CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF EMPORIA, VIRGINIA 
____________ 
Published in 1996 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
EMPORIA, VIRGINIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Samuel W. Adams, III 
Mayor 
____________ 
Ronnie L. White 
Council President 
____________ 
Julia L. Jones 
G. B. Ligon, Jr. 
Nancy B. Squire 
John R. White 
F. Woodrow Harris 
James A. Carey 
City Council 
____________ 
J. Brannon Godfrey, Jr. 
City Manager 
____________ 
Theodore J. Burr 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Stephanie F. Brown 
City Clerk 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
EMPORIA, VIRGINIA 
____________ 
Mary L. Person 
Mayor 
____________ 
Carolyn S. Carey 
Council President 
____________ 
F. Woodrow Harris 
Doris T. White 
L. Dale Temple 
Mark Mitchell 
Carol Mercer 
James C. Saunders 
City Council 
____________ 
Brian S. Thrower 
City Manager 
____________ 
C. Butler Barrett 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Tessie S. Wilkins 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Emporia, Virginia. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1972 Code, as supplemented through May 17, 1994, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1972 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Milton E. Lefkoff, Supervising Editor, and Robert MacNaughton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Theodore J. Burr, Jr., City Attorney, Mr. Brannon Godfrey, City Manager, and Ms. Stephanie Brown, City Clerk, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Emporia, Virginia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Emporia, Virginia. 
(c)  Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Emporia, Virginia. 1996. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 334-96 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF EMPORIA, VIRGINIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF EMPORIA, VIRGINIA: 
    Section 1. The Code entitle "Code of Ordinances, City of Emporia, Virginia, published in 1996 by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 to 90, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before December 19, 1995, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance of the city shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city council may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions and amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the council to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after December 19, 1995, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective July 1, 1996. 
    Passed and adopted by the council this 4th day of June, 1996. 
CITY OF EMPORIA, VIRGINIA 
BY 
/s/ Ronnie L. White 
      Council President   /s/ Stephanie F. Brown 
      Clerk   Certificate of Adoption 
    I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the city council of the City of Emporia, Virginia, held on the 4th day of June, 1996. 
/s/ Stephanie F. Brown 
      Clerk   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Include/ 
Omit Supp. No. Min. of  7-17-08 Include 43 10-41 10-19-10 Include 43 10-42 10-19-10 Include 43 10-47 11-16-10 Include 43 11-08  5- 3-11 Include 44 11-12  6-21-11 Include 45 11-13  6-21-11 Include 45 11-14  6-21-11 Include 45 11-19  7-19-11 Include 46 11-20  7-19-11 Include 46 11-21  7-19-11 Include 46 11-26  9- 6-11 Include 47 11-31 12- 6-11 Include 47 12-03  2-21-12 Include 48 12-09  6-19-12 Omit 48 12-10  6-19-12 Omit 48 12-11  6-19-12 Include 48 12-12  6-19-12 Include 48 12-13  6-19-12 Include 48 12-31 12- 4-12 Include 49 13-01  1-15-13 Include 49 13-05  3-19-13 Include 50 13-07  6- 4-13 Include 50 13-08  6-18-13 Include 50 13-10  6-18-13 Omit 50 13-11  6-18-13 Include 50 13-06(Res.)  9-17-13 Omit 51 13-15  9-17-13 Include 51 13-24 12-17-13 Include 51 14-05  4- 1-14 Include 52 14-08  6-17-14 Include 52 14-10  6-17-14 Include 52 14-11  6-17-14 Include 52 14-12  6-17-14 Omit 52 14-21 11-18-14 Include 53 14-22 11-18-14 Include 53 Acts 2008  3- 4-08 Include 54 15-01  1- 6-15 Include 54 15-09  3- 3-15 Include 55 15-15  6-16-15 Include 55 15-16  6-16-15 Include 55 15-17  6-16-15 Omit 55 15-18  6-16-15 Include 55 15-19  6-16-15 Include 55 15-20  6-16-15 Include 55 15-24  7-21-15 Include 56 15-29  8-18-15 Include 56 15-30  8-18-15 Include 56 15-32  9- 1-15 Include 56 15-33  9- 1-15 Include 56 15-34  9-15-15 Include 57 15-39 12-15-15 Include 57 16-09  5-17-16 Omit 58 16-29 11-15-16 Include 58 16-30 11-15-16 Include 58 17-08  5- 2-17 Omit 59 17-09  5- 2-17 Include 59 17-10  5- 2-17 Include 59 17-13  6- 6-17 Include 59 17-14  7-18-17 Include 60 17-15  7-18-17 Include 60 17-16  7-18-17 Include 60 18-01  1-16-18 Include 61 18-11  4-17-18 Include 62 18-13  6-19-18 Omit 62 18-14  6-19-18 Omit 62 18-16  6-19-18 Include 62  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is Acts 1968, ch. 78, as adopted by the General Assembly, effective on February 28, 1968. The Charter, consisting of section 1 of such act, is printed herein as enacted, except that the various unnumbered subject titles therein have been altered or expanded, designated articles and divisions, and assigned numbers; further the section captions have in some instances been changed or expanded to more precisely apprise the user of the contents. Section 2 of the act repeals earlier acts, and section 3 contains the emergency enactment provision and effective date. The last paragraph of Section 1 provides that the Charter may be referred to and cited as the City of Emporia Charter of 1968. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION, BOUNDARIES AND GENERAL POWERS 

Sec. 1. - Incorporation. 
    The inhabitants of the territory comprised within the limits of the City of Emporia as the same are now or may hereafter be established by law shall continue to be a body politic and corporate under the name of the City of Emporia and as such shall have perpetual succession, may sue and be sued, contract and be contracted with and may have a corporate seal which it may alter at its pleasure. 
Sec. 2. - Territorial limits. 
    The corporate boundaries of the city are set forth in the annexation orders and contraction of corporate limits, recorded in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of Greensville County, Virginia, in Common Law Order Book 11, at page 330, Common Law Order Book 13, at page 325, and Common Law Order Book 14, at page 444, and Common Law Order Book 15, at page 184. 
State Law reference- Boundaries incorporated by reference in Charter, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-836.2. 
Sec. 3. - Powers generally; taxing and licensing authority. 
    The powers set forth in Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-837 through 15.1-915 as in force on January 1, 1972, and all other powers which are now or may hereafter be conferred upon or delegated to cities under the constitution and laws of the Commonwealth and all other powers pertinent to the conduct of a city government are hereby specifically conferred upon the City of Emporia. It is intended that the city shall possess all powers which under the constitution it would be competent for this Charter to enumerate specifically and no enumeration of particular powers in this Charter shall be held to be exclusive but shall be held to be in addition to this general grant of powers. The powers which are now or may hereafter be conferred upon or delegated to this city under the constitution and laws of the commonwealth and this Charter shall be construed liberally when such powers are exercised by the city and in case of doubt as to the existence of a power such doubts shall be resolved in favor of the city. 
    In addition to the powers granted by other sections of this Charter, the city shall have the power to raise annually by taxes and assessments, as permitted by general law, such sums of money as the council shall deem necessary for the purposes of the city in such manner as the council shall deem expedient. The city shall have the power to expend the money of the city for any and all lawful purposes. In addition to, but not as a limitation upon, this general grant of power, the city shall have power to levy and collect ad valorem taxes on real estate and tangible personal property and machinery and tools; to levy and collect taxes for admission to or other charge for any public amusement, entertainment, performance, exhibition, sport or athletic event in the city, which taxes may be added to and collected with the price of such admission or other charge; to levy and collect taxes on hotel and motel rooms; to levy and collect privilege taxes, local general retail sales and use tax as provided by law and capitation taxes; to require a business license tax on local telephone service provided to subscribers within the city; unless prohibited by general law to require business licenses, prohibit the conduct of any business, profession, vocation or calling without such a license, require taxes to be paid on such licenses in respect of all businesses, professions, vocations and callings which cannot, in the opinion of the council, be reached by the ad valorem system; and to require licenses of all owners of vehicles of all kinds for the privilege of using the streets, and other public places in the city, require taxes to be paid on such licenses and prohibit the use of streets, alleys and other public places in the city without such license. Notwithstanding Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916, the city by ordinance may require tangible personal property taxes to be paid on July 1 for the succeeding fiscal year. 
    In addition to the other powers conferred by law, the City of Emporia shall have the power to impose, levy and collect, in such manner as its council may deem expedient, a consumer or subscriber tax upon the amount paid for the use of water, gas, electricity, telephone, and any other public utility service within the city or upon the amount paid for any one or more of such public utility services, and may provide that such tax shall be added to and collected with bills rendered consumers and subscribers for such services. 
(Acts 1972, Ch. 806, § 1; Acts 1986, Ch. 49, § 1) 
Editor's note- Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-908-15.1-915.1 have been repealed. 
Sec. 3.1. - Eminent domain. 
(A)  Generally. 
(a)  The powers of eminent domain set forth in Code of Virginia, tit. 15.1, Code of Virginia, § 25-46.1 et seq., and Code of Virginia, § 33.1-1 et seq., as amended, and all acts amendatory thereof and supplemental thereto, mutatis mutandis, are hereby conferred upon the City of Emporia. 
(b)  In any case in which a petition for condemnation is filed by or on behalf of the city, a true copy of the ordinance or resolution duly adopted by the council, declaring the necessity for any taking or damaging of any property within the city, for the purposes of the city, shall be filed with the petition and shall constitute sufficient evidence of the necessity of the exercise of the powers of eminent domain by the city. 
(B)  Certificates. 
(a)  Certificates issued pursuant to Code of Virginia, §§ 33.1-121 to 33.1-129, inclusive, as amended, and all acts amendatory thereof and supplemental thereto, may be issued by the city, signed by the city manager. Such certificate shall have the same effect as certificates issued by the state highway and transportation commissioner, under the aforesaid laws, and may be issued in any case in which the city proposes to acquire property of any kind by the exercise of its powers of eminent domain for any lawful purpose, whether within or without the city. 
(b)  In addition to the powers conferred by the aforesaid laws, such certificates may be amended or cancelled by the court having jurisdiction of the proceedings, upon petition or motion of the city, at any time after the filing thereof, provided that the court shall have jurisdiction to make such order for the payment of costs and damages, if any, or the refund of any excessive sums theretofore paid pursuant to such certificate as shall, upon due notice and hearing, appear just. The court shall have jurisdiction to require refunding bonds, for good cause shown by the city or any other person or party in interest, prior to authorizing any distribution of funds pursuant to any certificate issued or deposit made by the city. 
(C)  Alternate method. 
(a)  In addition to the other powers conferred by law, the city may, in exercising the right of eminent domain, make use of the procedure prescribed by the general law or may elect to proceed as hereinafter provided. Upon the adoption of an ordinance or resolution directing acquisition of any property, the city may file a petition for condemnation in the clerk's office of a court having jurisdiction. 
(b)  Upon the filing of the petition and the funds provided for the purpose having been duly deposited to the credit of the court, if the court is of the opinion that the property or interest or estate therein to be acquired is for the purpose of the city as provided by law, it may order that the interest or estate of the owner of such property shall terminate and the title to such property or the interest or estate to be taken in such property shall be vested absolutely in the city and such owner shall have such interest or estate in the funds so deposited as he had in the property taken or damaged and all liens by deed of trust, judgment or otherwise upon said property or estate shall be transferred to such funds and the city shall have the right to enter upon and take possession of such property for its uses and purposes and to construct its works or improvements. The clerk of the court in which such proceedings are instituted shall make and certify a copy of the order and deliver or transmit the same to the clerk of the court in which deeds are admitted to record who shall record the same in his deed book and index it in the name of the record title owner of such property and in the name of the city. 
(c)  All other proceedings under this section shall be had in accordance with the provisions of the Virginia General Condemnation Act insofar as they are then applicable and not inconsistent with the provisions of this section; provided, however, that the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 25-233, as now or hereafter in effect, shall apply to any property belonging to any corporation possessing the power of eminent domain that may be taken hereunder. 
(Acts 1975, Ch. 354, § 1) 
Editor's note- Pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 33.1-1, "State highway and transportation commissioner" has been changed to "commonwealth transportation commissioner." 
State Law reference- Condemnation proceedings generally, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-236 et seq. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT 

Sec. 4. - Mayor-Qualifications; chief executive officer; compensation as fixed. 
    The mayor shall be a qualified voter and a bona fide resident of the city. By virtue of his office, the mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city. He shall receive such annual compensation as may be fixed by the council in accordance with the laws of the state. 
Sec. 5. - Same-Powers and duties. 
    The mayor shall preside over the meetings of the council and shall have the same right to speak therein as other members. He shall have no vote in the proceedings of the council except in case of a tie. He shall have authority to appoint such committees of the council as deemed necessary and expedient to the proper administration of the city government. 
    He shall be recognized as the head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes, the purpose of military law and the service of civil process. He shall authenticate, by his signature, such instruments as the council, this Charter or the laws of the state shall require. 
Sec. 6. - President of council. 
    The council of the City of Emporia, at its first meeting after each councilmanic election, shall elect from its membership one of its members as president of council who shall in the absence or inability of the mayor to act, have all the powers and duties of the mayor, and shall perform all of his functions. 
    At the first meeting of each new and succeeding council elected hereunder, such president of council shall be elected. 
(Acts 1972, Ch. 806, § 1) 
Sec. 7. - Membership; qualifications, filling vacancies, president pro tem, fixing members' salaries. 
    In addition to a mayor who shall be elected at large, the City of Emporia shall be governed, beginning July 1, 1992, by a City Council which shall be composed of seven members elected from districts and who shall be qualified voters and bona fide residents of the city. More than one member of the City Council may be apportioned to a single district, but each such district shall be constituted as to give, as nearly as is practicable, representation in proportion to the population of the district. Candidates seeking election to the City Council shall be residents of the district for which they qualify to run and shall be elected solely by the voters of that district. 
    The districts to be used for electing the members of Council, the number of members to be elected from each district, and the terms of office of the members of Council shall initially be as prescribed in the consent decree entered on January 12, 1988, by the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia (the "Consent Decree") in the civil action styled Thomas M. Person, et al. v. William H. Ligon, et al. (Civil Action No. 84-0270-R). 
    Vacancies in either the office of the mayor or in the Council shall be filled within thirty days by a recorded majority vote of the Council for the unexpired term. 
    In absence, or in the case of disability of both the mayor and President of the Council, one of the other councilmen selected by a majority vote of the Council shall have all of the powers heretofore conferred upon the mayor and President of the Council. 
    The Council shall have the right to fix salaries for the members thereof, and same shall not be increased or diminished during their respective terms of office. 
(Acts 1988, Ch. 143, § 1; Acts 1991, Ch. 1, § 1) 
Sec. 8. - Election and terms of office. 
    At the regular municipal election to be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November 2006, and every two years thereafter, there shall be elected one council member from each district having an incumbent council member whose term expires on or before the first day of January next following such election. At the regular municipal election to be held on the first Tuesday following the first Monday in November 2008, and every four years thereafter, the mayor shall be elected at large. The mayor and members of the Council shall each serve for a term of four years commencing on the first day of January next following the date of their election and until their successors have been duly elected and qualified; provided, however, that the terms of the four council members subject to expire June 30, 2006, shall be extended to December 31, 2006, and the terms of the mayor and the three council members subject to expire June 30, 2008, shall be extended to December 31, 2008. 
(Acts 1972, Ch. 806, § 1; Acts 1988, Ch. 143, § 1; Acts 2006, Ch. 78, § 8) 
Charter cross reference- Date of election of treasurer, city sergeant and commissioner of the revenue, § 51. 
Sec. 9. - Powers of council. 
    All powers of the city of Emporia as a body politic and corporate shall be vested in the city council. 
    The council shall be the policy determining and lawmaking body of the city and shall be vested with all the rights and powers conferred on councils in cities, not inconsistent with this charter. In addition to the foregoing, the council shall have the following powers: 
(a)  To have full power to inquire into the official conduct of any office or officer under its control and to investigate the accounts, receipts, disbursements, and expenses of any city employee; for these purposes it may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths and require the production of books, papers, and other evidence; and in case any witness fails or refuses to obey any such lawful order of the council, he shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  To provide for the performance of all the governmental functions of the city; and to that end to provide for and set up all departments and agencies of government that shall be necessary. Whenever it is not designated in this charter what officer or employee of the city shall exercise any power or perform any duty conferred upon or required of the city or any officer thereof, by general law, then any such power shall be exercised or duty performed by that officer or employee of the city so designated by ordinance or resolution of the council. Any activity which is not assigned by the provisions of this charter to specific departments or agencies of the city government shall be assigned by the council to the appropriate department or agency. The council may further create, abolish, reassign, transfer or combine any city functions, activities, or departments. 
(c)  To fix a schedule of compensation for all city officers and employees. The council may by ordinance define certain classes of city employees whose salaries shall be set by the city manager, except that this provision shall not apply to the constitutional officers, the heads of city departments, and judges. 
(d)  To prescribe the amount and condition of surety bonds to be required of such officers and employees of the city as the council may designate. 
(e)  To set the membership of the Emporia Redevelopment and Housing Authority. Commissioners of the Emporia Redevelopment and Housing Authority shall be not less than five nor more than nine in number and shall hold their offices at the pleasure of the council for terms not to exceed four years; however, the council may at any time, and from time to time, adopt an ordinance adding one council member as a commissioner of the Emporia Redevelopment and Housing Authority. The remaining members of the Authority shall be appointed by council from the citizenry of the city. The Authority shall possess all powers and duties granted to or imposed upon redevelopment and housing authorities by general law. Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, a city council member shall receive no compensation for service as a commissioner of such authority; nor shall a council member continue to serve as a commissioner after ceasing to be a member of council. 
(Acts 1972, Ch. 806, § 1; Acts 2008, Ch. 326, § 1) 
Sec. 10. - Oath of office; vacancy upon failure to qualify. 
    The mayor and other municipal officers of the city, before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, shall be sworn in according to the laws of the state by any one authorized to administer oaths, which said oaths shall be subscribed in writing and filed with the clerk of the council. 
    The failure of any person elected or appointed to an office under this Charter to qualify within thirty (30) days after the commencement of the term for which he was elected or appointed, or if elected or appointed to fill a vacancy, for thirty (30) days after such election or appointment shall vacate his office. 
State Law reference- Oath of city officers, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-1522, 49-1. 
Sec. 11. - Fixing time and place of council meetings; adopting rules; disciplining members; voting on and recording elections and appropriations of money. 
    The council shall, by ordinance, fix the time and place of its meetings. It shall have authority to adopt such rules as it may deem proper for the regulation of its proceedings and may compel the attendance of its members, punish its members for disorderly behavior, and by a vote of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of its members, may expel a member for malfeasance or misfeasance in office. The council shall determine its own rules of procedure. All elections and appropriations of money shall be by oral vote and the vote shall be recorded in the minutes of the council. 
Editor's note- Section 15 also provides for the prescribing of the time of council meetings. 
Sec. 12. - Quorum; required vote on tax and money measures; presiding officer; vote of mayor. 
    Five members of the council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business; but no ordinance or resolution shall be adopted, having for its object the levying of taxes or the appropriating of moneys, except by a recorded affirmative vote of a majority of all the elected members of the council. The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the council when present, but in the absence or inability of the mayor or the president of the council, the members of the council present shall select one of their body to preside over the meeting. The mayor shall not be elected [sic] to vote except in case of a tie. 
(Acts 1987, Ch. 27, § 1) 
Charter cross reference- Vote necessary to adopt ordinance or resolution, § 19. 
State Law reference- Voting on certain matters, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-812, 15.1-819. 
Sec. 13. - Felony conviction affects office forfeiture. 
    Any member of the council or other officer of the city who shall have been convicted of a felony while in office shall thereby forfeit his office. 
Sec. 14. - Discharge of officer or employee for cause. 
    Any officer or employee of the city may be discharged for good cause. 
Sec. 15. - Organizational meeting; frequency of regular meetings. 
    On the first Thursday in January following the regular municipal election, the council shall meet in the council chambers at 7:30 p.m. at which time, the newly elected councilmen and mayor, after first having taken the oath of office prescribed by law, shall assume the duties of their offices. Thereafter, the council shall meet at such time as may be prescribed by ordinance or resolution, except that they shall meet regularly not less than once each month. 
(Acts 2006, Ch. 78, § 15) 
Editor's note- Section 11 also provides for the prescribing of the time of council meetings. 
Sec. 16. - Special meetings. 
    The mayor, or any two (2) members of the council, may call special meetings of the council, at any time, after a written notice of twelve (12) hours, with the purpose of the meeting stated therein, served personally on each member of the council and the mayor, or left at his usual place of business or residence if he be not found with due diligence, or such meeting may be held at any time, without any service of notice, provided all members of the council attend. No business other than that mentioned in the call shall be considered at such meeting. 
Sec. 17. - Meetings open to public. 
    Except as hereinafter provided, all meetings of the council and of the school board, planning commission and any other board, commission, organization, agency or other public body of the city shall be public. Information as to the time and place of each such meeting shall be furnished to any citizen and to the news media upon request. 
(a)  Executive meetings may be held only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Discussion or consideration of employment, assignment, appointment, promotion, demotion, salaries, disciplining or resignation of public officers, appointees or employees of any public body. 
(2)  Discussion or consideration of the condition, acquisition or use of real property for public purpose, or of the disposition of publicly held property. 
(3)  The protection of the privacy of individuals in personal matters not related to public business. 
(4)  Discussion concerning a prospective business or industry where no previous announcement has been made of the business' or industry's interest in locating in the community. 
(5)  The investing of public funds where competition or bargaining is involved, where if made public initially the financial interest of the city would be adversely affected. 
(6)  Consultation with legal counsel and briefings by staff members, consultants or attorneys, pertaining to pending litigation, or legal matters within the jurisdiction of the public body, including legal documents. 
(7)  Discussion of any matter which will be the topic of a public hearing prior to a final decision, provided that notice of every such public hearing shall be published generally in the city not less than ten (10) days prior to such public hearing. 
(b)  No meeting shall become an executive or closed meeting unless there shall have been recorded an affirmative vote to that effect by the public body holding such meeting. 
(c)  No resolution, ordinance, rule, contract, regulation or motion adopted, passed or agreed to in an executive or closed meeting shall become effective unless such public body, following such meeting, reconvenes in open meeting and takes a vote of the membership on such resolution, rule, contract, regulation or motion. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the holding of conferences between two (2) or more public bodies, or their representatives, but these conferences shall be subject to the same regulations for holding executive or closed sessions as are applicable to any other public body. 
(e)  Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, all official records shall be open to inspection and copying by any citizen of this state having a personal or legal interest in specified records during the regular office hours of the custodian of such records. Access to such records shall not be denied to any such citizen of this state, nor to representatives of newspapers published in this state, nor to representatives of radio and television stations located in this state. 
(f)  The following records are excluded from the provisions of subsection (e): 
(1)  Memoranda, correspondence, evidence and complaints related to criminal investigations, and reports submitted to the state police in confidence. 
(2)  State income tax returns, medical and mental records, scholastic records, welfare records, adoption records, illegitimate births and personnel records. 
(3)  Memoranda, working papers and correspondence held by the mayor, city manager or city attorney, or any material furnished in confidence to such officials. 
(4)  Memoranda, working papers and records compiled specifically for use in pending or impending litigation. 
(Acts 1972, Ch. 806, § 1) 
Editor's note- Executive or closed meetings are allowed as described in Code of Virginia, § 2.1-344. 
Sec. 18. - Clerk of the council. 
    The council shall appoint a clerk of the council to serve at the pleasure of the council. He shall keep the journal of the council's proceedings and shall record all ordinances in a book kept for the purposes. He shall be the custodian of the corporate seal of the city and shall be the officer authorized to use and authenticate it. He shall receive such compensation as clerk of the council as may be determined by the council. 
(Acts 1972, Ch. 806, § 1) 
Sec. 19. - Legislation-Introduction, enacting clause, necessary vote for adoption, enacting at meeting at which presented. 
    Each proposed ordinance or resolution shall be introduced in written or printed form. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, an affirmative vote of a majority in the members elected to the council shall be necessary to adopt any ordinance or resolution. An ordinance or resolution may be presented and enacted at the same meeting. 
(Acts 1972, Ch. 806, § 1) 
Charter cross reference- Two-thirds vote for tax and money measures required, § 12. 
Sec. 20. - Same-Recordation and authentication. 
    Every ordinance or resolution having the effect of an ordinance when enacted by the council shall be recorded and indexed by the clerk of the council in a book kept for that purpose, and shall be authenticated by the signature of the presiding officer and the clerk of the council. 
Sec. 21. - Same-Publication of ordinances. 
    Every ordinance involving a penalty for its violation shall be published one time, immediately following its passage, in some newspaper published in the city, or posted at three (3) or more public places in the city for one week. 
    This section shall not be construed to require the publication or posting of any revision or codification of the ordinances of the city. It shall be sufficient, in the case of any such revision or codification of the city ordinances and any new material or ordinances included therein, to publish or post the adopting ordinance as required herein. 
Sec. 22. - Same-Final passage of ordinance on day of presentation and first reading. 
    When it is proposed to place an ordinance on its final passage on the same day on which it was first presented and read, and objection is made to so doing, the ayes and noes shall be ordered on the question of so doing. In such case, the ordinance shall not be placed upon its final passage at that meeting, except by the concurrence of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the members present. 
ARTICLE III. - CITY MANAGER 

Sec. 22a. - General responsibility; appointment; qualifications. 
    There shall be a city manager who shall be responsible to the council and mayor for the proper administration of the city government. He shall be chosen by the council without regard to his political beliefs and solely upon the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications. He shall be appointed for an indefinite period and shall hold office at the pleasure of the council. At the time of his appointment, he need not be a resident of the city or the commonwealth, but during his tenure of office, he shall reside within the city. 
(Acts 1972, Ch. 806, § 1) 
State Law reference- Employment based on residency, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-29.23. 
Sec. 23. - Duties. 
    Duties [of the city manager are:] 
(1)  To see that all laws and ordinances of the city are enforced. 
(2)  To exercise supervision and control over all administrative departments and divisions. 
(3)  To attend all regular meetings of council with the right to take part in the discussion but having no vote. 
(4)  To recommend to the council for adoption such measures as he may deem necessary or desirable. 
(5)  To execute all contracts on behalf of the city which do not, by their nature, require the seal of the city. 
(6)  To prepare and submit to the council the annual budget. 
(7)  To keep the council advised as to the present and future needs of the city and as to all operations of its government. 
(8)  To perform all such duties as may be prescribed by the Charter or be required of him by the council. 
(Acts 1972, Ch. 806, § 1) 
Sec. 24. - Absence or disability. 
    During the absence or disability of the city manager or in case of a vacancy, the council may designate some properly qualified person to perform the duties of the office during such absence, disability or vacancy. 
Sec. 25. - Council-manager relationship. 
    Except for the purpose of conducting administrative inquiries and hearings by the council or a committee thereof, the mayor and members of the council shall deal with the administrative service solely through the city manager and neither the council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the city manager, either publicly or privately. 
Sec. 26. - Councilmen not to succeed to office of city manager. 
    No councilman shall be appointed as city manager during the term for which he shall have been elected nor within one year after the expiration of his term. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCES 

Sec. 27. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the city shall be from July 1 through June 30 inclusive. 
State Law reference- Fiscal year fixed by statute, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-13.2. 
Sec. 28. - Submission and adoption of budget, hearing and tax levy. 
    No later than the first day of May annually, the city manager shall prepare and submit to the council a budget presenting the financial plan for conducting the affairs of the city for the ensuing fiscal year. Such budget shall be set up in the manner provided by law and shall include such information as council, by ordinance or resolution, may require. Hearings on the budget shall be held and notice thereof given and the budget adopted in accordance with general laws of the Commonwealth. The tax levy for each fiscal year shall be made and a budget for the fiscal year shall be adopted prior to the first day of the fiscal year for which they were made or adopted. 
(Acts 1972, Ch. 806, § 1) 
Editor's note- Budgets may be prepared and approved as provided in Code of Virginia, § 15.1-159.8 et seq. 
Secs. 29, 30. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Acts 1972, ch. 806, § 1, repealed §§ 29 and 30 pertaining to borrowing powers and the purpose for which bonds or notes could be issued and the manner of issuance thereof. 
Sec. 31. - Audits. 
    At the close of each fiscal year, the council shall cause to be made an independent audit of the accounts, books, records and financial transactions of the city by the auditor of public accounts of the commonwealth or by a firm of independent certified public accountants to be selected by the council. The report of such audit shall be filed within such time as the council shall specify and one copy thereof shall always be available for public inspection in the office of the clerk of the council during regular business hours. Upon the death, resignation or termination of employment of any city officer or employee, council may order an audit of the accounts, books, records and financial transactions of that office. 
(Acts 1972, Ch. 806, § 1) 
Editor's note- Accounts and records are to be audited as provided in Code of Virginia, § 15.1-167. 
ARTICLE V. - LEGAL AND JUDICIAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter cross references- City sergeant, § 54a; sheriff, commonwealth's attorney and clerk of circuit court, § 59 et seq. 

Sec. 32. - City attorney. 
    There shall be a city attorney appointed by council and shall hold office at the pleasure of the council and he shall receive such compensation as council may determine. He shall be an attorney at law licensed to practice under the laws of the commonwealth. The city attorney shall be the chief legal adviser of the council, the city manager, and of all departments, boards, commissions and agencies of the city including the school board in all matters affecting the interest of the city. He shall represent the city in all civil proceedings. It shall be his duty to perform all services as may be required by the laws of the commonwealth, this Charter or by ordinance. 
Sec. 33. - Municipal court established, jurisdiction, powers; judges. 
    There shall be within the City of Emporia a municipal court which shall have jurisdiction and other judicial powers as are conferred on such courts by general law. 
    There shall be a judge of the municipal court of the City of Emporia and such associate and substitute judges as may be deemed necessary by the council. Such judges shall be appointed by the council for terms of four (4) years. Vacancies in the office of the judge of the municipal court or associate or substitute judge shall be filled by the council for the unexpired term. The municipal court judge, associate or substitute judge shall be an attorney at law qualified and authorized to practice in this commonwealth. 
    The judge, associate and substitute judges of any other city or county court may be appointed as judge, associate or substitute judge of the municipal court of the City of Emporia. 
(Acts 1972, Ch. 806, § 1) 
State Law reference- Existing courts continued and redesignated, Code of Virginia, § 16.1-69.8. 
Sec. 34. - Fixing compensation of judge. 
    The municipal judge shall receive such compensation as council may determine, which salary is to be paid in the same manner as salaries of other officials are paid and he shall receive no other compensation for his services as municipal judge. 
Sec. 35. - Juvenile and domestic relations court. 
    The municipal judge, associate and substitute judge, at the time of his appointment and during his term of office, may also serve as judge, associate or substitute judge of the juvenile and domestic relations court. The council may appoint a judge of the juvenile and domestic relations court of the City of Emporia in the same manner and for the same term as the judge of the municipal court. 
    The juvenile and domestic relations court shall possess such jurisdiction and other judicial authority as is conferred on juvenile and domestic relations court by general law. 
State Law reference- Juvenile and domestic relations district courts, Code of Virginia, § 16.1-226 et seq. 
Sec. 36. - Municipal court fees, costs and fines. 
    Fees, costs and fines shall be assessed, fixed and collected by the municipal court in the manner provided by general law. All such fees, costs and fines shall be paid into the city treasury for the benefit of the city; provided that fines, costs and fees due to the commonwealth shall be paid to the proper officials of the commonwealth. 
(Acts 1972, Ch. 806, § 1) 
Sec. 37. - Clerks of courts. 
    The clerk of the municipal court and of the juvenile and domestic relations court shall be appointed by the judge or judges of such courts and serve at the pleasure of the judge or judges thereof. The clerk of the municipal court may also serve as clerk of the juvenile and domestic relations court. The clerk shall receive such compensation as the council may prescribe, and shall take such oath and give such bond as may be prescribed by general law. The powers, authority and duties of the clerk shall be the same as are now or may hereafter be conferred or imposed upon clerks by the laws of the commonwealth in civil and criminal matters including violations of city ordinances. 
    The clerk and deputy clerk of any other city or county court may be appointed as clerk and deputy clerk of the municipal court of the City of Emporia and as clerk and deputy clerk of the juvenile and domestic relations court of the City of Emporia. 
(Acts 1972, Ch. 806, § 1) 
Sec. 37a. - Circuit court. 
    The City of Emporia shall be and continue in every respect within the jurisdiction of the circuit court of Greensville County and there shall be one and the same circuit court for the County of Greensville and the City of Emporia. There shall be for said County of Greensville and the City of Emporia but one circuit courthouse and circuit court clerk's office and the circuit court clerk of the County of Greensville shall continue in all respects as the clerk of such circuit court. Such court shall have the same jurisdiction in the City of Emporia in all respects as corporation courts have in other cities of its class. 
ARTICLE VI. - CITY DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND OFFICERS 
DIVISION 1. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Acts 1972, ch. 806, § 1, repealed §§ 38-40 pertaining to the department of public safety from which div. 1, §§ 38-40, of art. VI was formerly derived. 

Secs. 38-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS 

Sec. 41. - Authorized; director; other officers, employees and units. 
    There may be a department of public works which shall consist of the director of public works who may be the city manager or a person appointed by the city manager with the approval of the council and such other officers and employees organized into such bureaus, divisions and other units as may be provided by ordinance or by the orders of the director consistent therewith. 
Sec. 42. - Functions. 
    The department of public works shall be responsible for the construction and maintenance of all public buildings, streets, roads, bridges, drains, sewers, garbage and refuse collection and disposal, and all other public works and constructions; the care of public buildings; the custody of such equipment and supplies as the city manager may require; and such other powers and duties as may be assigned to the department by the city manager. 
DIVISION 3. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC UTILITIES 

Sec. 43. - Authorized; director; other officers, employees and units. 
    There may be a department of public utilities which shall consist of the director of public utilities, who may be the city manager or a person appointed by the city manager with the approval of the council, and such other officers and employees organized into such bureaus, divisions and other units as may be provided by ordinance or by the orders of the director consistent therewith. 
Sec. 44. - Functions. 
    The department of public utilities shall be responsible for: The water, sewer, gas and operation of the water, sewer, gas and electric departments and such other powers and duties as may be assigned to the department by the city manager. 
DIVISION 4. - HEALTH 

Sec. 45. - Department authorized; director; other officers, employees and units. 
    There may be a department of public health which shall consist of the director of public health, to be appointed by the city manager with the approval of the council and such other officers and employees organized into such bureaus, divisions, and other units as may be provided by ordinance or by the orders of the director consistent therewith. 
Sec. 46. - Functions. 
    The department of public health shall be responsible for the exercise of all health functions imposed on municipalities by general law and such other functions as may be assigned to the department. 
Sec. 47. - Powers and duties of director. 
    The head of the department of public health shall be the director of public health. He shall have general management and control of the several bureaus, divisions, and other units of the department. He shall have all the powers and duties with respect to the preservation of the public health which now are or may hereafter be conferred or imposed on municipal boards of health and health officers by the laws of the commonwealth, as well as the powers and duties conferred or imposed on him by this Charter and the ordinances of the city. 
Sec. 48. - Board of health. 
    The council may select two (2) or more qualified citizens of the city, who together with the director of public health shall constitute the board of health. The board of health shall advise and cooperate with the department of health and shall have power to adopt necessary rules and regulations, not in conflict with law, concerning the department. The provisions of general law relating to the establishment of local boards of health shall not apply to the City of Emporia. 
Sec. 49. - Contractual services. 
    The council may, in its discretion, effectuate the powers, duties, and functions assigned to the department of public health in this chapter [division] through contractual agreements with the state department of health, neighboring cities and counties. 
DIVISION 5. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WELFARE 

Sec. 50. - Created; members; superintendent; functions. 
    There shall be a department of public welfare consisting of three (3) members, elected by the council of the City of Emporia, one of whom shall be appointed annually. The first appointment hereunder shall be for one year, one for two (2) years and one for three (3) years, beginning July 1, 1968, and thereafter all appointments shall be for terms of three (3) years. 
    The department of public welfare shall appoint the superintendent of public welfare and such other employees of the department as may be necessary. 
    The superintendent of public welfare of Greensville County may be appointed superintendent of public welfare of the City of Emporia. 
    The department of public welfare shall be responsible for carrying out the duties and functions imposed on local boards and superintendents of public welfare by general law and such other duties as may be assigned by council. 
State Law reference- Local boards of public welfare, Code of Virginia, § 63.1-38 et seq. 
DIVISION 6. - COMMISSIONER OF REVENUE, TREASURER AND CITY SERGEANT 

Sec. 51. - Election, terms, powers, duties and compensation. 
    On the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November, 1969, and every four (4) years thereafter, the qualified voters of the city shall elect a treasurer, city sergeant and a commissioner of the revenue for the city who shall have such powers and perform such duties and receive such compensation as are provided by general law. 
Charter cross reference- Date of election of mayor and councilmen, § 8. 
Sec. 52. - Vacancies. 
    Vacancies in the office of treasurer, city sergeant and commissioner of the revenue shall be filled by the council for the unexpired portion of the term of office. 
Sec. 53. - Duties of commissioner of revenue. 
    The commissioner of revenue shall perform such duties not inconsistent with the laws of the commonwealth in relation to the assessment of property and licenses as may be required by the council for the purpose of levying city taxes and licenses. He shall have power to administer such oaths as may be required by the council in the assessment of license taxes or other taxes for the city. He shall make such reports in regard to the assessment of both property and licenses, or either, as may be required by the council or by the director of finance. He shall perform such other duties as may be required of him by the council. 
Sec. 54. - Duties of treasurer. 
    The city treasurer shall collect and receive, all money due the city by the state and all taxes and levies due the state and collected within the city, and disburse same as provided by the general laws of the commonwealth relating to city treasurers, and may be authorized by the council also to collect and receive all money, taxes and levies due the city and disburse the same according to this Charter and the ordinances enacted by the city. 
Sec. 54a. - Duties of city sergeant. 
    The city sergeant and any deputy city sergeant shall have the authority and powers and jurisdiction which is granted to sergeants of other cities of the class of Emporia by the general laws of the commonwealth of Virginia and the ordinances of the City of Emporia and they shall perform such duties as may be prescribed by the state laws and the ordinances of the City of Emporia. 
Charter cross reference- Legal and judicial provisions, art. V. 
State Law reference- See also Code of Virginia (1950), §§ 15.1-796, 15.1-824. 
DIVISION 7. - SCHOOLS 

Sec. 55. - Joint school district authorized. 
    The City of Emporia may enter into an agreement with the County of Greensville for a joint school district between the city and county, subject to the approval of the state board of education. 
Sec. 56. - School board-Number and qualifications of trustees. 
    The school board of the City of Emporia may consist of not more than four (4) trustees, who shall be bona fide residents and qualified voters of the city and not a member of the city council. The number of said trustees on the school board shall be set by the city council. 
Sec. 57. - Same-Appointment and terms of trustees. 
    Members of the school board for the City of Emporia shall be appointed by the city council for a term of four (4) years, one of whom shall be appointed annually. The first trustee appointed shall be for a term expiring December 31, 1968, another for a term expiring December 31, 1969, and the others for a term expiring December 31, 1970, and thereafter all appointments shall be for a term of four (4) years. 
Sec. 58. - Same-Fixing compensation of trustees. 
    The compensation to be paid each trustee shall be fixed by a majority vote of the council, provided, however, that the annual compensation to be paid to any trustee shall not exceed the sum set by statute. 
Sec. 58a. - Same-Function. 
    The city school board shall be responsible for the employment of all personnel required for the operation of the city schools, unless a contractual provision is entered into for the operation of the city schools with a neighboring political subdivision. 
DIVISION 8. - SHERIFF, COMMONWEALTH'S ATTORNEY AND CLERK OF CIRCUIT COURT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter cross reference- Legal and judicial provisions, art. V. 

Sec. 59. - Election. 
    In addition to the municipal officers provided for by the preceding provisions of this Charter, there shall also be a sheriff, an attorney for the commonwealth and a clerk of said circuit court of Greensville County elected conjointly for the city and the County of Greensville by the qualified voters of said city and county. The sheriff, attorney for the commonwealth and clerk of said circuit court of Greensville County at the effective date of this Charter [February 28, 1968] are hereby continued in office for the terms for which they were appointed or elected and until their successors have been appointed or elected and qualified. Subsequent elections for any of the three (3) abovementioned offices shall be held at the times, in the manner, and for the terms provided by general law. 
State Law reference- Constitutional and local officers, Code of Virginia, § 24.2-217 et seq. 
Sec. 60. - Rights, privileges, powers and duties. 
    The sheriff, attorney for the commonwealth and clerk of said circuit court of Greensville County shall exercise and have the same rights and privileges, perform the same duties, have the same jurisdiction and receive the same fees therefor in the city as they, respectively, exercise and have and receive in the County of Greensville, and shall receive such compensation as is prescribed by the general law. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 61. - Contractual relationships. 
    The City of Emporia may, at the option of the city council, enter into contractual relationships with the commonwealth and/or its departments, bureaus, boards and agencies, neighboring political subdivisions, and private agencies for the performance of any part of or all of the functions, or purposes of the city, on such terms and for such periods as the council may determine to be in the public interest, where such contractual relations are not specifically prohibited by the constitution and general laws of the commonwealth. The school board may, with the approval of the city council, enter into contractual relationships with the commonwealth or its departments, bureaus, boards and agencies, neighboring political subdivisions, and private agencies for the performance of any part of or all of the functions, or purposes of the school board, on such terms and for such periods as the school board may determine to be in the public interest, where such contractual relations are not specifically prohibited by the constitution and general laws of the commonwealth. 
(Acts 1972, Ch. 806, § 1) 
Sec. 62. - Residence of employees. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the council shall have the power to provide by ordinance from time to time that the regular, permanent officers and employees of the city, or any of them, shall reside within the city during their continuance in such office or employment. 
Editor's note- Employment based on residency is restricted in Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-29.23 and 15.1-51. 
Sec. 63. - Continuance of existing ordinances, etc. 
    All ordinances and resolutions of the city and all rules, regulations and orders legally made by any department, board, commission or officer of the city, in force at the effective date of this Charter [February 28, 1968], insofar as they or any portion thereof are not inconsistent herewith, shall remain in force until amended or repealed. 
Sec. 64. - Continuance in office of officials and officers. 
    Except where this Charter may otherwise provide, all officials and officers of the city holding office immediately prior to the effective date of this Charter [February 28, 1968], whether such office be elective or appointive, may continue in such office until the expiration of their respective current term of office or until their successors shall have been elected or appointed and qualified or until such office may be lawfully terminated. 
Sec. 65. - Continuance of internal organization of the city. 
    Except where this Charter may otherwise provide, the several departments, commissions, boards and other administrative units of the city functioning at the effective date of this Charter [February 28, 1968] are hereby continued until otherwise provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 66. - Continuance of contracts. 
    All contracts entered into by the city or for its benefit prior to the taking effect of this Charter [February 28, 1968] shall continue in full force and effect. All public works begun prior to the taking effect of this Charter may be continued and completed hereunder. Public improvements for which legislative steps shall have been taken under laws in force at the time this Charter takes effect may be carried to completion in accordance with the provisions of such laws. 
Sec. 67. - Partial invalidity. 
    If any clause, sentence, paragraph, or part of this Charter shall for any reason be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of said Charter, but shall be confined in its operations to the clause, sentence, paragraph, or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Year Chapter Section  Section 
this Charter 1972 806 1 3 6 8, 9 17-19 22a 23 28 31 33 36, 37 61 1975 354 1 3.1 1986 49 1 3 1987 27 1 12 1988 143 1 7, 8 1991 1 1 7 2006 78 1 8 15 2008 15.2 10 2008 326 1 9  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Incorporation, boundaries and general powers, art. I; general and miscellaneous provisions, art. VII. 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Emporia, Virginia," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1972, § 1-1) 
Charter reference- Publication of ordinances, § 21. 
State Law reference- Codification and recodification of ordinances, admission in evidence, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-37.3. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council. 
    Charter. The word "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the city, as it now exists or as it may be amended in the future. 
    City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall mean the City of Emporia, in the County of Greensville and the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    City clerk. The words "city clerk" shall mean the clerk of the city council. 
    City officers, departments, etc. Except as otherwise provided, whenever a particular officer, employee, department, board, commission or other unit or agency is referred to by title or name, such as mayor, treasurer, police department, etc., such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Emporia, Virginia," and whenever a particular officer is designated in this Code with power to perform specific duties, he may delegate to a person reporting to him, his powers and duties unless it is some power or duty the exercise of which by another person is expressly forbidden by law or requires the exercise of judgment for the public welfare. However, such delegation shall not act to relieve the officer making such delegation of his legal obligation attached to the exercise of powers and performance of duties of his office. 
    Code. Whenever the term "Code" or "this Code" is referred to without further qualification, it shall mean the Code of Ordinances, City of Emporia, Virginia, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Code of Virginia. The term "Code of Virginia" shall mean the Code of Virginia of 1950, as now or hereafter amended. 
    Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done in a certain time before a proceeding shall be had, there must be allowed that amount of time, exclusive of the day for such proceeding, but the day on which such notice is given or such act is done may be counted as part of the time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done within a certain time after any event or proceeding, that time shall be allowed in addition to the day on which the event or proceeding occurred. When the last day fixed by an ordinance or this Code for the commencement of any proceeding or for a notice to be given or for any other act to be done, falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the proceeding may be commenced, the notice may be given, or the act may be done on the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 1-13.3, 1-13.3:1. 
    Council. The words "council," "this council," "the council" or "city council" shall mean the city council of the City of Emporia, Virginia. 
State Law reference- "Council" defined, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.5. 
    County. The words "county," "the county" or "this county" shall mean Greensville County, Virginia. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
State Law reference- Gender, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.7. 
    Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.13. 
    Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.15. 
    Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.16; when affirmation may be made, Code of Virginia, § 49-9. 
    Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole of or a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word "person" shall include any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, company, business, trust, joint venture or other legal entity, or any combination of individuals of whatever form or character. 
State Law reference- "Person" defined, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.19. 
    Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
State Law reference- "Following" defined, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.6; "preceding" defined, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.23. 
    Roadway. The word "roadway" shall mean that portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the shoulder. A highway may include two or more roadways if divided by a physical barrier or an unpaved area. 
State Law reference- "Roadway" defined, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100. 
    Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
    Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature or subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark when a person cannot write. 
    State or commonwealth. The words "the state" or "this state" or "the commonwealth" or "this commonwealth" shall be construed to mean the Commonwealth of Virginia, in the United States of America. 
State Law reference- "State" defined, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.26. 
    State law means the law cited in any accompanying state law reference note. This provision does not make any state law reference note a part of the adopted section. 
    Street, highway. The word "street" or "highway" shall include any highway, alley, street, avenue, lane or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, underpass, overpass, tunnel and causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
State Law reference- "Street" defined, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Written or in writing. The words "written" or "in writing," shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.32. 
    Year. Unless otherwise expressed, the word "year" shall be construed to mean a calendar year; and the word "year" alone shall be equivalent to the expression "year of our Lord." 
State Law reference- "Year" defined, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.33. 
(Code 1972, §§ 1-2, 8-71) 
Sec. 1-3. - Section catchlines and other headings. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. No provision of this Code shall be held invalid by reason of deficiency in any such catchline or in any heading or title to any chapter, article or division. 
(Code 1972, § 1-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions relative to state code, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.9. 
Sec. 1-4. - History notes. 
    The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the sections. 
Sec. 1-5. - Editor's notes and references. 
    The editor's notes, Charter references, cross references and state law references in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to assist the user of this Code. 
Sec. 1-6. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
    The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1972, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-7. - Amendments or additions to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. 
(b)  Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make them a part of this Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code, so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
(c)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Emporia, Virginia, is hereby amended to read as follows:...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Emporia, Virginia, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered ____________ , which section reads as follows:...." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(e)  All sections, articles, chapters or other provisions of this Code desired to be repealed shall be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1972, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-8. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been replaced shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meanings to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to supplement Code, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-37.3. 
Sec. 1-9. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions, any portion of this Code or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
(Code 1972, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-10. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code, or its application to any persons or circumstances, shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or other invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, or their application, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional or otherwise invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1972, § 1-7) 
Charter reference- Severability of parts of Charter, § 67. 
State Law reference- Severability of provisions of statutes, Code of Virginia, § 1-17.1. 
Sec. 1-11. - General penalty; continuing violations; misdemeanors enumerated. 
(a)  The authorized punishments for conviction of a misdemeanor are: 
(1)  For class 1 misdemeanors, confinement in jail for not more than 12 months and a fine of not more than $2,500.00, either or both. 
(2)  For class 2 misdemeanors, confinement in jail for not more than six months and a fine of not more than $1,000.00, either or both. 
(3)  For class 3 misdemeanors, a fine of not more than $500.00. 
(4)  For class 4 misdemeanors, a fine of not more than $250.00. 
(b)  Wherever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or wherever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the person violating any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor; provided, however, the punishment shall not exceed any limit established by state statute for a like offense. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  The imposition of any such punishment shall not prevent the city from forceably removing or abating an unlawful condition. 
(Code 1972, § 1-8) 
State Law reference- Penalties for violations of municipal ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-901; bond of persons convicted to prevent additional violations, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-902; injunctive relief against continuing violation of ordinance, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-905; classification of criminal offenses, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-9; punishment for conviction of misdemeanor, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-11; punishment for misdemeanor where no penalty prescribed, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-12, 18.2-13; extraterritorial jurisdiction in state criminal cases, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-250. 
Sec. 1-12. - Miscellaneous actions and ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds for the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(3)  Any administrative ordinance of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code; 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing salaries of officers or employees of the city; 
(5)  Any appropriation ordinance; 
(6)  Any right or franchise granted by the council to any person; 
(7)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(8)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city; 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor; 
(10)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; 
(11)  Any ordinance explicitly saved from repeal in the body of the Code of Ordinances; 
(12)  Any ordinance making any act or failure to do any act an offense against the city, when such ordinance is authorized under the state law and is not inconsistent with this Code; 
(13)  Any ordinance fixing ad valorem taxes, or providing for the levying or collecting thereof; 
(14)  Any ordinance levying an occupation or business license fee or tax, or regulating any business, and not included therein; 
and all such actions and ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 39-72, § 3, 4-7-72) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Incorporation, boundaries and general powers, art. I; government, art. II. 
Cross reference- Board of building code appeals, § 14-171 et seq.; courts, ch. 26; elections, ch. 30; fire prevention and protection, ch. 38; law enforcement, ch. 46; planning, ch. 54; planning commission, § 54-31 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; taxation, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 78. 
State Law reference- The Virginia Freedom of Information Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.1-340 et seq.; State and Local Government Conflict of Interests Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.1-639.1 et seq.; Virginia Public Procurement Act, Code of Virginia, § 11-35 et seq.; liability insurance or self-insurance for officers, employees, etc., Code of Virginia, § 15.1-7.3:1; photographing, recording, etc., of records, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-8; purchase of recycled paper, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-11.5:01; municipal ordinances generally, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-13; creation of service districts, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-18.2, 15.1-18.3; fee for bad checks, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-29.4; oath of local officers, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-1522, 49-1; budget procedures, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-159.8 et seq.; Public Finance Act of 1991, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-227.1 et seq.; Virginia Public Records Act, Code of Virginia, § 42.1-76 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Loaning of city equipment. 
    No city equipment shall be loaned for any purpose, unless permission is first obtained from the city manager. 
(Code 1972, § 8-10; Ord. No. 331-95, § 8-10, 12-6-95) 
Sec. 2-2. - Fees for furnishing copies of any public record or paper. 
    Upon request for any public record or paper to go out of any office of the city, there shall be paid a fee of $0.25 per page, or $5.00 per electronic media disc such as but not limited to a compact disc (CD) or digital video disc (DVD). Such fees shall be payable to the treasurer of the city, shall not be prorated or refunded, and shall be paid into the general fund. 
(Ord. No. 05-33, § 1, 6-28-05) 
Secs. 2-3-2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- City council generally, § 7 et seq. 

Sec. 2-31. - Regular meetings-Date and time. 
    The regular meetings of the council shall be convened at 6:30 p.m. on the first and third Tuesdays in each month at such place as may be designated by the council, unless previously canceled by the council. 
(Code 1972, § 2-26; Ord. No. 13-05, § 1, 3-19-13) 
Sec. 2-32. - Same-Special in lieu thereof. 
    A special meeting may be called, as provided by the Charter, for the transaction of general business when for any reason, a regular meeting for that month was not held at the time designated therefor. 
(Code 1972, § 2-27) 
Charter reference- Calling special meetings, § 16. 
Sec. 2-33. - Order of proceedings. 
    The order of the proceedings of the council shall be as follows: 
(1)  Roll call. 
(2)  Reading of minutes. 
(3)  Consideration of accounts and appropriations. 
(4)  Reports of officers. 
(5)  Reports of special committees. 
(6)  Unfinished business. 
(7)  Communications and new business. 
(Code 1972, § 2-28) 
Sec. 2-34. - Speaking more than once; speaking more than twice. 
    In any debate at a council meeting, no member shall speak more than once on the same question, until all others have spoken who desire to do so, nor more than twice on the same question, except by the consent of a majority of the members of the council present. 
(Code 1972, § 2-29) 
Sec. 2-35. - Conduct of members when speaking. 
    If any member of the council in speaking transgresses the rules of the council, or, during a meeting of the council, is guilty of any breach of decorum or of courtesy in debate, the presiding officer shall, and any member may, call him to order and he shall be required to take his seat and not be allowed to proceed unless permission to explain be granted by the presiding officer. An appeal to the council from the decision of the presiding officer may be had in such cases. 
(Code 1972, § 2-30) 
Sec. 2-36. - Address by nonmember. 
    No person who is not a member of the council, except the city manager, shall orally address it, unless leave to do so has been applied for through a member of the council or the presiding officer and granted by the council. 
(Code 1972, § 2-31) 
Charter reference- Participation of city manager in council meetings, § 23. 
Sec. 2-37. - Appeal from decision of presiding officer. 
    From any decision of the officer presiding during a meeting of the council, an appeal shall lie to the council. On such appeal, no debate shall be permitted if it relates to a question of propriety of conduct, but if it relates to the priority of business or any other matter, the appeal may be debated. The decision of the chair shall be final, unless two-thirds of the members present vote against such decision. 
(Code 1972, § 2-32) 
Charter reference- Mayor presides over meetings of council, § 5; president of council, § 6. 
Sec. 2-38. - Submission of motion or resolution. 
    Every motion or resolution shall, when requested by any member of the council or the presiding officer, be reduced to writing and seconded before it is submitted, and the name of the person offering it shall be recorded in the journal or record. 
(Code 1972, § 2-33) 
Sec. 2-39. - Question to be stated by chair. 
    At council meetings, the question shall be stated by the chair before it is voted on or debated. 
(Code 1972, § 2-34) 
Sec. 2-40. - Withdrawal of motion or resolution. 
    At council meetings, any motion or resolution may be withdrawn by the mover at any time with the consent of the councilman seconding the same, before decision, amendment or other action of the council upon it. 
(Code 1972, § 2-35) 
Sec. 2-41. - Motions, propositions or subjects under color of amendment. 
    No motion, proposition or subject different from that under consideration by the council shall be admitted under color of amendment. 
(Code 1972, § 2-36) 
Sec. 2-42. - Moving the main or previous question. 
    Pending a debate, any member who obtains the floor for the purpose only and submits no other motion or remark may move for the "previous question," and the motion may be forthwith put to the council without debate. Two-thirds of the members present shall be required to order the main or previous question. The previous question shall be put in this form: "Shall the main question now be put?" If carried, its effect shall be to put an end to all debate and bring the council to a direct vote upon pending amendments, if any, and then upon the main question. If upon the motion for the previous question, the main question is not ordered, debate may be continued as if the motion had not been made. 
(Code 1972, § 2-37) 
Sec. 2-43. - Calling for "ayes" and "noes." 
    The "ayes" and "noes" on any question before the council may be called for at any time before proceeding to any other business, and shall be ordered on the demand of any member. 
(Code 1972, § 2-38) 
Sec. 2-44. - Recording "ayes" and "noes"; majority vote of all required for money measures; exception. 
    The "ayes" and "noes," when called for by any member, shall be entered on the record when the vote is taken on any motion, resolution or ordinance having as its object, or providing for, the appropriation of money, the allowance of a claim, the imposition of taxes or assessments, or the contraction of any debt or obligation on behalf of the city. No such motion, resolution or ordinance shall be adopted or passed, except when a greater number of votes is required, unless the same shall receive a majority of the votes of the whole number of the councilmen elected; provided, however, that when a duly audited account against the city approved by the proper auditing officer or committee is on hand and read to the council, the presiding officer of the council shall ask whether there be objection to its allowance, and if no objection be made by any member of the council, such account shall stand approved and allowed; provided further that, where any appropriation exceeds $100.00, an aye and no vote shall be taken and recorded. 
(Code 1972, § 2-39) 
Sec. 2-45. - Reconsideration of questions. 
    When a question has been decided by the council, it may be reconsidered on the motion of any member who voted with the prevailing side, provided such motion is made at the same session of the council at which it was decided. All motions to reconsider shall be decided by a majority of the votes of the members present. 
(Code 1972, § 2-40) 
Sec. 2-46. - Adjournment-In absence of quorum. 
    If a quorum fails to attend within half an hour after the appointed time of meeting, those present may adjourn to such time as they may deem proper, and the city clerk shall enter the names of those present and those absent on the journal. 
(Code 1972, § 2-40) 
Sec. 2-47. - Same-Moving. 
    A motion to adjourn shall always be in order, except when a member has the floor, when the ayes and noes are being called, when the previous question has been ordered, or when a resolution to adjourn has been put and lost without any other business intervening. 
(Code 1972, § 2-42) 
Sec. 2-48. - Member not to leave meeting. 
    After the name of a member has been recorded as present at any meeting of the council, he shall not absent himself from such meeting previous to the adjournment, without permission of the mayor (appealable to the council). Any member violating this rule will forfeit $100.00 of their monthly council salary. Similarly, no member of council shall miss a scheduled regular meeting of council without permission of the mayor (appealable to the council). Permission to be absent shall not be denied for valid purposes of sickness, vacation, business or similar purpose. 
(Code 1972, § 2-43; Ord. No. 03-14, § 1, 4-15-03; Ord. No. 03-53, § 1, 12-2-03) 
Sec. 2-49. - Member not to vote on question in which he has interest. 
    No member of the council who has an immediate personal or pecuniary interest in the result of any question or matter before the council shall vote thereon. 
(Code 1972, § 2-44) 
State Law reference- State and Local Government Conflict of Interests Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.1-639.1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-50. - Effective date of ordinances. 
    Every ordinance shall commence and be in force from the date of its passage, unless otherwise provided. 
(Code 1972, § 2-45) 
Sec. 2-51. - Suspension of rule or order of business. 
    No rule of the council or order of business shall be suspended without the concurrence of two-thirds of the members present. 
(Code 1972, § 2-46) 
Secs. 2-52-2-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Mayor, § 4 et seq.; president of council, § 6; clerk of the council, § 18; city manager, art. III; city departments, boards and officers, art. VI. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-76. - Powers and duties generally. 
    The powers and duties of the officers and employees of the city shall not be construed as limited to those delineated in this Code. The powers and duties of such officers and employees shall also include those set out or required of them by the council or by a superior officer. 
(Code 1972, § 2-7) 
Sec. 2-77. - Removal of officers. 
    For malfeasance, neglect of duty, incapacity, or any other cause, the council may remove from office any officer appointed by it, and the city manager may remove from office any officer appointed by him. 
(Code 1972, § 2-8) 
Charter reference- Authority to remove officers and employees for good cause, § 14. 
Sec. 2-78. - Reports to council generally. 
    All officers shall make written reports to the council from time to time as requested. 
(Code 1972, § 2-9) 
Sec. 2-79. - Physical examinations for firefighters and police officers. 
    Every firefighter (including volunteer firefighters) and police officer shall submit to an annual physical examination to be provided by the city. 
(Code 1972, § 2-14) 
State Law reference- Examinations relating to certain diseases, Code of Virginia, §§ 27-40.1, 27-40.1:1. 
Sec. 2-80. - Qualifications of examining physician. 
    The physical examination required by section 2-79 shall be performed by a qualified medical doctor licensed to practice in the commonwealth as specified by the city council; provided, however, that the firefighter or police officer shall, at his own expense, have the right to have present at such examination a physician of his own choosing. 
(Code 1972, § 2-15) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, as to certain examinations, Code of Virginia, § 27-40.1. 
Sec. 2-81. - Laboratory and diagnostic studies to be included in physical examination. 
    The physical examination required by section 2-79 shall include the following laboratory and diagnostic studies: 
(1)  Examination of head, eyes, ears, nose, throat, neck. 
(2)  Examination of chest and lungs. 
(3)  Examination of heart. 
(4)  Examination of abdomen. 
(5)  Examination of genitalia. 
(6)  Examination of extremities including peripheral pulses. 
(7)  Examination of neuromuscular system. 
(8)  Chest X-ray and electrocardiogram. 
(9)  Checking the vital signs including weight, blood pressure, temperature, respirations, pulse, etc. 
(10)  Other tests and procedures deemed necessary by the examining physician. 
(Code 1972, § 2-16) 
Secs. 2-82-2-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY MANAGER[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference- City manager, art. III. 

Sec. 2-101. - General powers. 
    The city manager shall have general powers necessary and proper to carry out all the responsibilities set out in the Charter, this Code and other ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 2-1) 
Sec. 2-102. - Additional duties. 
    The city manager, in addition to the duties specified in the Charter, this Code and other ordinances of the city, shall perform such duties as the council may from time to time prescribe. 
(Code 1972, § 2-2) 
Sec. 2-103. - Receipt and examination of all reports of officers prior to submission to council. 
    The city manager shall receive and examine all reports of officers made to the council, as provided in this Code, to ascertain their correctness and shall prescribe the forms thereof. 
(Code 1972, § 2-3) 
Sec. 2-104. - Employee control and supervision. 
    Except as otherwise provided in the Charter, the city manager shall have general supervision and shall exercise control over all departments of the city government and employees of the city, and employ, appoint and remove department heads and subordinate employees of the city. The city manager shall have power to suspend, without pay, any department head or employee of the city, for any length of time as in his discretion is necessary and proper, which suspension shall be reported to the council. The city manager shall further report to the council the employment, appointment and removal of department heads. 
(Code 1972, § 2-4) 
Editor's note- The following officers are not appointed or subject to dismissal by the city manager: Clerk of council, city attorney, general district court judges, members of the board of health, members of the department of public welfare, treasurer, city sheriff, commissioner of revenue, members of the school board, clerk of general district court, clerk of juvenile and domestic relations district court, and the circuit court sheriff, commonwealth's attorney and clerk of the circuit court. 
Sec. 2-105. - Public utility companies and franchises. 
    The city manager shall see that all terms and conditions imposed by law upon any public utility company or under any franchise in favor of the city or its inhabitants are faithfully kept and performed. 
(Code 1972, § 2-5) 
Secs. 2-106-2-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CITY CLERK 

Sec. 2-126. - Clerk of council serves as city clerk. 
    The clerk of council shall serve as the city clerk. 
(Code 1972, § 2-60) 
Charter reference- Clerk of the council, § 18. 
Sec. 2-127. - Secretary to the board of zoning appeals. 
    The city clerk shall serve as secretary to the board of zoning appeals. 
(Code 1972, § 2-61) 
Sec. 2-128. - General ordinance book; minute book. 
    The city clerk shall keep two books in which to record the proceedings of the council. In one of them, to be termed "General Ordinance Book," shall be recorded with a suitable index all ordinances and resolutions of a general and permanent character; and in the other, to be called the "Minute Book," shall be recorded and indexed the transactions of every meeting of the council. 
(Code 1972, § 2-62) 
Sec. 2-129. - Publication and distribution of ordinances and resolutions-Delivery to newspaper. 
    If an ordinance is ordered to be published pursuant to section 21 of the Charter, it shall be the duty of the city clerk, within 24 hours of the passage of the ordinance, to furnish to a newspaper published in the city, a copy of such ordinance. 
(Code 1972, § 2-63) 
Sec. 2-130. - Same-Delivery to chief of police. 
    If an ordinance of the city is ordered to be posted pursuant to section 21 of the Charter, it shall be the duty of the clerk, within 24 hours of the passage of the ordinance, to furnish to the chief of police a copy of such ordinance for posting in accordance with such section. 
(Code 1972, § 2-64) 
Sec. 2-131. - Same-Distribution to departments and officials. 
    It shall be the duty of the city clerk to transmit to the several departments or officials of the city copies of ordinances or resolutions of the council concerning any particular department or official. 
(Code 1972, § 2-65) 
Sec. 2-132. - Fees for furnishing copies. 
    The city clerk shall, when furnishing copies of any ordinance, resolution or other proceeding of the council, or paper in his custody, to any person other than the officials of the city entitled thereto, whether by paper or electronic means, charge the same fees for such copies as provided for in section 2-2. Such fees shall be payable to the treasurer of the city, shall not be prorated or refunded, and shall be paid into the general fund. 
(Code 1972, § 2-66; Ord. No. 05-34, § 1, 6-28-05) 
Sec. 2-133. - Notice of final action on petitions or communications. 
    It shall be the duty of the city clerk to give notice to all persons presenting petitions or communications to the council of the final action of the council on such petition or communication. 
(Code 1972, § 2-67) 
Sec. 2-134. - Receipt in proof of certified records or paper. 
    A copy of any record or paper in the custody of the city clerk shall, when certified by him, be received in proof as if it were the original. 
(Code 1972, § 2-68) 
Sec. 2-135. - Custody of deeds, contracts, plats, surveys or other evidences of title. 
    Except as otherwise provided by the council, the city clerk shall have custody of all deeds, contracts, plats, surveys or other evidences of title, belonging to the city, which may be duly filed in his office. 
(Code 1972, § 2-69) 
Sec. 2-136. - Inspection of books and papers. 
    All books and papers in the custody of the city clerk shall be open to the inspection of the public during reasonable business hours. 
(Code 1972, § 2-70) 
Sec. 2-137. - Record of obligation bonds. 
    The city clerk shall keep a list of the city bonds, their date, number, amount, the rate of interest thereon, and the date on which such bonds and interest become due. 
(Code 1972, § 2-71) 
Sec. 2-138. - City real estate records. 
    The city clerk shall keep a descriptive list of all real estate owned by the city, whether acquired for its own use or bought for delinquent taxes, and shall keep a list of all sales of such lands, to whom made and at what price. 
(Code 1972, § 2-72) 
Sec. 2-139. - City personal property records. 
    The city clerk shall keep a descriptive list of all personal property owned by the city and in whose custody the same should be. Such list shall be furnished him by the various department heads, who shall also report to the clerk any changes to be made in such list, except as to such property in the custody of the city clerk. 
(Code 1972, § 2-73) 
Sec. 2-140. - Affixing corporate seal. 
    The city clerk shall affix the corporate seal to any paper directed by the council to be executed on behalf of the city to which it may be necessary to affix such seal, unless another person is designated by the council to affix the seal. The clerk is also authorized to affix such seal to any copy of a resolution, ordinance or other proceeding as evidence of the correctness of such copy and the genuineness of his attestation or certificate thereto. 
(Code 1972, § 2-74) 
Charter reference- Authority of clerk to use corporate seal, § 18. 
Sec. 2-141. - Description of the city seal. 
    There is adopted, as the seal of the city, a metallic disk 1 5/8 inches in diameter, with a border or outer circle consisting of 30 oak leaves within which shall be engraved, at the top of the circle, the words "City of Emporia," and at the bottom of the circle the word "Virginia." Also within the circle to the left shall be the number "19" and within the right side of the circle shall be the number "67." Within the circle shall be engraved an inner circle depicting a highway and bridge. The bridge will symbolize the joining of the Towns of Hicksford and Belfield to form the City of Emporia. The seal shall be so engraved as to produce the above described design when it is impressed on paper. When the seal is reproduced in color, the outer circle shall be royal blue with the lettering in the circle in gold. The skyline in the inner circle shall be light or powder blue, and the landscaping on either side of the road shall be green. Both the bridge and the highway will be white in color outlined in gold. The seal shall be the authorized, official, and corporate seal of the city and shall be accepted and used as such. 
(Code 1972, § 2-75) 
Secs. 2-142-2-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CITY TREASURER[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference- City treasurer, § 51 et seq. 
State Law reference- Treasurers, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3123 et seq. 

Sec. 2-161. - Attendance at council meetings. 
    It shall be the duty of the city treasurer to attend all regular meetings of the council and to attend special or called meetings of the council when so directed by the council or the mayor. He shall not leave any such meeting until authorized by the mayor. 
(Code 1972, § 8-1) 
Charter reference- Duties of treasurer, § 54. 
Sec. 2-162. - Duty with reference to city money generally; collections. 
    The city treasurer shall receive all moneys belonging to the city which it is his duty to collect from persons owing the same to the city or which it is the duty of other officers to collect and pay over to him, and to pay the same out as the laws of the city may prescribe and to keep such moneys safely and account therefor. The money collected by him shall be deposited at a bank designated by the council as a depository for city funds. 
(Code 1972, § 8-2) 
State Law reference- Virginia Security for Public Deposits Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.1-359 et seq. 
Sec. 2-163. - Tax assessing and collecting officer. 
    The collection of all city taxes and levies shall be handled by the city treasurer and shall be made by and through his office. When the treasurer receives the land and personal property books relative to property within the city from the commissioner of revenue, he shall adopt the valuations as of January 1, as shown on such books for city purposes. The city treasurer shall take the assessment of the state corporation commission as to public utilities. The city treasurer shall make up and mail out tax tickets on the city property calling for payment in accordance with the provisions of this division. All payments on account of delinquent taxes shall be made to the city treasurer. 
(Code 1972, § 8-3) 
Sec. 2-164. - Payment of administrative costs. 
    Any person failing to pay taxes or levies in the year in which the same are levied or assessed shall incur a fee to cover the administrative costs associated with the collection of delinquent taxes. Such fee shall be in addition to all penalties and interest, and shall be $20.00 for taxes collected subsequent to the filing of a warrant or other appropriate legal document but prior to judgment, and $25.00 for taxes collected subsequent to judgment. The collection of such fees shall be handled by the city treasurer. 
(Code 1972, § 8-3.1; Ord. No. 98-12, 8-18-98) 
Sec. 2-165. - Monthly report. 
    The treasurer shall before the second regular council meeting in each month file in the office of the city clerk a report of his transactions in receiving, collecting and disbursing the accounts and moneys of the city during the previous month; all moneys collected or received and from what branch of the revenue derived; all disbursements made by him, whether on city warrant or for interest on the bonded debt of the city; and the balance of uncollected accounts and of money in his hands or due by him to the city on the first day of the month in which such report is filed. 
(Code 1972, § 8-4; Ord. No. 05-61, § 1, 11-15-05) 
Sec. 2-166. - Receipts from persons collecting city revenue. 
    The city treasurer shall take from any officer or person authorized to collect any of the revenues of the city, proper receipts for all accounts, tax tickets, etc., belonging to the city, which are placed in the hands of such officer or person for collection. 
(Code 1972, § 2-10) 
Secs. 2-167-2-185. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - FISCAL DIRECTOR 

Sec. 2-186. - Office created. 
    There is hereby created the office of fiscal director, which officer may or may not be a city employee. 
(Code 1972, § 8-5) 
Sec. 2-187. - Accounts. 
    The fiscal director shall keep accurate accounts with all officers and persons authorized to collect any of the revenues or make any expenditures of the city, showing at all times the liability to the city of such officers and persons. The fiscal director shall keep accounts wherein shall be stated each item of expenditure, payment of which has been directed by the council together with the object of such expenditure. The city fiscal director shall so keep his books that all receipts and disbursements and the source and character thereof, the amount to the credit of each separate fund set apart or established by the laws of the city or orders of the council, under his control, and the receipts and disbursements on account thereof, shall appear. 
(Code 1972, § 8-6) 
Secs. 2-188-2-205. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference- Finances, art. IV. 

Sec. 2-206. - Approval of claims before payment. 
(a)  No claim against the city shall be allowed until it has been approved by the city manager and the department head by whose direction or on whose order the services were performed or materials furnished for which such account was rendered. The department head shall endorse on such claim the specific object of such expenditure, and if incurred under the direction or authority of such officer, and return the claim to the city clerk before the regular meeting of the council at which it is to be submitted. 
(b)  The city manager shall examine all claims against the city before presentation to the council for payment, for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not such claims are approved by the proper officer, authorized to incur such indebtedness against the city and having knowledge of the details thereof, or are accompanied by the proper vouchers and are correct and payable by the city, and shall endorse thereon his approval or disapproval of the payment thereof. 
(c)  Any officer of the city, whose duty it is to examine a claim before it is examined by the city manager pursuant to this section, shall endorse thereon the object of each item of such expenditure. 
(Code 1972, § 8-7) 
Sec. 2-207. - Warrants-Generally. 
    All payments by the city, except interest on the bonded debt, and except as provided in section 2-208, shall be made on the warrant of the treasurer, countersigned by the city manager, and no warrant shall be so given unless authorized by some ordinance or resolution of the council. 
(Code 1972, § 8-8) 
Sec. 2-208. - Same-Prerequisite to payment of money; exception as to payrolls, cash items, filing of bills and payrolls; vouchers. 
    The city treasurer shall pay no money out of the treasury in any case other than the payment of interest on the bonded indebtedness of the city except on the warrant executed as provided in section 2-207; provided, however, that on the written order of the city manager, he may pay freight and express bills, bills for gas and oil, the weekly payrolls certified by the city manager and such other cash items as may be certified to him by the city manager necessary to the prosecution of the work under the supervision and control of the city manager, where from the necessity of the case, such items must be paid for in cash. He shall, at the end of each month, file all such bills and payrolls properly receipted and receipts for such cash items paid by him in the office of the clerk of the city, and vouchers shall be issued him at the next meeting of the council. When requested by any member of the council, such payrolls, bills, and other cash items, shall be presented to the council for examination. 
(Code 1972, § 8-9) 
Sec. 2-209. - Budget-Contents. 
    Opposite each item of the contemplated expenditures, the budget shall show in separate parallel columns the aggregate amount appropriated during the preceding fiscal year, the amount expended, actually or projected, during that year, the aggregate amount appropriated and expected to be appropriated during the current fiscal year, and the increases or decreases in the contemplated expenditures for the ensuing year as compared with the aggregate amount appropriated or expected to be appropriated for the current year. This budget shall be accompanied by: 
(1)  A statement of the contemplated revenue and disbursements, liabilities, reserves and surplus or deficit of the city as of the date of the preparation of the budget. 
(2)  An itemized and complete financial balance sheet for the city at the close of the last preceding fiscal year. 
(Code 1972, § 8-11) 
Charter reference- Budget, § 28. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-161. 
Sec. 2-210. - Same-Publication and notice; public hearing; recess; adjournment from day to day; moneys not to be paid out until appropriated. 
    For informative and fiscal planning purposes only, a brief synopsis of the budget shall be published in a newspaper having general circulation in the city, and notice given of one or more public hearings, at least seven days prior to the date set for hearing, at which any citizen of the city shall have the right to attend and state his views thereon. The hearing shall be held at least seven days prior to the beginning of the fiscal year; provided, however, that the council may recess or adjourn from day to day or time to time during such hearing. The fact of such notice and hearing shall be entered of record in the minute book. The contemplated expenditure for all purposes as contained in the budget prepared under section 2-209 and published under this section shall be for informative and fiscal planning purposes only and shall not be deemed to be an appropriation. No money shall be paid out or become available to be paid out for any contemplated expenditure unless and until there has first been made an annual, semiannual, quarterly or monthly appropriation for such contemplated expenditure by the council. 
(Code 1972, § 8-12) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-162. 
Sec. 2-211. - Fee for giving check or draft for payment of sums due city which is returned. 
    There shall be a fee of $30.00 chargeable to any person who shall utter, publish or pass any check or draft for the payment of city taxes or any other sums due the city which is subsequently returned for nonsufficient funds or because there is no account or because the account has been closed. 
(Code 1972, § 8-25; Ord. No. 98-11, 8-18-98; Ord. No. 05-20, 6-21-05) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-29.4. 
Secs. 2-212-2-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PURCHASING; SURPLUS PROPERTY[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Virginia Public Procurement Act, Code of Virginia, § 11-35 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-241. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Agent means the purchasing agent of the city. 
    Blind trusts means an independently managed trust in which the employee-beneficiary has no management rights and in which the employee-beneficiary is not given notice of alterations in, or other dispositions of, the property subject to the trust. 
    Brand name or equal specification means a specification limited to one or more items by manufacturers' names or catalogue numbers to describe the standard of quality, performance and other salient characteristics needed to meet the city's requirements and which provides for the submission of equivalent products. 
    Brand name specification means a specification limited to one or more items by manufacturers' names or catalogue numbers. 
    Business means any corporation, partnership, individual, sole proprietorship, joint stock company, joint venture or any other private legal entity. 
    Change order (unilateral) means a written order signed and unilaterally issued by the purchasing agent directing the contractor to make changes which the "changes" clauses of the contract authorize the purchasing agent to order without the consent of the contractor. 
    Confidential information means any information which is available to an employee only because of the employee's status as an employee of the city and is not a matter of public knowledge or available to the public on request. 
    Construction means building, altering, repairing, improving or demolishing any structure, building or highway, and any draining, dredging, excavation, grading or similar work upon real property. 
    Construction management contract means a contract in which a party is retained by the owner to coordinate and administer contracts for construction services for the benefit of the owner, and may also include, if provided in the contract, the furnishing of construction services to the owner. 
    Contract means all types of city agreements, regardless of what they may be called, for the procurement of goods, services, insurance or construction. 
    Contract modification means any written alteration in specifications, delivery point, rate of delivery, period of performance, price, quantity, or other provision of any contract accomplished by mutual action of the parties of the contract. 
    Contractor means any person having a contract with the city or a using agency thereof. 
    Cost analysis means the evaluation of cost data for the purpose of arriving at costs actually incurred or estimates of costs to be incurred, prices to be paid, and costs to be reimbursed. 
    Cost data means factual information concerning the cost of labor, material, overhead, and other cost elements which are expected to be incurred or which have been actually incurred by the contractor in performing the contract. 
    Cost-reimbursement contract means a contract under which a contractor is reimbursed for costs which are allowable and allocable in accordance with the contract terms and the provisions of this article, and a fee or profit, if any. 
    Direct or indirect participation means involvement through decision, approval, disapproval, recommendation, preparation of any part of a purchase request, influencing the content of any specification or procurement standard, rendering of advice, investigation, auditing, or in any other advisory capacity. 
    Disadvantaged business means a small business which is owned or controlled by a majority of persons, not limited to members of minority groups, who have been deprived of the opportunity to develop and maintain a competitive position in the economy because of social disadvantages. 
    Employee means an individual drawing a salary or wages from the city, whether elected or not; any noncompensated individual performing personal services for the city, or any department, agency, commission, council, board or any other entity established by the executive or legislative branch of the city; and a noncompensated individual serving as an elected official of the city. 
    Goods means all material, equipment, supplies, printing and automated data processing hardware and software. 
    Informality means a minor defect or variation of a bid or proposal from the exact requirements of the invitation to bid, or the request for proposal, which does not affect the price, quality, quantity or delivery schedule for the goods, services or construction being procured. 
    Insurance means a contract whereby, for a stipulated consideration, one party undertakes to compensate the other for loss on a specified subject by specified perils. 
    Invitation for bids means all documents, whether attached or incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting sealed bids. No confidential or proprietary data shall be solicited in any invitation for bids. 
    Nominal value means so small, slight, or the like, in comparison to what might properly be expected, as scarcely to be entitled to the name but in no case to be more than $5.00. 
    Nonprofessional services means any services not specifically identified as professional services in the definition of the term "professional services." 
    Price analysis means the evaluation of price data, without analysis of the separate cost components and profit as in cost analysis, which may assist in arriving at prices to be paid and costs to be reimbursed. 
    Pricing data means factual information concerning prices for items substantially similar to those being procured. Prices in this definition refer to offer or proposed selling prices, historical selling prices and current selling prices. The definition refers to data relevant to both prime and subcontract prices. 
    Professional services means work performed by an independent contractor within the scope of the practice of accounting, architecture, land surveying, landscape architecture, law, medicine, optometry, professional engineering, real estate appraisers or systems development. 
    Public body means any legislative, executive or judicial body, agency, office, department, authority, post, commission, committee, institution, board, or political subdivision created by law to exercise some sovereign power or to perform some governmental duty, and empowered by law to undertake the activities described in this article. 
    Qualified products list means an approved list of goods, services or construction items described by model or catalogue number, which prior to competitive solicitation, the city has determined will meet the applicable specification requirements. 
    Request for proposals means all documents, whether attached or incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting proposals. 
    Responsible bidder or offeror means a person who has the capability, in all respects, to perform fully the contract requirements and the moral and business integrity and reliability which will ensure good faith performance, and who has been prequalified, if required. 
    Responsive bidder means a person who has submitted a bid which conforms in all material respects to the invitation to bid. 
    Services means any work performed by an independent contractor wherein the service rendered does not consist primarily of acquisition of equipment or materials, or the rental of equipment, materials and supplies. 
    Sheltered workshop means a work-oriented rehabilitative facility with a controlled working environment and individual goals which utilizes work experience and related services for assisting the handicapped person to progress toward normal living and a productive vocational status. 
    Small business means a United States business which is independently owned and which is not dominant in its field of operation or an affiliate or subsidiary of a business dominant in its field of operation. 
    Specification means any description of the physical or functional characteristics, or of the nature of a good, service or construction item. It may include a description of any requirement for inspecting, testing or preparing a good, service or construction item for delivery. 
    Using agency means any department, agency, commission, bureau, or other unit in the city government requiring goods, services, insurance or construction as provided for in this article. 
(Code 1972, § 2-206(1)-(5), (9)-(22), (24)-(29), (31)-(42)) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Definitions, Code of Virginia, § 11-37. 
Sec. 2-242. - Purpose of article. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide for the fair and equitable treatment of all persons involved in public purchasing by the city, to maximize the purchasing value of public funds in procurement, and to provide safeguards for maintaining a procurement system of quality and integrity. 
(Code 1972, § 2-202) 
Sec. 2-243. - Application of article. 
(a)  This article applies to contracts for the procurement of goods, services, insurance and construction entered into by the city involving every expenditure for public purchasing irrespective of its source. 
(b)  When the procurement involves the expenditure of federal assistance or contract funds, the procurement shall be conducted in accordance with any applicable mandatory federal law and regulation which are not reflected in this article. Nothing in this article shall prevent any public agency from complying with the terms and conditions of any grant, gift or bequest which is otherwise consistent with law. 
(Code 1972, § 2-203) 
Sec. 2-244. - Cooperative procurement; conditions for use. 
    The city manager has the duty to develop, to the maximum extent possible, a program for the joint or cooperative purchasing of common use supplies with the surrounding governing bodies, the state and other public agencies in the surrounding area and to endeavor to arrange for a program of standardization of common use supplies. Items so procured under a cooperative agreement with other jurisdictions shall be exempted from the provisions of this article, provided such procurements are the result of competitive bidding wherever practicable. 
(Code 1972, § 2-211) 
State Law reference- Cooperative procurement, Code of Virginia, § 11-40. 
Sec. 2-245. - Participation of small businesses and businesses owned by women and minorities. 
    The purchasing agent may establish programs consistent with all provisions of this article to facilitate the participation of small businesses and businesses owned by women and minorities in procurement transactions. Such programs shall be in writing, and may include cooperation with the state department of minority business enterprise, the United States Small Business Administration and other public or private agencies. 
(Code 1972, § 2-232) 
State Law reference- State department of minority business enterprise, Code of Virginia, § 2.1-64.32 et seq. 
Sec. 2-246. - Discrimination. 
    In the solicitation or awarding of contracts, the city shall not discriminate because of race, religion, color, sex or national origin of the bidder or offeror. 
(Code 1972, § 2-233) 
Sec. 2-247. - Disposal of surplus property. 
    All using agencies shall submit to the purchasing agent at such time and in such form as he shall prescribe, reports showing stocks of all supplies which are no longer used or which have become obsolete, worn out or scrapped. The purchasing agent shall have the authority to transfer surplus stock to the other using agencies. The purchasing agent shall have the authority to sell all supplies which have been unsuitable for public use, or to exchange the same for, or trade in the same on, new supplies. Sales under this section shall be made to the highest responsible bidder. 
(Code 1972, § 2-219) 
Secs. 2-248-2-265. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PURCHASING AGENT 

Sec. 2-266. - Establishment, appointment and bond. 
(a)  Establishment of purchasing system. There is hereby created a purchasing system to operate under the direction and supervision of the city manager. Nothing contained in this article shall prevent the city manager from designating a responsible person to perform the duties of purchasing agent, subject to his direction. 
(b)  Purchases generally. The city manager shall be responsible for all purchases made by the city. All purchases of the city shall be approved by the city manager or designee. The city manager or designee shall be restricted to purchase within the budget. 
(c)  Appointment of purchasing agent. There is hereby created the position of purchasing agent, who shall be the city's principal public purchasing official. The purchasing agent may be the city manager or his appointed designee, who shall be subject to his general direction and control. 
(d)  Purchasing agent's bond. The purchasing agent shall give an official bond; the form and amount shall be approved by the city attorney. 
(Code 1972, §§ 2-6, 2-207; Ord. No. 05-58, § 1, 11-1-05) 
Sec. 2-267. - Authority and duties. 
(a)  Principal public purchasing official. The purchasing agent shall serve as the principal public purchasing official for the city and shall be responsible for the procurement of goods, services, insurance and construction in accordance with this article, as well as the management and disposal of supplies. 
(b)  Duties. In accordance with this article, and subject to the supervision of the city manager, the purchasing agent shall: 
(1)  Purchase or supervise the purchasing of all goods, services, insurance and construction needed by the city; 
(2)  Exercise direct supervision over the city's central stores and general supervision over all other inventories of goods belonging to the city; 
(3)  Sell, trade or otherwise dispose of surplus goods belonging to the city; and 
(4)  Establish and maintain programs for specifications development, contract administration and inspection and acceptance, in cooperation with the public agencies using the goods, services, and construction. 
(c)  Operational procedures. The purchasing agent shall have the power and duty to: 
(1)  Purchase or contract for all goods, services, insurance and construction required by the using department, except as provided in this section; 
(2)  Ensure preparation and enforcement of standard specifications; 
(3)  Ensure the inspection of all deliveries of goods, services, or construction purchased through him to determine their conformance with the order or contract; 
(4)  Act to procure for the city the highest quality in goods, services, insurance and construction at the least expense to the city; 
(5)  Endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases and sales; 
(6)  Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions and new products; 
(7)  Secure for the city the benefits of research done in the fields of purchasing by other governmental jurisdictions, national societies, national trade associations, and by private business and organizations; 
(8)  Prepare and adopt standard purchase nomenclature for the using departments and for goods; 
(9)  Prepare, adopt and maintain a vendor's file containing catalogues, descriptions of commodities, prices and discounts; 
(10)  Declare vendors who default on their quotations as irresponsible bidders and to disqualify them from receiving business from the city for a stated period of time, subject to approval by the city manager; 
(11)  Maintain a current file of sources of goods, services, insurance and construction to be known as a "bidder list" to which vendors can request to be included; 
(12)  Not issue any order for delivery on a purchase until the city treasurer, or other designated official, shall have certified, after preaudit, that there is to the credit of the using agencies concerned a sufficient unencumbered appropriation balance, in excess of all unpaid obligations, to defray the amount of such order; and 
(13)  Perform such other functions and duties in keeping with good purchasing practices and such other duties as the city manager may assign. 
(Code 1972, § 2-208) 
Sec. 2-268. - Delegation. 
    The purchasing agent may delegate authority to purchase certain supplies, services or construction items to other city officials, if such delegation is deemed necessary for the effective procurement of those items. 
(Code 1972, § 2-209) 
Sec. 2-269. - Unauthorized purchases. 
    Except as in this article provided no official elected or appointed, or any employee shall purchase or contract for any goods, services, insurance or construction within the purview of this article other than by and through the purchasing department, and any purchase order or contract made contrary to the provisions of this article is not approved and the city shall not be bound thereby. 
(Code 1972, § 2-210) 
Secs. 2-270-2-285. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CONTRACT FORMATION; METHODS OF SOURCE SELECTION 

Sec. 2-286. - Competitive sealed bidding. 
(a)  Conditions for use. All public contracts with nongovernmental contractors for the purchase or lease of goods, or for the purchase of services, insurance or construction shall be awarded after competitive sealed bidding, or competitive negotiation as provided in this section, unless otherwise authorized by law. 
(b)  Competitive bidding on state-aid projects. No contract for the construction of any building or for an addition to or improvement of an existing building by any local government or subdivision of local government for which state funds of $15,000.00 or more, either by appropriation, grant-in-aid or loan, are used or are to be used for all or part of the cost of construction shall be let except after competitive sealed bidding or after competitive negotiation as provided under state law. The procedure for the advertising for bids or for proposals and for letting of the contract shall conform, mutatis mutandis, to this division. A person or firm who has been engaged as an architect or engineer for the same project under a separate contract shall not be eligible to bid on or submit a proposal for any such contract or to have the contract awarded to him. 
State Law reference- Methods of procurement, Code of Virginia, § 11-41(C)(2); competitive bidding on state-aid projects, Code of Virginia, § 11-41.1. 
(c)  Public access to procurement information. Except as provided in this section, all proceedings, records, contracts and other public records relating to procurement transactions shall be open to the inspection of any citizen, or any interested person, in accordance with state law. Cost estimates relating to a proposed transaction prepared by or for the city shall not be open to public inspection. Any bidder or offeror, upon request, shall be afforded the opportunity to inspect bid and proposal records within a reasonable time after the opening of all bids but prior to award, except if the city decides not to accept any of the bids and to reopen the contract. Otherwise, bid and proposal records shall be open to public inspection only after award of the contract. Any inspection of procurement transaction records under this section shall be subject to reasonable restrictions to ensure the security and integrity of the records. Trade secrets or proprietary information submitted by a bidder, offeror or contractor in connection with a procurement transaction shall not be subject to public disclosure under state law; however, the bidder, offeror or contractor must invoke the protections of this section prior to or upon submission of the data or other materials, and must identify the data or other materials to be protected and state the reasons why protection is necessary. 
State Law reference- The Virginia Freedom of Information Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.1-340 et seq. 
(d)  Employment discrimination by contractor. Every contract of over $10,000.00 shall include the provisions in subsections (d)(1)a and (d)(1)b of this section. 
(1)  During the performance of this contract, the contractor agrees as follows: 
a.  The contractor will not discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because of race, religion, color, sex or national origin, except where religion, sex or national origin is a bona fide occupational qualification reasonably necessary to the normal operation of the contractor. The contractor agrees to post in conspicuous places, available to employees and applicants for employment, notices setting forth the provisions of this nondiscrimination clause. 
b.  The contractor, in all solicitations or advertisements for employees placed by or on behalf of the contractor, will state that such contractor is an equal opportunity employer. 
c.  Notices, advertisements and solicitations placed in accordance with federal law, rule or regulation shall be deemed sufficient for the purpose of meeting the requirements of this section. 
(2)  The contractor will include the provisions of subsection (d)(1) of this section in every subcontract or purchase order of over $10,000.00, so that the provisions will be binding upon each subcontractor or vendor. 
State Law reference- Employment discrimination by contractor prohibited, Code of Virginia, § 11-51. 
(e)  Notice of invitation to bid. Notice inviting bids shall be published once in at least one official newspaper in the city and at least ten days preceding the last day set for the receipt of proposals. The newspaper notice required in this subsection shall include a general description of the articles to be purchased or sold, shall state where bid blanks and specifications may be secured, and the time and place for opening bids. The purchasing agent shall also solicit sealed bids from all responsible prospective suppliers who have requested their names to be added to a bidders' list which the agent shall maintain, by sending other notice as will acquaint them with the proposed purchase or sale. In any case, invitations sent to the vendors on the bidders' list shall be limited to commodities that are similar in character and ordinarily handled by the trade group to which the invitations are sent. The agent shall also advertise all pending purchases or sales by notice posted on the public bulletin board in the city municipal building. 
(f)  Use of brand names. Unless otherwise provided in the invitation to bid, the name of a certain brand, make or manufacturer does not restrict bidders to the specific brand, make or manufacturer named; it conveys the general style, type, character and quality of the article desired, and any article which the public body in its sole discretion determines to be the equal of that specified, considering quality, workmanship, economy of operation and suitability for the purpose intended, shall be accepted. 
State Law reference- Use of brand names, Code of Virginia, § 11-49. 
(g)  Comments on specifications. For complex equipment, supplies or repair, prebid conferences with prospective bidders are desirable after draft specifications have been prepared. Such conferences help to detect unclear provisions and tend to widen competition by removing unnecessarily restrictive language. Conferences on purchasing bids will be called by the purchasing agent and attended by a department representative and, if necessary, the city attorney. 
State Law reference- Comments concerning specifications, Code of Virginia, § 11-50. 
(h)  Bid bonds on construction contracts. Bid bonds on construction contracts shall be made as follows: 
(1)  Except in cases of emergency, all bids or proposals for construction contracts in excess of $25,000.00 shall be accompanied by a bid bond from a surety company selected by the bidder which is legally authorized to do business in the state, as a guarantee that if the contract is awarded to such bidder, that bidder will enter into the contract for the work mentioned in the bid. The amount of the bid bond shall not exceed five percent of the amount bid. 
(2)  No forfeiture under a bid bond shall exceed the lesser of: 
a.  The difference between the bid for which the bond was written and the next low bid; or 
b.  The face amount of the bid bond. 
State Law reference- Bid bonds, Code of Virginia, § 11-57. 
(i)  Bonds for other than construction contracts. At the discretion of the purchasing agent, bidders may be required to submit with their bid a bid bond, or a certified check, in an amount to be determined by the purchasing agent and specified in the invitation to bid, which shall be forfeited to the city as liquidated damages upon the bidder's failure to execute a contract awarded to him or upon the bidder's failure to furnish any required performance or payment bonds in connection with a contract awarded to him. When deemed necessary by the agent, bid deposits shall be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to return of surety when the agent has required such. A successful bidder shall forfeit any surety required by the agent upon failure on his part to enter a contract within ten days after the award. 
State Law reference- Bonds on other than construction contracts, Code of Virginia, § 11-62. 
(j)  Rejection of bids. Rejection of bids shall be executed as follows: 
(1)  An invitation to bid, a request for proposal, any other solicitation, or any and all bids or proposals, may be cancelled or rejected. The reasons for cancellation or rejection shall be made part of the contract file. 
(2)  A governing body may waive informalities in bids. 
(k)  Bid opening. All bids received must be opened in public and announced in public. 
(l)  Withdrawal of bid due to error. Withdrawal of a bid due to error shall be made as follows: 
(1)  A bidder for a public construction contract, other than a contract for construction or maintenance of public highways, may withdraw his bid from consideration if the price bid was substantially lower than the other bids due solely to a mistake therein, provided the bid was submitted in good faith, and the mistake was a clerical mistake as opposed to a judgment mistake, and was actually due to an unintentional arithmetic error or an unintentional omission of a quantity of work, labor or material made directly in the compilation of a bid, which unintentional arithmetic error or unintentional omission can be clearly shown by objective evidence drawn from inspection of original work papers, documents and materials used in the preparation of the bid sought to be withdrawn. 
(2)  The procedure for bid withdrawal must be stated in the advertisement for bids. The procedure for withdrawal of bids is: The purchasing agent shall select one of these procedures: 
a.  The bidder shall give notice in writing of his claim of right to withdraw his bid within two business days after the conclusion of the bid opening procedure and shall submit original work papers with such notice; or 
b.  The bidder shall submit to the governing body or designated official his original work papers, documents and materials used in the preparation of the bid within one day after the date fixed for submission of bids. The work papers shall be delivered by the bidder in person or by registered mail at or prior to the time fixed for the opening of bids. In either instance, such work papers, documents and materials may be considered as trade secrets or proprietary information subject to the conditions of state law. The bids shall be opened one day following the time fixed by the city for the submission of bids. Thereafter, the bidder shall have two hours after the opening of bids within which to claim in writing any mistake as defined in this section and withdraw his bid. The contract shall not be awarded by the city until the two-hour period has elapsed. Such mistake shall be proved only from the original work papers, documents and materials delivered as required in this section. 
(3)  Procedures for the withdrawal of bids for other than construction contracts may be established by the purchasing agent. 
(4)  No bid may be withdrawn under this section when the result would be the awarding of the contract on another bid of the same bidder or of another bidder in which the ownership of the withdrawing bidder is more than five percent. 
(5)  If a bid is withdrawn under the authority of this section, the lowest remaining bid shall be deemed to be the low bid. 
(6)  No bidder who is permitted to withdraw a bid shall, for compensation, supply any material or labor to or perform any subcontract or other work agreement for the person or firm to whom the contract is awarded or otherwise benefit, directly or indirectly, from the performance of the project for which the withdrawn bid was submitted. 
(7)  If the governing body denies the withdrawal of a bid under the provisions of this section, it shall notify the bidder in writing stating the reasons for its decision and award the contract to such bidder at the bid price, provided such bidder is a responsible and responsive bidder. 
State Law reference- Public inspection of certain records, Code of Virginia, § 11-52(D); withdrawal of bid due to error, Code of Virginia, § 11-54. 
(m)  Bid evaluation. In determining the lowest responsible bidder, in addition to price, the agent shall consider: 
(1)  The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service required. 
(2)  Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference. 
(3)  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder. 
(4)  The quality of performance of previous contracts or services. 
(5)  The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances relating to the contract or service. 
(6)  The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service. 
(7)  The quality, availability and adaptability of the goods or services to the particular use required. 
(8)  The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the contract. 
(9)  The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid. 
(n)  Bid award. Bids shall be awarded to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder. When the terms and conditions of multiple bids are so provided in the invitation to bid, awards may be made to more than one bidder. When the award is not given to the lowest bidder, a full and complete statement of the reasons for placing the order elsewhere shall be prepared by the agent and filed with the other papers relating to the transaction. 
(o)  Tie bids. Tie bids shall be resolved as follows: 
(1)  In the case of a tie bid, preference shall be given to goods, services and construction produced in the state or provided by state persons, firms or corporations, if such a choice is available; otherwise the tie shall be decided by lot. 
(2)  Whenever any bidder is a resident of any other state and such state under its laws allows a resident contractor of that state a preference, a like preference may be allowed to the lowest responsible bidder who is a resident of this state. 
If all bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, the contract shall be awarded to a local bidder. If there is a tie bid, the tie bidder shall be invited to resubmit written bids below the original bid, and award shall be made to the bidder with the lowest bid price. Any price quote made verbally shall be confirmed in writing. If none of the foregoing provisions of this section resolve the tie, the purchasing agent may cancel the solicitation and rebid. Records shall be kept of any proceeding connected with tie bids. 
(p)  Multistep sealed bidding. When it is considered impractical to initially prepare a purchase description to support an award based on price, an invitation for bids may be issued requesting the submission of unpriced offers to bidders whose offers have been determined to be technically acceptable under the criteria set forth in the first solicitation. 
(q)  Contract pricing arrangement. Except as prohibited in this section, public contracts may be awarded on a fixed price or cost reimbursement basis, or on any other basis that is not prohibited. Subject to the limitations of this section, any type of contract which is appropriate to the procurement and which will promote the best interests of the city may be used, provided that the use of a cost, plus a percentage of cost contract or a cost plus a percentage of construction cost contract are prohibited. A cost reimbursement contract may be used only when a determination is made in writing that such contract is likely to be less costly to the city than any other type or that it is impracticable to obtain the supply, service, or construction item required except under such a contract. 
(r)  Multiterm contracts. Multiterm contracts shall be as follows: 
(1)  Specified period. Unless otherwise provided by law, a contract for goods, services or insurance may be entered into for any period of time deemed to be in the best interests of the city, provided the term of the contract and conditions of renewal or extension, if any, are included in the solicitation and funds are available for the first fiscal period at the time of contracting. Payment and performance obligations for succeeding fiscal periods shall be subject to the availability and appropriation of funds therefor. 
(2)  Cancellation due to unavailability of funds in succeeding fiscal periods. When funds are not appropriated or otherwise made available to support continuation of performance in a subsequent fiscal period, the contract shall be cancelled. 
(s)  Contract modification. A public contract may include provisions for modification of the contract during performance, but no fixed price contract may be increased by more than 25 percent of the amount of the contract or $10,000.00, whichever is greater, without the advance written approval of the governing body. 
State Law reference- Modification of the contract, Code of Virginia, § 11-55. 
(t)  Retainage on construction contracts. Retainage on construction contracts shall be instituted upon the following conditions: 
(1)  In any public contract for construction which provides for progress payments in installments based upon an estimated percentage of completion, the contractor shall be paid at least 95 percent of the earned sum when payment is due, with not more than five percent being retained to ensure faithful performance of the contract. All amounts withheld may be included in the final payment. 
(2)  Any subcontract for a public project which provides for similar progress payments shall be subject to the same limitations. 
State Law reference- Retainage on construction contracts, Code of Virginia, § 11-56. 
(u)  Performance and payment bonds. Performance and payment bonds shall be as follows: 
(1)  Upon the award of any public construction contract exceeding $25,000.00 awarded to any prime contractor, such contractor shall furnish to the city the following bonds: 
a.  A performance bond in the sum of the contract amount conditioned upon the faithful performance of the contract in strict conformity with the plans, specifications and conditions of the contract. 
b.  A payment bond in the sum of the contract amount. Such bond shall be for the protection of claimants who have and fulfill contracts to supply labor or materials to the prime contractor to whom the contract was awarded, or to any subcontractors, in the prosecution of the work provided for in such contract, and shall be conditioned upon the prompt payment for all such material furnished or labor supplied or performed in the prosecution of the work. The term "labor or materials" shall include public utility services and reasonable rentals of equipment, but only for periods when the equipment rented is actually used at the site. 
(2)  Each of such bonds shall be executed by one or more surety companies selected by the contractor which are legally authorized to do business in the state. 
(3)  Bonds shall be made payable to the city. 
(4)  Each of the bonds shall be filed with the city which awarded the contract, or a designated office or official of the city. 
(5)  Nothing in this section shall preclude the purchasing agent from requiring payment or performance bonds for construction contracts below $25,000.00. 
(6)  Nothing in this section shall preclude such contractor from requiring each subcontractor to furnish a payment bond with surety thereon in the sum of the full amount of the contract with such subcontractor, conditioned upon the payment to all persons who have and fulfill contracts which are directly with the subcontractor for performing labor and furnishing materials in the prosecution of the work provided for in the subcontract. 
State Law reference- Performance and payment bonds, Code of Virginia, § 11-58. 
(v)  Action on performance bond. No action against the surety on a performance bond shall be brought unless within one year after: 
(1)  Completion of the contract, including the expiration of all warranties and guarantees; or 
(2)  Discovery of the defect or breach of warranty, if the action is for such. 
State Law reference- Action on performance bond, Code of Virginia, § 11-59. 
(w)  Actions on payment bonds. Actions on payment bonds shall be as follows: 
(1)  Subject to the provisions of subsection (w)(2) of this section, any claimant who has performed labor or furnished material in accordance with the contract documents in the prosecution of the work provided in any contract for which a payment bond has been given, and who has not been paid in full therefor before the expiration of 90 days after the day on which such claimant performed the last of such labor or furnished the last of such materials for which he claims payment, may bring an action on such payment bond to recover any amount due him for such labor or material, and may prosecute such action to final judgment and have execution on the judgment. The obligee named in the bond need not be named a party to such action. 
(2)  Any claimant who has a direct contractual relationship with any subcontractor from whom the contractor has not required a subcontractor payment bond under subsection (v) of this section but who has no contractual relationship, express or implied, with such contractor, may bring an action on the contractor's payment bond only if he has given written notice to such contractor within 180 days from the day on which the claimant performed the last of the labor or furnished the last of the materials for which he claims payment, stating with substantial accuracy the amount claimed and the name of the person for whom the work was performed or to whom the material was furnished. Any claimant who has a direct contractual relationship with a subcontractor from whom the contractor has required a subcontractor payment bond under subsection (v) of this section but who has no contractual relationship, express or implied, with such contractor, may bring an action on the subcontractor's payment bond. Notice to the contractor shall be served by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, in an envelope addressed to such contractor at any place where his office is regularly maintained for the transaction of business. Claims for sums withheld as retainages with respect to labor performed or materials furnished, shall not be subject to the time limitations stated in this subsection. 
(3)  Any action on a payment bond must be brought within one year after the day on which the person bringing such action last performed labor or last furnished or supplied materials. 
State Law reference- Actions on payment bonds, Code of Virginia, § 11-60. 
(x)  Alternative forms of security. Alternative forms of security are as follows: 
(1)  In lieu of a bid, payment or performance bond, a bidder may furnish a certified check or cash escrow in the face amount required for the bond. 
(2)  If approved by the city attorney, a bidder may furnish a personal bond, property bond or bank or savings and loan association's letter of credit on certain designated funds in the face amount required for the bid, payment or performance bond. Approval shall be granted only upon a determination that the alternative form of security proffered affords protection to the city equivalent to a corporate surety's bond. 
State Law reference- Alternative forms of security, Code of Virginia, § 11-61. 
(Code 1972, § 2-212) 
Sec. 2-287. - Competitive negotiation. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Competitive negotiation means a method of source selection which involves individual discussions between the city and the offeror on the basis of responses to the city's request for proposals. The source selection method of competitive negotiation incorporates section 2-286(c), (d), (e), (g), (h), (k), (n), (r), (s) in addition to the provisions outlined in this section and section 2-290. 
(b)  Conditions for use. Upon a determination made in advance by the public body and set forth in writing that competitive sealed bidding is either not practicable or not fiscally advantageous to the public, goods, services, or insurance may be procured by competitive negotiation. The writing shall document the basis for this determination. 
(c)  Request for proposals. Request for proposals shall be in writing and indicate in general terms that which is sought to be procured, specifying the factors which will be used in evaluating the proposal and containing or incorporating by reference the other applicable contractual terms and conditions, including any unique capabilities or qualifications which will be required of the contractor. 
(d)  Public notice. At least ten days prior to the date set for receipt of proposals, public notice shall be given by posting in a public area normally used for posting of public notices or by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the area in which the contract is to be performed, or both. In addition, proposals may be solicited directly from potential contractors. 
(e)  Evaluation factors. Evaluation factors are as follows: 
(1)  Conditions for use. When the purchasing agent determines in writing that the use of competitive sealed bidding is either not practicable or not advantageous to the city, a contract may be entered into by use of the competitive sealed proposal method. 
(2)  Request for proposals. Proposals shall be solicited through a request for proposals. 
(3)  Public notice. Adequate public notice of the request for proposals shall be given in the same manner as provided for competitive sealed bids provided the minimum time shall be 30 calendar days. 
(4)  Receipt of proposals. No proposals shall be handled so as to permit disclosure of the identity of any offeror or the contents of any proposal to competing offerors during the process of negotiation. 
(5)  Evaluation factors. The request for proposals shall state the relative importance of price and other evaluation factors. 
(6)  Discussion with responsible offerors and revision to proposals. As provided in the request for proposals, discussion may be conducted with responsible offerors who submit proposals determined to be reasonably susceptible of being selected for award for the purpose of clarification to assure full understanding of, and conformance to, the solicitation requirements. Offerors shall be accorded fair and equal treatment with respect to any opportunity for discussion and revision of proposals and such revisions may be permitted after submissions and prior to award for the purpose of obtaining best and final offers. In conducting discussions, there shall be no disclosure of the identity of competing offerors or of any information derived from proposals submitted by competing offerors. 
(7)  Award. Award shall be made to the responsible offeror whose proposal is determined in writing to be the most advantageous to the city taking into consideration price and the evaluation factors set forth in the request for proposals. No other factors or criteria shall be used in the evaluation. The contract file shall contain the basis on which the award is made. 
(Code 1972, § 2-213) 
Sec. 2-288. - Deposit of certain retained funds on certain contracts with city; penalty for failure to timely complete. 
(a)  The city when contracting directly with contractors for public contracts of $200,000.00 or more for construction of highways, roads, streets, bridges, parking lots, demolition, clearing, grading, excavating, paving, piledriving, miscellaneous drainage structures, and the installation of water, gas, sewer lines and pumping stations where portions of the contract price are to be retained, shall include in the bid proposal an option for the contractor to use an escrow account procedure for utilization of the city's retainage funds by so indicating in the space provided in the proposal documents. If the contractor elects to use the escrow account procedure, the escrow agreement form included in the bid proposal and contract shall be executed and submitted to the city within 15 calendar days after notification. If the escrow agreement form is not submitted within the 15-day period, the contractor shall forfeit his rights to the use of the escrow account procedure. 
(b)  In order to have retained funds paid to an escrow agent, the contractor, the escrow agent, and the surety shall execute an escrow agreement form. The contractor's escrow agent shall be a trust company, bank or savings institution with its principal office located in the commonwealth. The escrow agreement and all regulations promulgated by the city entering into the contract shall be substantially the same as that used by the commonwealth department of transportation. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to public contracts for construction for railroads, public transit systems, runways, dams, foundations, installation or maintenance of power systems for the generation and primary and secondary distribution of electric current ahead of the customer's meter, the installation or maintenance of telephone, telegraph or signal systems for public utilities and the construction or maintenance of solid waste or recycling facilities and treatment plants. 
(d)  Any such public contract for construction with the city, which includes payment of interest on retained funds, may require a provision whereby the contractor, exclusive of reasonable circumstances beyond the control of the contractor stated in the contract, shall pay a specified penalty for each day exceeding the completion date stated in the contract. 
(e)  Any subcontract for such public project which provides for similar progress payments shall be subject to the provisions of this section. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-56.1. 
Sec. 2-289. - Public construction contract provisions barring damages for unreasonable delays declared void. 
(a)  Any provision contained in any public construction contract entered into on or after July 1, 1991, that purports to waive, release, or extinguish the rights of a contractor to recover costs or damages for unreasonable delay in performing such contract, either on his behalf or on behalf of his subcontractor if and to the extent such delay is caused by acts or omissions of the public body, its agents or employees and due to causes within their control is against public policy and is void and unenforceable. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not be construed to render void any provision of a public construction contract that: 
(1)  Allows a public body to recover that portion of delay costs caused by the acts or omissions of the contractor, or its subcontractors, agents or employees; 
(2)  Requires notice of any delay by the party claiming the delay; 
(3)  Provides for liquidated damages for delay; or 
(4)  Provides for arbitration or any other procedure designed to settle contract disputes. 
(c)  A contractor making a claim against a public body for costs or damages due to the alleged delaying of the contractor in the performance of its work under any public construction contract shall be liable to the public body and shall pay it for a percentage of all costs incurred by the public body in investigating, analyzing, negotiating, litigating and arbitrating the claim, which percentage shall be equal to the percentage of the contractor's total delay claim which is determined through litigation or arbitration to be false or to have no basis in law or in fact. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-56.2. 
Sec. 2-290. - Contracting for professional services by competitive negotiation. 
(a)  Authority of section. Professional services may be procured by competitive negotiation. The process includes section 2-286(c), (d), (e), (g), (h), (k), (r), (s) and section 2-287(c) and (d). 
(b)  Discussion and award. The purchasing agent shall engage in individual discussions with all offerors deemed fully qualified, responsible and suitable on the basis of initial responses and with emphasis on professional competence, to provide the required services. Repetitive informal interviews shall be permissible. Such offerors shall be encouraged to elaborate on their qualifications and performance data or staff expertise pertinent to the proposed project as well as alternative concepts. These discussions may encompass nonbinding estimates of total project costs, including where appropriate, design, construction and life cycle costs. Methods to be utilized in arriving at price for services may also be discussed. Proprietary information from competing offerors shall not be disclosed to the public or to competitors. At the conclusion of discussion, outlined in this subsection, on the basis of evaluation factors published in request for proposal and all information developed in the selection process to this point, the purchasing agent shall select in the order of preference two or more offerors whose professional qualifications and proposed services are deemed most meritorious. Negotiations shall then be conducted, beginning with the offeror ranked first. If a contract satisfactory and advantageous to the city can be negotiated at a price considered fair and reasonable, the award shall be made to that offeror. Otherwise, negotiations with the offeror ranked first shall be formally terminated and negotiations conducted with the offeror ranked second, and so on until such a contract can be negotiated at a fair and reasonable price. Should the purchasing agent determine in writing and in his sole discretion that only one offeror is fully qualified, or that one offeror is clearly more highly qualified and suitable than the others under consideration, a contract may be negotiated and awarded to that offeror. 
(Code 1972, § 2-214) 
Sec. 2-291. - Sole source procurement. 
    Upon a determination in writing that there is only one source practicably available for that which is to be procured, a contract may be negotiated and awarded to that source without competitive sealed bidding or competitive negotiation. The writing shall document the basis for this determination. 
(Code 1972, § 2-215) 
Sec. 2-292. - Emergency purchases. 
(a)  In case of emergency, a contract may be awarded without competitive sealed bidding or competitive negotiation; however, such procurement shall be made with such competition as is practicable under the circumstances. A written determination of the basis for the emergency and for the selection of the particular contractor shall be included in the contract file. 
(b)  An emergency shall be deemed to exist when a breakdown in machinery or equipment and/or a threatened termination of essential services or a dangerous condition develops, or when any unforeseen circumstances arise causing curtailment or diminution of an essential service or where materials or services are needed to prevent loss of life or property. 
(Code 1972, § 2-216) 
Sec. 2-293. - Small purchases. 
    Any contract for goods and services other than professional services if the aggregate or the sum of all phases is not expected to exceed $100,000.00 and any single or term contract for professional services if the aggregate or the sum of all phases is not expected to exceed $50,000.00 may be made in accordance with the small purchase procedures; provided, however, that contract requirements shall not be artificially divided so as to constitute a small purchase under this section. Award shall be made to the business offering the lowest acceptable quotation. The name of the business submitting a quotation, and the date and amount of each quotation, shall be recorded and maintained as a public record. 
(Code 1972, §2-217; Ord. No. 08-05, 2-19-08; Ord. No. 11-26, § 1, 9-6-11) 
State Law reference- Methods of procurement, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4303 (G) and (H) 
Sec. 2-294. - Miscellaneous sources. 
    The following transactions are hereby exempt from the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Purchases from the state penitentiary or state contracts from the state purchasing department warehouse. 
(2)  Legal services associated with actual or potential litigation. 
(3)  Purchases for special police work when the chief of police certifies to the purchasing agent that items are needed for undercover police operations. 
(Code 1972, § 2-218) 
Secs. 2-295-2-315. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DEBARMENT[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Debarment, Code of Virginia, § 11-46.1. 

Sec. 2-316. - Authority to debar or suspend. 
    After reasonable notice to the person involved and reasonable opportunity for that person to be heard, the council or its designee, after consulting with the city attorney, is authorized to debar a person for cause from consideration for award of contracts. The debarment shall not be for a period of more than three years. After consultation with the city attorney, the council or its designee is authorized to suspend a person from consideration for award of contracts if there is probable cause to believe that the person has engaged in any activity which might lead to debarment. The suspension shall not be for a period exceeding three months. The causes for debarment include: 
(1)  Conviction for commission of a criminal offense as an incident to obtaining or attempting to obtain a public or private contract or subcontract, or in the performance of such contract or subcontract. 
(2)  Conviction under state and federal statutes of embezzlement, theft, forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of records, receiving stolen property, or any other offense indicating a lack of business integrity or business honesty which currently, seriously and directly affects responsibility as a city contractor. 
(3)  Conviction under state or federal antitrust statutes arising out of the submission of bids or proposals. 
(4)  Violation of contract provisions, as set forth below, of a character which is regarded by the council or its designee to be so serious as to justify debarment action: 
a.  Deliberate failure without good cause to perform in accordance with the specifications or within the time limit provided in the contract; or 
b.  A recent record of failure to perform or of unsatisfactory performance in accordance with the terms of one or more contracts, provided that failure to perform or unsatisfactory performance caused by acts beyond the control of the contractor shall not be considered to be a basis for debarment. 
(5)  Any other cause the council or its designee determines to be so serious and compelling as to affect responsibility as a city contractor including debarment by another governmental entity for any cause in this article; and for violation of the ethical standards set forth in this article. 
(Code 1972, § 2-220) 
Sec. 2-317. - Decision to debar or suspend. 
    The council or its designee shall issue a written decision to debar or suspend. The decision shall state the reasons for the action taken and inform the debarred or suspended person involved of his rights concerning judicial or administrative review. 
(Code 1972, § 2-221) 
Sec. 2-318. - Notice of decision. 
    A copy of the decision required by section 2-317 shall be mailed or otherwise furnished immediately to the debarred or suspended person. 
(Code 1972, § 2-222) 
Sec. 2-319. - Finality of decision. 
    A decision under section 2-317 shall be final and conclusive, unless the debarred or suspended person within ten days after receipt of the decision takes an appeal to the council or commences a timely action in court in accordance with applicable law. 
(Code 1972, § 2-223) 
Secs. 2-320-2-335. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - APPEALS; REMEDIES FOR BID PROTESTS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Remedies, Code of Virginia, § 11-63 et seq. 

Sec. 2-336. - Ineligibility of bidder, offeror or contractor. 
(a)  Any bidder, offeror or contractor refused permission to, or disqualified from, participating in public contracts shall be notified in writing. Such notice shall state the reasons for the action taken. This decision shall be final unless the bidder, offeror or contractor appeals within 30 days of receipt by invoking administrative procedures meeting the standards of this division. 
(b)  If, upon appeal, it is determined that the action taken was arbitrary or capricious, or not in accordance with the state constitution, statutes or regulations, the sole relief shall be restoration of eligibility. 
(Code 1972, § 2-224) 
State Law reference- Ineligibility, Code of Virginia, § 11-63. 
Sec. 2-337. - Appeal of denial of withdrawal of bid. 
(a)  A decision denying withdrawal of bid under the provisions of section 2-286(m) shall be final and conclusive unless the bidder appeals the decision within ten days after receipt of the decision by invoking administrative procedures meeting the standards of this division. 
(b)  If no bid bond was posted, a bidder refused withdrawal of a bid under the provisions of section 2-286(m), prior to appealing, shall deliver to the purchasing agent a certified check or cash bond in the amount of the difference between the bid sought to be withdrawn and the next lowest bid. Such security shall be released only upon a final determination that the bidder was entitled to withdraw the bid. 
(c)  If, upon appeal, it is determined that the decision refusing withdrawal of the bid was arbitrary or capricious, the sole relief shall be withdrawal of the bid. 
(Code 1972, § 2-225) 
State Law reference- Appeal of denial of withdrawal of bid, Code of Virginia, § 11-64. 
Sec. 2-338. - Determination of nonresponsibility. 
(a)  Any bidder who, despite being the apparent low bidder, is determined not to be a responsible bidder for a particular contract shall be notified in writing. Such notice shall state the basis for the determination, which shall be final unless the bidder appeals the decision within ten days by invoking administrative procedures meeting the standards of this division. 
(b)  If, upon appeal, it is determined that the decision of the purchasing agent was arbitrary or capricious, and the award of the contract in question has not been made, the sole relief shall be a finding that the bidder is a responsible bidder for the contract in question. If it is determined that the decision of the purchasing agent was arbitrary or capricious, the relief shall be as set forth in section 2-339(b). 
(c)  A bidder contesting a determination that he is not a responsible bidder for a particular contract shall proceed under this section, and may not protest the award or proposed award under section 2-339. 
(d)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to require the city when procuring by competitive negotiation, to furnish a statement of the reasons why a particular proposal was not deemed to be the most advantageous. 
(Code 1972, § 2-226) 
State Law reference- Determination of nonresponsibility, Code of Virginia, § 11-65. 
Sec. 2-339. - Protest of award or decision to award. 
(a)  Any bidder or offeror may protest the award or decision to award a contract by submitting such protest in writing to the council or designated official, no later than ten days after the award or the announcement of the decision to award, whichever occurs first. No protest shall lie for a claim that the selected bidder or offeror is not a responsible bidder or offeror. The written protest shall include the basis for the protest and the relief sought. The council or designated official shall issue a decision in writing within ten days stating the reasons for the action taken. This decision shall be final unless the bidder or offeror appeals within ten days of the written decision by invoking administrative procedures meeting the standards of this division. 
(b)  If prior to an award it is determined that the decision to award is arbitrary or capricious, then the sole relief shall be a finding to that effect. The purchasing agent shall cancel the proposed award or revise it to comply with the law. If, after an award, it is determined that an award of a contract was arbitrary or capricious, then the sole relief shall be as provided in this section. Where the award has been made but performance has not begun, the performance of the contract may be enjoined. Where the award has been made and performance has begun, the council or designated official may declare the contract void upon a finding that this action is in the best interest of the public. Where a contract is declared void, the performing contractor shall be compensated for the cost of performance up to the time of such declaration. In no event shall the performing contractor be entitled to lost profits. 
(c)  Where the council or designated official or appeals board determines, after a hearing held following reasonable notice to all bidders, that there is probable cause to believe that a decision to award was based on fraud or corruption or on an act in violation of division 6 of this article, the council or designated official, or appeals board may enjoin the award of the contract to a particular bidder. 
(Code 1972, § 2-227) 
State Law reference- Protest of award or decision to award, Code of Virginia, § 11-66. 
Sec. 2-340. - Effect of appeal upon contract. 
    Pending final determination of a protest or appeal, the validity of a contract awarded and accepted in good faith in accordance with this article shall not be affected by the fact that a protest or appeal has been filed. 
(Code 1972, § 2-228) 
State Law reference- Effect of appeal upon contract, Code of Virginia, § 11-67. 
Sec. 2-341. - Stay of award during protest. 
    An award need not be delayed for the period allowed a bidder or offeror to protest, but in the event of a timely protest, no further action to award the contract will be taken unless there is a written determination that proceeding without delay is necessary to protect the public interest or unless the bid or offer would expire. 
(Code 1972, § 2-229) 
State Law reference- Stay of award during protest, Code of Virginia, § 11-68. 
Sec. 2-342. - Contractual disputes. 
(a)  Contractual claims, whether for money or other relief, shall be submitted in writing no later than 60 days after final payment; however, written notice of the contractor's intention to file such claim shall have been given at the time of the occurrence or beginning of the work upon which the claim is based. Nothing in this section shall preclude a contract from requiring submission of an invoice for final payment within a certain time after completion and acceptance of the work or acceptance of the goods. Pendency of claims shall not delay payment of amounts agreed due in the final payment. 
(b)  A procedure for consideration of contractual claims shall be included in each contract. Such procedure, which may be incorporated into the contract by reference, shall establish a time limit for a final decision in writing by the council or designated official. 
(c)  A contractor may not invoke administrative procedures meeting the standards of this Code, prior to receipt of the decision on the claim, unless the council or designated official fails to render such decision within the time specified in the contract. 
(d)  The decision of the council or designated official shall be final and conclusive unless the contractor appeals within six months of the date of the final decision on the claim by the council or designated official by invoking administrative procedures meeting the standards of this division. 
(Code 1972, § 2-230) 
State Law reference- Contractual disputes, Code of Virginia, § 11-69. 
Sec. 2-343. - Legal actions. 
(a)  A bidder or offeror, actual or prospective, who is refused permission or disqualified from participation in bidding or competitive negotiation, or who is determined not to be a responsible bidder or offeror for a particular contract, may bring an action in the appropriate circuit court challenging that decision, which shall be reversed only if the petitioner establishes that the decision was arbitrary or capricious, or, in the case of denial of prequalification, that the decision to deny prequalification was not based upon the criteria for denial of prequalification set forth in state law. 
State Law reference- Prequalification generally, prequalification for construction, Code of Virginia, § 11-46(B). 
(b)  A bidder denied withdrawal of a bid under state law may bring an action in the appropriate circuit court challenging that decision, which shall be reversed only if the bidder establishes that the decision of the city was clearly erroneous. 
State Law reference- Appeal of denial of withdrawal of bid, Code of Virginia, § 11-64. 
(c)  A bidder, offeror or contractor, or a potential bidder or offeror on a contract negotiated on a sole source or emergency basis in the manner provided in state law, whose protest of an award or decision to award under state law is denied, may bring an action in the appropriate circuit court challenging a proposed award or the award of a contract, which shall be reversed only if the petitioner establishes that the proposed award or the award is not an honest exercise of discretion, but rather is arbitrary or capricious or not in accordance with the state constitution, statutes, regulations or the terms and conditions of the invitation to bid or request for proposal. 
State Law reference- Methods of procurement, Code of Virginia, § 11-41; protest of award or decision to award, Code of Virginia, § 11-66. 
(d)  If injunctive relief is granted, the court, upon request of the city, shall require the posting of reasonable security to protect the city. 
(e)  A contractor may bring an action involving a contract dispute with the city in the appropriate circuit court. 
(f)  A bidder, offeror or contractor need not utilize administrative procedures meeting the standards of state law, if available, but if those procedures are invoked by the bidder, offeror or contractor, the procedures shall be exhausted prior to instituting legal action concerning the same procurement transaction unless the council agrees otherwise. 
(g)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the city from instituting legal action against a contractor. 
State Law reference- Legal actions, Code of Virginia, § 11-70; administrative appeals procedure, Code of Virginia, § 11-71. 
Secs. 2-344-2-360. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - ETHICS IN PUBLIC CONTRACTING[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference- Ethics in public contracting, Code of Virginia, § 11-72 et seq. 

Sec. 2-361. - Definitions. 
    The words defined in this section shall have the meanings set forth below throughout this division. 
    Immediate family means a spouse, children, parents, brothers and sisters, and any other person living in the same household as the employee. 
    Official responsibility means administrative or operating authority, whether intermediate or final, to initiate, approve, disapprove or otherwise affect a procurement transaction, or any claim resulting therefrom. 
    Pecuniary interest arising from the procurement means a personal interest in a contract as defined in state law. 
    Procurement transaction means all functions that pertain to the obtaining of any goods, services or construction, including description of requirements, selection and solicitation of sources, preparation and award of contract, and all phases of contract administration. 
    Public employee means any person employed by a governing body, including elected officials or appointed members of governing bodies. 
(Code 1972, § 2-235) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-73; State and Local Government Conflict of Interests Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.1-639.1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-362. - Purpose of division. 
    The provisions of this division supplement, but do not supersede, other provisions of law. The provisions of this division apply notwithstanding the fact that the conduct described may not constitute a violation of other state law. 
(Code 1972, § 2-234) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-72; State and Local Government Conflict of Interests Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.1-639.1 et seq.; bribery and related offenses, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-438 et seq.; bribery of public servants and party officials, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-446 et seq.; Virginia Governmental Frauds Act, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-498.1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-363. - Penalty for violation of division. 
    Willful violation of any provision of this division shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. Upon conviction, any public employee, in addition to any other fine or penalty provided by law, shall forfeit his employment. 
(Code 1972, § 2-242) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-80. 
Sec. 2-364. - Proscribed participation by public employees in procurement transactions. 
    Except as may be specifically allowed by provisions of state law, no public employee having official responsibility for a procurement transaction shall participate in that transaction on behalf of the public body when the employee knows that: 
(1)  The employee is contemporaneously employed by a bidder, offeror or contractor involved in the procurement transaction; 
(2)  The employee, the employee's partner, or any member of the employee's immediate family holds a position with a bidder, offeror or contractor such as an officer, director, trustee, partner or the like, or is employed in a capacity involving personal and substantial participation in the procurement transaction, or owns or controls an interest of more than five percent; 
(3)  The employee, the employee's partner, or any member of the employee's immediate family has a pecuniary interest arising from the procurement transaction; or 
(4)  The employee, the employee's partner, or any member of the employee's immediate family is negotiating, or has an arrangement concerning, prospective employment with a bidder, offeror or contractor. 
(Code 1972, § 2-236) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-74; State and Local Government Conflict of Interests Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.1-639.1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-365. - Solicitation or acceptance of gifts. 
    No public employee having official responsibility for a procurement transaction shall solicit, demand, accept, or agree to accept from a bidder, offeror, contractor or subcontractor any payment, loan, subscription, advance, deposit of money, services or anything of more than nominal or minimal value, present or promised, unless consideration of substantially equal or greater value is exchanged. The city may recover the value of anything conveyed in violation of this section. 
(Code 1972, § 2-237) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-75. 
Sec. 2-366. - Disclosure of subsequent employment. 
    No public employee, or former public employee, having official responsibility for procurement transactions shall accept employment with any bidder, offeror or contractor with whom the employee or former employee dealt in an official capacity concerning procurement transactions for a period of one year from the cessation of employment by the city unless the employee, or former employee, provides written notification to the council or designated official or both prior to commencement of employment by that bidder, offeror or contractor. 
(Code 1972, § 2-238) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-76. 
Sec. 2-367. - Gifts by bidders, offerors, contractors or subcontractors. 
    No bidder, offeror, contractor or subcontractor shall confer upon any public employee having official responsibility for a procurement transaction any payment, loan, subscription, advance, deposit of money, services or anything of more than nominal value, present or promised, unless consideration of substantially equal or greater value is exchanged. 
(Code 1972, § 2-239) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-77. 
Sec. 2-368. - Kickbacks. 
(a)  No contractor or subcontractor shall demand or receive from any of his suppliers or his subcontractors, as an inducement for the award of a subcontract or order, any payment, loan, subscription, advance, deposit of money, services or anything, present or promised, unless consideration of substantially equal or greater value is exchanged. 
(b)  No subcontractor or supplier shall make, or offer to make, kickbacks as described in this section. 
(c)  No person shall demand or receive any payment, loan, subscription, advance, deposit of money, services or anything of value in return for an agreement not to compete on a public contract. 
(d)  If a subcontractor or supplier makes a kickback or other prohibited payment as described in this section, the amount of such kickback or payment shall be conclusively presumed to have been included in the price of the subcontract or order and ultimately borne by the city and will be recoverable from both the maker and recipient. Recovery from one offending party shall not preclude recovery from other offending parties. 
(Code 1972, § 2-240) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-78. 
Sec. 2-369. - Purchase of building materials, supplies or equipment from architect or engineer. 
(a)  No building materials, supplies or equipment for any building or structure constructed by or for the city shall be sold by or purchased from any person employed as an independent contractor by the city to furnish architectural or engineering services, but not construction, for such building or structure or from any partnership, association or corporation in which such architect or engineer has a personal interest as defined in state law. 
(b)  No building materials, supplies or equipment for any building or structure constructed by or for the city shall be sold by or purchased from any person which has provided or is currently providing design services specifying a sole source for such materials, supplies or equipment to be used in such building or structure to the independent contractor employed by the city to furnish architectural or engineering services in which such person has a personal interest as defined in state law. 
(c)  The provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall not apply in cases of emergency. 
(Code 1972, § 2-241) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-79; conflict of interests, definitions, Code of Virginia, § 2.1-639.2. 
Sec. 2-370. - Certification of compliance required; penalty for false statements. 
(a)  The city may require city employees having official responsibility for procurement transactions in which they participated to annually submit for such transactions a written certification that they complied with the provisions of this division. 
(b)  Any city employee required to submit a certification as provided in subsection (a) of this section who knowingly makes a false statement in such certification shall be punished as provided in section 2-363. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-79.1. 
Sec. 2-371. - Misrepresentations. 
    No city employee having official responsibility for a procurement transaction shall knowingly falsify, conceal, or misrepresent a material fact; knowingly make any false, fictitious or fraudulent statements or representations; or make or use any false writing or document knowing the same to contain any false, fictitious or fraudulent statement or entry. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 11-79.2. 
Chapter 6 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 10; businesses, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; health and sanitation, ch. 42; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 50; taxation, ch. 70; zoning, ch. 90. 
State Law reference- Authority of council to protect property and preserve peace and good order, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-137; certain premises deemed common nuisance, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-258, 18.2-258.01; charitable gaming, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-340.15 et seq.; minors in public places of amusement, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-432, 40.1-100; public dancehalls, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-433. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1-6-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POOL ROOMS AND BILLIARD ROOMS 

Sec. 6-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Minor means a person under 18 years of age. 
    Pool room or billiard room means any public place in which pool, billiard or bagatelle tables are kept for play by the public, consisting of the entire interior of the building in which such tables are housed and operated, including any area that may be partitioned off for a snack bar or restaurant. 
(Code 1972, §§ 14-45, 14-47) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-32. - Hours of operation. 
    It shall be unlawful for the business of any pool room or billiard room within the city to be carried on sooner than 1:00 p.m. or later than 2:00 a.m. on Sunday, or the business of any such pool or billiard room to be carried on sooner than 6:00 a.m. or later than 2:00 a.m. of any other day. 
(Code 1972, § 14-46; Ord. No. 06-11, 3-21-06) 
Sec. 6-33. - Frequenting by minors. 
    No minor shall frequent, play in or loiter in any public pool room or billiard room operated in conjunction with any establishment licensed under the state alcoholic beverage laws; nor shall any minor frequent, play in or loiter in any other public pool room or billiard room; nor shall the proprietor of any pool room or billiard room or his agent permit any minor to frequent, play in or loiter in any such place in violation of this section. Nothing in this section shall apply to an establishment in which not more than three substandard sized pool tables that operate on a coin-in-slot principle are exclusively kept or played. 
(Code 1972, § 14-47) 
State Law reference- Alcoholic beverages, Code of Virginia, tit. 4.1; minors in public places of amusement, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-432. 
Secs. 6-34-6-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REGULATION OF FOOD 

Sec. 6-60. - Regulation of food at concessions of youth athletic activities. 
(a)  Title 35.1 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended "Hotels, Restaurants, Summer Camps and Campgrounds" shall not apply to concession stands at youth athletic activities when such stands are promoted or sponsored by either a youth athletic association or by any charitable non-profit organization or group thereof where such association or organization has been recognized by resolution of the city as being part of its youth recreational program. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the director of health for the city, or a qualified person designated by director, to provide education and consultation, establish advisory standards and exercise appropriate supervision defined as training, consultation and guidance upon request, regarding the safe preparation, handling, protection and preservation of food at concession stands at youth athletic activities, to protect the public health. 
(Ord. No. 10-24, § 1, 5-18-10) 
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Amusements and entertainments, ch. 6; businesses, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; prohibited noises, § 34-31; health and sanitation, ch. 42; taxation, ch. 70; traffic and vehicles, ch. 74; zoning, ch. 90. 
State Law reference- Comprehensive animal laws, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.66 et seq.; offenses involving animals, Code of Virginia, §§ 3.1-796.128, 18.2-403.1 et seq.; inoculation of cats against rabies, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-28.5; ordinances prohibiting cruelty to animals, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-29.1:1; regulation of animals by municipalities, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-870; diseased animals, dead animals, etc., Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-323, 18.2-510; hunting near public schools and public parks, Code of Virginia, § 29.1-527; estrays, Code of Virginia, § 55-202 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Running at large. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or other person in charge to permit any horse, cow, mule, sheep, goat, hog or other livestock, or any chicken, goose, duck, turkey or other fowl of which he is the owner or in charge, to run at large within the city. 
(Code 1972, § 3-1) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-870. 
Sec. 10-2. - Dangerous or vicious animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep on his premises any animal known to him individually or by repute to be dangerous or vicious, unless suitable precautions are taken to prevent harm therefrom to children, or to unsuspecting persons who might lawfully be on the premises, or to persons on adjacent public or private property. 
(Code 1972, § 3-2) 
Sec. 10-3. - Swine. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any swine on any premises within the city. 
(Code 1972, § 3-5) 
Sec. 10-4. - Stables. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to establish a stable within the city. 
(Code 1972, § 3-8) 
Secs. 10-5-10-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Rabies control, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.97 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal warden means any person employed, contracted, or appointed by the commonwealth or any political subdivision for the purpose of aiding in the enforcement of Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.66 et seq., or any other law or ordinance relating to the licensing of dogs, control of dogs and cats, cruelty to animals, or seizure and impoundment of companion animals and includes any state or municipal police officer, animal control officer, sheriff, constable, or other employee whose duties in whole or in part include assignments which involve seizure or taking into custody of any dog or other animal. 
    To run at large or running at large or go at large or going at large or roaming at large means to run, loiter, roam, walk or be let off the real property limits of the owner or keeper without being caged, physically carried or held by a leash or led by a person thoroughly capable of both physically and mentally controlling the dog. 
(Code 1972, § 3-28) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- "Run at large" defined, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.93. 
Sec. 10-32. - Penalties for violation of article. 
    Any person who shall make a false statement in order to secure a dog license to which he is not entitled shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. Any person convicted of failure to pay the license tax prior to February 1 of any year, or as otherwise provided in this article, on any dog owned by him, shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor, shall be fined not less than the amount of the license tax required by law to be paid on such dog, and shall be required to obtain a proper license forthwith. Unless the fine and license tax are immediately paid, the trial court shall order the dog killed by the animal warden or some other officer, but the killing of such dog shall not relieve the owner of the payment of the fine and the license tax already due. If a dog is found running and roaming at large at any time of the year in violation of the provisions of section 10-33, its owner shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1972, § 3-35) 
Sec. 10-33. - Running at large. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any dog to allow such dog to run at large within the city regardless of whether such dog is licensed or unlicensed. 
(Code 1972, § 3-28) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.93. 
Sec. 10-34. - Bitches in heat. 
    No person shall permit any bitch in heat to be at large or to remain on his premises if such animal disturbs one or more neighbors. Such bitch shall be taken into custody by the police or animal warden and, if not redeemed by the payment of the fine imposed within 24 hours, the bitch shall be killed, but this shall not exempt its owner for such fine and costs. 
(Code 1972, § 3-29) 
Sec. 10-35. - Barking, howling or other disturbing conduct. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep within the city a dog which by barking, howling, or other conduct disturbs the quiet of any person. Upon complaint being made to the chief of police that the provisions of this section are being violated, such officer shall give, or cause to be given, to such offender, notice of such complaint and shall further order that such disturbance cease. If the owner of such dog shall fail, after the expiration of 24 hours from the receipt of such notice, to cause the discontinuance of such disturbance, he shall be guilty of a violation for each day of continuance of such disturbance. 
(Code 1972, § 3-34) 
Sec. 10-36. - Number of dogs permitted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep on his property within the city more than three dogs without a valid kennel license. A property is defined by parcel boundaries as set forth by the city tax map. For example, if a property contains two or more adjoining parcels, then it would be considered as two or more separate properties. Any person keeping more than three dogs on his property must obtain a valid kennel license for such dogs, pay the appropriate fees as set forth in section 10-51 of this Code and meet the proper zoning conditions as set forth in chapter 90 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 00-3, 2-15-00; Ord. No. 05-12, § 1, 5-17-05) 
Secs. 10-37-10-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18. 

Sec. 10-51. - Required; issuance; fee. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a dog four months or older within the city limits unless such dog has a current city license. Such license shall be issued by the city treasurer. The fee therefor shall be $10.00. No license tax shall be levied on any dog that is trained and serves as a guide dog for a blind person, that is trained and serves as a hearing dog for a deaf or hearing impaired person, or that is trained and serves as a service dog for a mobility-impaired person. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "hearing dog" means a dog trained to alert its owner by touch to sounds of danger and sounds to which the owner should respond. The term "service dog" means a dog trained to accompany its owner for the purpose of carrying items, retrieving objects, pulling a wheelchair or other such activities of service or support. 
(Code 1972, § 3-20; Ord. No. 00-4, 2-15-00; Ord. No. 06-53, 6-19-07) 
State Law reference- Licensing of dogs, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.85 et seq. 
Sec. 10-52. - Due date of license tax. 
    License tax on dogs shall be due and payable as follows: 
(1)  On or before January 1 and not later than January 31 of each year, the owner of any dog four months old or older shall pay a license tax as prescribed in section 10-51. 
(2)  If a dog shall become four months of age or come into the possession of any person between January 1 and November 1 of any year, the license tax for the current calendar year shall be paid forthwith by the owner. 
(3)  If a dog shall become four months of age or come into the possession of any person between October 31 and December 31 of any year, the license tax for the succeeding calendar year shall be paid forthwith by the owner, and such license shall be valid from the date of purchase. 
(Code 1972, § 3-21) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.88. 
Sec. 10-53. - Procedure for obtaining. 
    Any person may obtain a dog license by making oral or written application to the treasurer of the city, accompanied by the amount of the license tax and current certificate of vaccination for rabies. The treasurer or other officer charged with the duty of issuing dog licenses shall only have authority to license dogs of resident owners or custodians who reside within the boundary limits of the city and may require information to this effect from any applicant. Upon receipt of proper application and current certificate of vaccination, the treasurer or other officer charged with the duty of issuing dog licenses shall issue a license receipt for the amount, on which he shall record the name and address of the owner or custodian, the date of payment, the year for which issued, the serial number of the tag, whether male, unsexed female, or female and deliver the metal license tags or plates provided for in this article. The information thus received shall be retained by the treasurer, open to public inspection, during the period for which such license is valid. 
(Code 1972, § 3-22) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.86. 
Sec. 10-54. - Components of license. 
    A dog license shall consist of a license receipt and a metal tag of a style and design adopted by the council. The tag shall be stamped or otherwise permanently marked to show the jurisdiction issuing the license, the sex of dog, the calendar year for which issued and bear a serial number. 
(Code 1972, § 3-23) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.90. 
Sec. 10-55. - Duplicate license tags. 
    If a dog license shall become lost, destroyed or stolen, the owner or custodian shall at once apply to the treasurer or his agent who issued the original license for a duplicate license tag, presenting the original license receipt. Upon affidavit of the owner or custodian before the treasurer or his agent that the original license tag has been lost, destroyed or stolen, he shall issue a duplicate license tag which the owner or custodian shall immediately affix to the collar of the dog. The treasurer or his agent shall endorse the number of the duplicate and the date issued on the face of the original license receipt. The fee for a duplicate tag shall be $1.00 which shall be paid into the dog fund and reported in the gross dog license collections. 
(Code 1972, § 3-24) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.91. 
Sec. 10-56. - Displaying receipts; dogs to wear tags. 
    Dog license receipts shall be carefully preserved by the licensees and exhibited promptly on request for inspection by any animal warden, game warden or other officer. Dog license tags shall be securely fastened to a substantial collar by the owner or custodian and worn by such dog. It shall be unlawful for the owner to permit any licensed dog four months old or over to be off the real property limits of the owner without wearing a license tag, except: 
(1)  When the dog is engaged in lawful hunting; 
(2)  When the dog is competing in a dog show; 
(3)  When the dog has a skin condition which would be exacerbated by the wearing of a collar; or 
(4)  When the dog is confined. 
Any dog not wearing a collar bearing a license tag of the proper calendar year shall prima facie be deemed to be unlicensed and in any proceedings under this article the burden of proof of the fact that such dog has been licensed, or is otherwise not required to bear a tag at the time, shall be on the owner of the dog. 
(Code 1972, § 3-25) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.92. 
Sec. 10-57. - Numbers and order of tags; sale to begin November 1. 
    Dog tags for each calendar year shall be sold in serial and numerical order, beginning November 1 of the prior year and shall remain on sale until December 31 of the calendar year covered by such tags. 
(Code 1972, § 3-26) 
Sec. 10-58. - Illegal killing of licensed dog. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, without legal justification and necessity, to kill a licensed dog. 
(Code 1972, § 3-27) 
State Law reference- Dog constitutes personal property, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.127. 
Secs. 10-59-10-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 10-76. - Required. 
(a)  Shelter. There shall be established and maintained an animal shelter in accordance with guidelines issued by the state department of agriculture and consumer services or any successor agency, for the confinement and disposition of stray animals and dogs running at large or in violation of this article. 
(b)  Confinement period; redemption. Any animal which has been so confined must be kept for a period of not less than seven days, such period to commence on the day immediately following the day the dog is initially confined in the facility, unless sooner claimed by the owner thereof. A custodian of a dog or individual who has found a dog may qualify as owner and may claim the dog by expressing his desire in writing to claim the dog at the expiration of the seven-day period set out in this section after payment of the required license fee; provided, however, that if the rightful owner shall claim such dog at any time, the custodian or finder shall relinquish possession of such dog to the rightful owner. 
(c)  Destruction or disposal. If an animal confined pursuant to this section has not been claimed, it may be humanely destroyed or disposed of by: 
(1)  Sale or gift to a federal agency, state-supported institution, agency of the commonwealth, agency of another state, or a licensed federal dealer having its principal place of business located within the commonwealth, provided that such agency, institution or dealer agrees to confine the animal for an additional period of not less than five days; 
(2)  Delivery to any humane society or animal shelter within the commonwealth; 
(3)  Adoption by any person who is a resident of the county or city for which the pound is operated and who will pay the required license fee, if any, on such animal; 
(4)  Adoption by a resident of an adjacent political subdivision of the commonwealth; or 
(5)  Delivery, for the purposes of adoption or euthanasia only, to a humane society or an animal shelter located in and lawfully operating under the laws of another state, provided that such humane society or animal shelter: 
a.  Maintains records which comply with state law; 
b.  Requires that adopted dogs and cats be sterilized; and 
c.  Has been approved by the state veterinarian or his designee as a facility which maintains such records, requires adopted dogs and cats to be sterilized, and provides adequate care and euthanasia. 
No provision in this section shall prohibit the destruction of a critically injured or critically ill animal for humane purposes. 
(Code 1972, § 3-30) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.96; records, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.105. 
Sec. 10-77. - Impounding certain animals; care of impounded animals. 
    It shall be the duty of the animal warden, the game warden or any other officer to seize and impound in the city pound any and every animal found in the city in violation of any provision of this article or in violation of any state law relating to animals. The animal warden, upon impounding any animal, shall make a complete registry, entering the breed, color and sex of such animal, if known, and whether licensed. If licensed, he shall enter the name and address of the owner and the number of the license tag. Licensed dogs shall be separated from unlicensed dogs. The animal warden shall exercise reasonable diligence to ascertain the name of the owner of every animal impounded and, if such owner is found, to promptly notify him of such impounding. It shall be the duty of the animal warden to see that all dogs, or other animals, impounded in the city pound are adequately fed, watered, sheltered, and, otherwise, humanely treated. 
(Code 1972, § 3-31) 
Sec. 10-78. - Redemption. 
    No dog impounded as provided in section 10-76 shall be released until the owner of such dog makes demand therefor at the pound, which demand shall be made within the time period prescribed in section 10-76, and proves ownership to the satisfaction of the animal warden and pays the treasurer a penalty of $10.00 for the impounding, and $5.00 for each day or fraction thereof during which such dog was impounded, and any license fee which may be due, provided such animal has been properly vaccinated. No dog may be kept by the animal warden longer than 21 consecutive days. 
(Code 1972, § 3-32; Ord. No. 06-35, 11-21-06) 
Secs. 10-79-10-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS DOGS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.93:1. 

Sec. 10-96. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dangerous dog means a canine or canine crossbreed which has bitten, attacked, or inflicted injury on a person or companion animal, other than a dog, or killed a companion animal. 
    Vicious dog means a canine or canine crossbreed which has killed a person; inflicted serious injury to a person, including multiple bites, serious disfigurement, serious impairment of health, or serious impairment of a bodily function; or continued to exhibit the behavior which resulted in a previous finding by a court that it is a dangerous dog, provided that its owner has been given notice of that finding. 
(Ord. No. 326-95(A), 8-15-95) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-97. - Summons; determination. 
    Any animal warden who has reason to believe that a canine or canine crossbreed within his jurisdiction is a dangerous dog or vicious dog shall apply to a magistrate of the jurisdiction for the issuance of a summons requiring the owner or custodian, if known, to appear before a general district court at a specified time. The summons shall advise the owner of the nature of the proceeding and the matters at issue. The animal warden or owner shall confine the animal until such time as evidence shall be heard and a verdict rendered. The court, through its contempt powers, may compel the owner, custodian or harborer of the animal to produce the animal. If, after hearing the evidence, the court finds that the animal is a dangerous dog, the court shall order the animal's owner to comply with the provisions of this division. If, after hearing the evidence, the court finds that the animal is a vicious dog, the court shall order the animal euthanized in accordance with the provisions of state law. 
(Ord. No. 326-95(B)(1), 8-15-95) 
State Law reference- Euthanizing companion animals, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.119. 
Sec. 10-98. - Exemptions. 
    No canine or canine crossbreed shall be found to be a dangerous dog or vicious dog solely because it is a particular breed, nor shall the council prohibit the ownership of a particular breed of canine or canine crossbreed. No animal shall be found to be a dangerous dog or vicious dog if the threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who was committing, at the time, a crime upon the premises occupied by the animal's owner or custodian; committing, at the time, a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the animal's owner or custodian; or provoking, tormenting, or physically abusing the animal, or can be shown to have repeatedly provoked, tormented, abused, or assaulted the animal at other times. No police dog which was engaged in the performance of its duties as such at the time of the acts complained of shall be found to be a dangerous dog or a vicious dog. No animal which, at the time of the acts complained of, was responding to pain or injury, or was protecting itself, its kennel, its offspring, or its owner or owner's property, shall be found to be a dangerous dog or a vicious dog. 
(Ord. No. 326-95(B)(2), 8-15-95) 
Sec. 10-99. - Registration; certificate; fee; tag. 
    The owner of any animal found by a court to be a dangerous dog shall, within ten days of such finding, obtain a dangerous dog registration certificate from the animal warden for a fee of $50.00, in addition to other fees that may be authorized by law. The local animal warden shall also provide the owner with a uniformly designed tag which identifies the animal as a dangerous dog. The owner shall affix the tag to the animal's collar and ensure that the animal wears the collar and tag at all times. All certificates obtained pursuant to this division shall be renewed annually for the same fee and in the same manner as the initial certificate was obtained. 
(Ord. No. 326-95(B)(3), 8-15-95) 
Sec. 10-100. - Conditions for issuance of certificate or certificate renewal. 
    All certificates or renewals required to be obtained under this division shall only be issued to persons 18 years of age or older who present satisfactory evidence of the animal's current rabies vaccination, if applicable, and that the animal is and will be confined in a proper enclosure or is and will be confined inside the owner's residence or is and will be muzzled and confined in the owner's fenced-in yard until the proper enclosure is constructed. In addition, owners who apply for certificates or renewals under this division shall not be issued a certificate or renewal unless they present satisfactory evidence that their residence is and will continue to be posted with clearly visible signs warning both minors and adults of the presence of a dangerous dog on the property, and the animal has been permanently identified by means of a tattoo on the inside thigh or by electronic implantation. 
(Ord. No. 326-95(B)(4), 8-15-95) 
Sec. 10-101. - Confinement and control. 
    While on the property of its owner, an animal found by a court to be a dangerous dog shall be confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked structure of sufficient height and design to prevent its escape or direct contact with or entry by minors, adults, or other animals. The structure shall be designed to provide the animal with shelter from the elements of nature. When off its owner's property, an animal found by a court to be a dangerous dog shall be kept on a leash and muzzled in such a manner as not to cause injury to the animal or interfere with the animal's vision or respiration, but so as to prevent it from biting a person or another animal. 
(Ord. No. 326-95(B)(5), 8-15-95) 
Sec. 10-102. - Owner responsibilities and liabilities. 
(a)  If the owner of an animal found by a court to be a dangerous dog is a minor, the custodial parent or legal guardian shall be responsible for complying with all requirements of this section. 
(b)  After an animal has been found by a court to be a dangerous dog, the animal's owner shall immediately, upon learning of same, notify the local animal warden if the animal is loose or unconfined; bites a person or attacks another animal; is sold, given away, or dies; or has been moved to a different address. 
(c)  The owner of any animal which has been found by a court to be a dangerous dog who willfully fails to comply with the requirements of this division shall be guilty of a class I misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 326-95(B)(6)-(8), 8-15-95) 
Sec. 10-103. - Disposition of fees. 
    All fees collected pursuant to this division, less the costs incurred by the animal warden in producing and distributing the certificates and tags required by this division, shall be paid into a special dedicated fund in the treasury of the city for the purpose of paying the expenses of any training course required under Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.105. 
(Ord. No. 326-95(B)(9), 8-15-95) 
Secs. 10-104-10-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CATS 

Sec. 10-131. - Vaccination. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep or harbor any cat over four months old within the city unless such cat has been vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian, and has received any required revaccination against rabies as specified in the certificate of vaccination. 
(b)  Tag; certificate. Upon vaccination or revaccination of a cat, as required by this section, a suitable and distinctive rabies tag and a certificate of vaccination, properly executed and signed by the licensed veterinarian performing the vaccination, shall be issued to the animal's owner by the veterinarian, who shall retain a copy of the certificate for his records. 
(c)  Certificate contents. The certificate issued pursuant to subsection (b) of this section shall certify that the cat has been vaccinated in accordance with this article, and shall include the following information: 
(1)  The date of the vaccination; 
(2)  The date for required revaccination; 
(3)  The rabies tag number; 
(4)  A brief description of the cat and its age, sex and breed; and 
(5)  The name and address of the animal's owner. 
(d)  Preservation and exhibition of certificate. The certificate issued pursuant to subsection (b) of this section shall be preserved by the owner of the cat and exhibited promptly on request for inspection by the animal warden or any law enforcement officer. 
(e)  Violation of section. A violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. Should any person who owns, keeps or harbors a cat fail or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this section or with any instructions given by the animal warden, a veterinarian, a health district representative or other appropriate official, pursuant to this section, the animal warden may take such cat immediately into custody and confine it in the city pound and the person owning, keeping or harboring such cat shall then be summoned forthwith by the animal warden to appear in the general district court where the matter shall be heard as all other matters are heard on criminal warrants. Upon finding that such person either owns, keeps or harbors a cat and has failed or refused to comply with any provision of this section or with instructions properly given pursuant to this section, the judge, in addition to any sentence which he may impose for conviction of a class 4 misdemeanor, shall order any confinement of the animal appropriate under the circumstances and pursuant to this section, and shall order the convicted person to pay for any required vaccination, and confinement-related expenses. 
(f)  Enforcement of section. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the police department through the animal warden and other persons designated by the chief of police or by the city council. 
(Code 1972, § 3-37(a)-(d), (f), (g)) 
State Law reference- Rabies inoculation for cats, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-28.5. 
Sec. 10-132. - Display of rabies vaccination tags. 
(a)  The owner or custodian of any cat over four months old within the city shall securely fasten the tag provided for in section 10-131(b), showing that the cat has been properly inoculated for rabies, to a substantial collar, which collar shall be worn by the cat whenever the cat is off the real property limits of the owner or custodian. Any cat not wearing a collar bearing a rabies tag for the proper calendar year shall prima facie be deemed to be considered not properly inoculated for rabies and in any proceedings under this article the burden of proof of the fact that such cat has been properly inoculated for rabies shall be on the owner or custodian of the cat. 
(b)  If the owner or custodian of any cat which has been inoculated for rabies is unable to obtain a rabies tag from a licensed veterinarian performing the inoculation, the owner or custodian of the cat shall obtain a rabies tag from the city treasurer's office by exhibiting the certificate set forth in section 10-131 and by paying a fee of $1.00. 
(Code 1972, § 3-38) 
Sec. 10-133. - Running at large without wearing rabies tags; impoundment. 
    Any cat, found by the animal warden, or other persons designated by the chief of police or by city council to enforce provisions of this Code, not displaying a rabies tag as set forth in section 10-132 shall be seized and impounded by the animal warden or other properly designated person. The animal warden, upon impounding any cat without a rabies tag, shall make a complete registry of the animal including color and sex. The animal warden shall exercise reasonable diligence to ascertain the name of the owner of every animal impounded and, if such owner is found, to promptly notify him of such impounding. 
(Code 1972, § 3-39) 
Sec. 10-134. - Redemption by owner. 
    No cat impounded as provided in section 10-133 shall be released until the owner of such cat makes demand therefor at the pound, which demand shall be made within the time period prescribed in section 10-135, and proves ownership to the satisfaction of the animal warden and pays the treasurer a penalty of $10.00 for the impounding, and $5.00 for each day or fraction thereof during which such cat was impounded, provided such animal has been properly inoculated. No cat may be kept by the animal warden longer than 21 consecutive days. 
(Code 1972, § 3-40; Ord. No. 06-35, 11-21-06) 
Sec. 10-135. - Minimum impoundment period; disposition of unclaimed animals. 
    Any animal which has been so confined must be kept for a period of not less than seven days, such period to commence on the day immediately following the day the cat was initially confined in the facility, unless sooner claimed by the owner thereof. If the animal has not been claimed, it may be humanely destroyed or delivered to any local humane society, shelter, or to any person who desires to own the cat as a pet and who will pay the required fees and costs on such animal, if any, and any penalties or charges set out in section 10-134. No more than two animals shall be delivered during any 30-day period to any one such person. No provision in this section shall prohibit the destruction of a critically injured or critically ill animal for humane purposes. 
(Code 1972, § 3-41) 
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Department of public works, § 41 et seq. 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; fire prevention and protection, ch. 38; planning, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; building operations blocking streets, § 62-178; taxation, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 78; zoning, ch. 90; floodplain zoning regulations, § 90-181 et seq. 
State Law reference- Access to and use of buildings by handicapped, Code of Virginia, § 2.1-517; dangerous buildings and other structures, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-11.2; regulations concerning the building of houses, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-15(1); fences around swimming pools, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-29; display of numbers on buildings, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-29.11; buildings, monuments and lands of local governments, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-257 et seq.; buildings for municipal functions, purposes, etc., Code of Virginia, § 15.1-846; light, ventilation and sanitation of buildings and premises, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-869; Virginia Industrialized Building Safety Law, Code of Virginia, § 36-70 et seq.; Uniform Statewide Building Code, Code of Virginia, § 36-97 et seq.; local licensing of certain contractors, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-1117. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Violation of chapter a misdemeanor; civil penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or any other person, firm or corporation, on or after the effective date of any Code provisions of the Uniform Statewide Building Code (USBC), to violate any such provisions. Any such violation shall be deemed a misdemeanor and any owner or any other person, firm or corporation convicted of such a violation shall be punished by a fine of not more than $2,500.00. In addition, each day the violation continues after conviction or the court-ordered abatement period has expired shall constitute a separate offense. If the violation remains uncorrected at the time of the conviction, the court shall order the violator to abate or remedy the violation in order to comply with the USBC. Except as otherwise provided by the court for good cause shown, any such violator shall abate or remedy the violation within six months of the date of conviction. Each day during which the violation continues after the court-ordered abatement period has ended shall constitute a separate offense. Any person convicted of a second offense committed within less than five years after a first offense under this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than $1,000.00 nor more than $2,500.00. Any person convicted of a second offense committed within a period of five to ten years of a first offense under this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than $500.00 nor more than $2,500.00. Any person convicted of a third or subsequent offense involving the same property committed within ten years of an offense under this chapter after having been at least twice previously convicted shall be punished by confinement in jail for not more than ten days and a fine of not less than $2,500.00 nor more than $5,000.00, either or both. No portion of the fine imposed for such third or subsequent offense committed within ten years of an offense under this chapter shall be suspended. 
(b)  There is hereby established a schedule of civil penalties for violations of the provisions of the USBC which are not abated or remedied promptly after receipt of notice of violation from the local enforcement officer. This schedule of civil penalties shall be; 
(1)  $100.00 for the initial summons, and 
(2)  $150.00 for each additional summons. 
    Each day during which the violation is found to have existed shall constitute a separate offense. However, violations arising from the same operative set of facts shall not be charged more frequently than once in any ten-day period, and a series of specified violations arising from the same operative set of facts shall not result in civil penalties which exceed a total of $3,000.00. Designation of a particular Code violation for a civil penalty pursuant to this section shall be in lieu of criminal sanctions, and except for any violation resulting in injury to persons, such designation shall preclude the prosecution of a violation as a misdemeanor. 
    Any person summoned or issued a ticket for a scheduled violation may make an appearance in person or in writing by mail to the department of finance or the treasurer of the locality prior to the date fixed for trial in court. Any person so appearing may enter a waiver of trial, admit liability, and pay the civil penalty established for the offense charged. Such persons shall be informed of their right to stand trial and that a signature to an admission of liability will have the same force and effect as a judgment of court. As a condition of waiver of trial, admission of liability, and payment of a civil penalty, the violator shall agree in writing to abate or remedy the violation within six months after the date of payment of the civil penalty. 
    If a person charged with a scheduled violation does not elect to enter a waiver of trial and admit liability, the violation shall be tried in the general district court in the same manner and with the same right of appeal as provided for by law. In any trial for a scheduled violation authorized by this section, it shall be the burden of the locality to show the liability of the violator by a preponderance of the evidence. An admission of liability or finding of liability shall not be a criminal conviction for any purpose. 
    If the violation concerns a residential unit, and if the violation remains uncorrected at the time of assessment of the civil penalty, the court shall order the violator to abate or remedy the violation in order to comply with the Code. Except as otherwise provided by the court for good cause shown, any such violator shall abate or remedy the violation within six months of the date of the assessment of the civil penalty. 
(Code 1972, § 5-61; Ord. No. 320-94, 11-15-94; Ord. No. 03-48, § 1, 11-18-03) 
State Law reference- Violation of building code, Code of Virginia, § 36-106. 
Sec. 14-2. - Liability of city. 
    This chapter shall not be construed as imposing upon the city any liability or responsibility for damages to any person injured in any manner by any defect involved in the construction, addition, repair, alteration, relocation, demolition, the storage and handling of hazardous materials and the use and occupancy of buildings and premises and any systems installed therein or thereon nor shall any officer or employee, or member of the board of building code appeals, charged with the enforcement of this chapter, acting for the city in the discharge of his duties, thereby render himself liable personally, and he is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee because of such act performed by him in the enforcement of any provision of this chapter shall be defended by the department of law until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(Code 1972, § 5-62; Ord. No. 320-94, 11-15-94) 
Secs. 14-3-14-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - VIRGINIA UNIFORM STATEWIDE BUILDING CODE 

Sec. 14-31. - Amendments to building code. 
    The Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code is hereby amended as follows: 
The fire limits of the city shall include all districts or blocks of land now or hereafter zoned C-1 or C-2 as provided in the zoning ordinance of the city, except no C-1 or C-2 district or block of land shall be included in the fire limits until a majority of the buildings or structures contained therein shall be in commercial use or occupancy. Districts or blocks of land, or portions thereof zoned other than C-1 or C-2 may be included in the fire limits when such are contiguous to C-1 or C-2 districts or blocks of land in the fire limits. The fire limits or districts shall be set out on a map in the office of the city building official. 
(Code 1972, § 5-2; Ord. No. 320-94, 11-15-94) 
Sec. 14-32. - Permit fees specified. 
    Permit fees are hereby established in accordance with the provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code (BOCA), as amended. 
(Code 1972, § 5-3.0) 
Sec. 14-33. - Base charge. 
    There shall be a base charge of $25.00 for building, electrical, plumbing, sewer, mechanical, and where applicable, utility. 
(Ord. No. 99-1, 2-16-99; Ord. No. 09-33, 6-16-09) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 99-1, adopted Feb. 16, 1999, repealed the former § 14-33 and enacted a new § 14-33 as set out herein. The former § 14-33 pertained to base charges and derived from Code 1972, § 5-3.0. 
Sec. 14-34. - Penalty, beginning work without a permit. 
    There shall be a penalty for beginning work without a permit of two times the permit fee. 
(Ord. No. 99-1, 2-16-99) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 99-1, adopted Feb. 16, 1999, repealed the former § 14-34 and enacted a new § 14-34 as set out herein. The former § 14-34 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1972, § 5-3.1. 
Sec. 14-35. - Building permit fees. 
    Upon issuance of a permit as provided for in section 14-32, there shall be a fee for each item as applicable in accordance with the following building fee schedule: 
(1)  New construction: 
a.  Residential, per square foot ..... $0.12 
b.  Commercial, per square foot ..... 0.15 
(2)  Alterations: 
a.  Residential, per $1,000.00 value of work ..... 8.00 
b.  Commercial, per $1,000.00 value of work ..... 9.00 
(3)  Decks, sheds, etc., per square foot ..... 0.10 
(4)  Demolition ..... 70.00 
(5)  Accessory structure demolition ..... 25.00 
(6)  Temporary electrical service ..... 10.00 
(7)  Land disturbance permit, erowion and sediment control inspection ..... 20.00 
plus $10.00 per additional acre 
(8)  Commercial/industrial building plan review ..... 50.00 
(9)  Reinspection (base fee exempt) ..... 20.00 
(Ord. No. 99-1, 2-16-99; Ord. No. 09-33, 6-16-09) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 99-1, adopted Feb. 16, 1999, repealed the former § 14-35 and enacted a new § 14-35 as set out herein. The former § 14-35 pertained to permit fees and derived from Code 1972, § 5-3.3(1)-(10), (12)-(14). 
Sec. 14-36. - Electrical permit fees. 
    Upon issuance of a permit as provided for in section 14-32, there shall be paid a fee for each item as applicable in accordance with the following electrical fee schedule: 
(1)  New construction, per square 
   foot ..... $0.06 
(2)  New electrical service or upgrade: 
a.  1 to 200 amps ..... 25.00 
b.  201 to 400 amps ..... 35.00 
c.  401 to 600 amps ..... 55.00 
d.  601 to 800 amps ..... 75.00 
e.  801 to 1000 amps ..... 95.00 
(3)  Alterations: 
a.  Residential, per $1,000.00 value of work ..... 8.00 
b.  Commercial, per $1,000.00 value of work ..... 9.00 
(4)  Temporary service/reconnect ..... 10.00 
(5)  Reinspection (base fee exempt) ..... 20.00 
(Ord. No. 99-1, 2-16-99; Ord. No. 09-33, 6-16-09) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 99-1, adopted Feb. 16, 1999, repealed the former § 14-36 and enacted a new § 14-36 as set out herein. The former § 14-36 pertained to new construction and derived from Code 1972, § 5-3.4. 
Sec. 14-37. - Plumbing permit fees. 
    Upon issuance of a permit as provided for in section 14-32, there shall be paid a fee for each item as applicable in accordance with the following plumbing fee schedule: 
(1)  New construction, per square foot ..... $0.06 
(2)  Alterations: 
a.  Residential, per $1,000.00 value of work ..... 8.00 
b.  Commercial, per $1,000.00 value of work ..... 9.00 
(3)  Water service hook-up ..... 10.00 
(4)  Sewer tap-in ..... 10.00 
(5)  Backflow preventer ..... 25.00 
(6)  Fire suppression systems, per $1,000.00 value of work ..... 0.03 
(7)  Reinspection (base fee exempt) ..... 20.00 
(Ord. No. 99-1, 2-16-99) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 99-1, adopted Feb. 16, 1999, repealed the former § 14-37 and enacted a new § 14-37 as set out herein. The former § 14-37 pertained to alteration and derived from Code 1972, § 5-3.5. 
Sec. 14-38. - Mechanical permit fees. 
    Upon issuance of a permit as provided for in section 14-32, there shall be paid a fee for each item as applicable in accordance with the following mechanical fee schedule: 
(1)  New construction, per square foot ..... $0.06 
(2)  Alterations: 
a.  Residential, per $1,000.00 value of work ..... 8.00 
b.  Commercial, per $1,000.00 value of work ..... 9.00 
(3)  Underground storage tanks: 
a.  Removal ..... 40.00 
b.  Installation, per $1,000.00 value of work ..... 10.00 
(4)  Above-ground storage tank ..... 7.00 
(5)  Reinspection (base fee exempt) ..... 20.00 
(Ord. No. 99-1, 2-16-99; Ord. No. 09-33, 6-16-09) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 99-1, adopted Feb. 16, 1999, repealed the former § 14-38 and enacted a new § 14-38 as set out herein. The former § 14-38 pertained to electrical permit fee schedule and derived from Code 1972, § 5-3.6. 
Sec. 14-39. - Sign permit fees. 
    Upon issuance of a permit as provided for in section 14-32, there shall be paid a fee for each item as applicable in accordance with the following sign fee schedule: 
(1)  10-24 square feet ..... $10.00 
(2)  25-49 square feet ..... 15.00 
(3)  50-74 square feet ..... 25.00 
(4)  75-99 square feet ..... 50.00 
(5)  100-299 square feet ..... 100.00 
(6)  300+ square feet ..... 200.00 
(7)  Electrical lighting ..... 15.00 
(8)  Special sign construction ..... 15.00 
(9)  Temporary sign ..... No fee 
(10)  Reinspection (base fee exempt) ..... 20.00 
(Ord. No. 99-1, 2-16-99; Ord. No. 09-33, 6-16-09; Ord. No. 18-01, 1-16-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 99-1, adopted Feb. 16, 1999, repealed the former § 14-39 and enacted a new § 14-39 as set out herein. The former § 14-39 pertained to wiring permit fee schedule and derived from Code 1972, § 5-3.7. 
Sec. 14-40. - Fire protection and amusement permit fees. 
    Upon issuance of a permit as provided for in section 14-32, there shall be paid a fee for each item as applicable in accordance with the following sign fee schedule: 
(1)  Commercial fire alarm, per square foot ..... $0.03 
(2)  Other fire alarm, per $1,000.00 value of work ..... 7.00 
(3)  Circular ride ..... 15.00 each 
(4)  Kiddie ride ..... 10.00 each 
(5)  Other rides ..... 25.00 each 
(6)  Tents, per square foot ..... 0.03 
(Ord. No. 09-33, 6-16-09) 
Sec. 14-41. - Permit fees for work to be performed that are not covered. 
    Permit fees for work to be performed that are not covered in sections 14-33, 14-34, 14-35, 14-36, 14-37, 14-38 and 14-39 shall be calculated at one (1) per cent of the contract cost. 
(Ord. No. 99-1, 2-16-99; Ord. No. 09-33, 6-16-09) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 99-1, adopted Feb. 16, 1999, repealed the former § 14-40 and enacted a new § 14-39 as set out herein. The former § 14-40 pertained to plumbing fee schedule and derived from Code 1972, § 5-3.8. 
Secs. 14-42-14-43. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 99-1, adopted Feb. 16, 1999, repealed the former §§ 14-41-14-43. The former §§ 14-41-14-43 pertained to mechanical permit fees, motor permit fees, and solar system permit fees and derived from Code 1972, § 5-3.9-5-3.11, respectively. 
Sec. 14-44. - Refund of permit fees; service charge. 
    The building official shall authorize the refunding of any permit fee upon application by the person or corporation who paid such fee under the following conditions: 
(1)  If the work authorized by the permit has not been started and no inspections have been made, the permit fee less a service charge of $5.00 shall be refunded. 
(2)  If the work authorized by the permit has been started and inspections have been made, the permit fee shall not be refunded. 
(3)  No permit fee of a value of $5.00 or less shall be refunded. 
(Code 1972, § 5-4) 
Sec. 14-45. - Exemption from permit fees. 
    Where the owner of any premises is the United States of America, the commonwealth, the city or instrumentalities thereof, the payment of any permit fee established in this article is hereby waived. 
(Code 1972, § 5-5) 
Sec. 14-46. - Conflict of chapter with other ordinances. 
    In the interpretation and application of this chapter, its provisions shall be held to be minimum requirements and except as may be specifically required by the provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, as adopted, it is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, or in any way impair or interfere with any other provisions of law or ordinance, or any regulations or permits adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use or construction of buildings or structures, but in any case, the most rigid requirements shall apply whenever they may be in conflict. 
(Code 1972, § 5-6) 
Secs. 14-47-14-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE AND UNSAFE BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 97-8, adopted Sept. 2, 1997, repealed former Art. III, §§ 14-76-14-84, which pertained to unsafe buildings and structures and derived from Code 1972, §§ 5-16, 5-19, 5-21-5-27; Ord. No. 320-94, adopted Nov. 15, 1994; and Ord. No. 322-94, adopted Dec. 6, 1994. In addition, Ord. No. 97-8 enacted a new Art. III, containing provisions herein set out as §§ 14-76.1 and 14-76.2. 

Sec. 14-76. - Reserved. 
Sec. 14-76.1. - Statewide building code to govern. 
    Pursuant to title 36 of the Code of Virginia, all matters involving real property maintenance and/or unsafe buildings or structures and their equipment shall be subject to and governed by the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, and enforcement of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code shall be pursuant to the provisions of said building code. 
(Ord. No. 97-8, 9-2-97) 
Sec. 14-76.2. - Provisions pertaining to abatement of unsafe structures. 
(a)  Responsibility of property owners. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 14-76.1, the owners of property within the city shall at such time or times as the building code official of the city may prescribe, remove, repair or secure any building, wall or any other structure which might endanger the public health or safety of other residents of the city. 
(b)  Authority of city to remove, repair or secure. The city, through its building officials or other agents or employees, may remove, repair or secure any building, wall or any other structure which might endanger the public health or safety of other residents of the city wherein the owner and lienholder of such property, after reasonable notice and a reasonable time to do so, has failed to remove, repair or secure said building, wall or other structure. For the purposes of this section, "repair" may include maintenance work to the exterior of a building to prevent deterioration of the building or adjacent buildings. For purposes of this section, "reasonable notice" shall include a written notice (i) mailed by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, sent to the last known address of the property owner and (ii) published in a newspaper having general circulation in the city. No action shall be taken by the city to remove, repair or secure any building, wall or other structure for at least 30 days following the later of the return of the receipt or newspaper publication. 
(c)  Charges for work done by city. In the event the city, through its own agents or employees, removes, repairs or secures any building, wall or any other structure after complying with the notice provisions of this section, the cost or expense thereof shall be chargeable to and paid by the owners of such property and may be collected by the city as taxes and levies are collected. 
(d)  Liens for unpaid charges. Every charge authorized by this section with which the owner of any such property shall have been assessed and which remains unpaid shall constitute a lien against such property ranking on a parity with liens for unpaid local taxes and enforceable in the same manner as provided in articles 3 and 4 of chapter 39 of title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 97-8, 9-2-97; Ord. No. 99-9, 9-7-99) 
Secs. 14-77-14-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS 

Sec. 14-111. - Construction by homeowner. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the owner of any single-family dwelling from performing additions, alterations, or repairs to the dwelling in which he resides, provided that all proper permits shall be obtained and such additions, alterations, or repairs shall be approved by the building official upon completion. 
(Code 1972, § 5-36; Ord. No. 320-94, 11-15-94) 
Sec. 14-112. - Employment of person not certified to do construction work. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee, agent, or any person having any authority or duty in connection with any building or premises knowingly to employ or hire any person, whether such work is done or offered to be done by hourly labor, day labor, general contract, or subcontract, to perform any construction, additions, alterations, or repairs in or upon such building or premises unless such person has qualified to perform such work as provided by this chapter. 
(Code 1972, § 5-37) 
Sec. 14-113. - Certificate prerequisite to connecting public service systems. 
    No electric power company or gas company shall turn on electricity or gas to any permanent installation until a certificate of occupancy or approval has been issued by the building official, nor shall water and sewage service be initiated by the city until advised by the building official. 
(Code 1972, § 5-38) 
Sec. 14-114. - Certificate prerequisite to issuance of business license. 
    The commissioner of revenue for the city shall not authorize the issuance of a business license at a new location, until the applicant submits evidence that a certificate of occupancy or approval, if required, has been issued and the premises have been inspected and approved for the intended occupancy. 
(Code 1972, § 5-39) 
Secs. 14-115-14-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CONTRACTORS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18. 
State Law reference- Local licensing of certain contractors, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-1117. 

Sec. 14-141. - Qualifications and requirements generally. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law, before any person shall perform any activity involving the construction, addition, repair, alteration, relocation, the storage and handling of hazardous materials, the use and occupancy of buildings, structures or premises and the systems installed therein or thereon, within the city, for which a permit is required, he shall qualify as set forth in this article and in accordance with the laws of the commonwealth, obtain a state and city license, post proper bond, and register with the building official. 
(Code 1972, § 5-46) 
State Law reference- License of class A contractors, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-1106; local licensing of contractors, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-1117. 
Sec. 14-142. - Allowing one's name, license or bond to be used to obtain permit fraudulently. 
    No person qualified and licensed to engage in any activity governed by this chapter, shall allow his name to be used by any other person, directly or indirectly, to obtain a permit, or for the construction of any work under his name, license, or bond. 
(Code 1972, § 5-50) 
Sec. 14-143. - Revocation of license. 
    Any person engaged in the contracting business whose work does not conform to the rules and regulations in this article, or whose workmanship or materials are of inferior quality shall, on notice from the building official, make necessary changes or corrections at once so as to conform to this chapter. If work has not been so changed after ten days' notice from the building official, the building official shall then refuse to issue any more permits until such work has fully complied with the rules and regulations of this chapter. The building official may appear before the governing authority and request that all licenses be revoked because of continuous violations. When the revocation of any such license is to be considered at any meeting of the council, the person to whom the license has been issued shall have at least seven days' notice in writing of the time and place of such meeting, together with a statement of the grounds upon which it is proposed to revoke such license. 
(Code 1972, § 5-51) 
Secs. 14-144-14-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - APPEALS; BOARD OF BUILDING CODE APPEALS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 14-171. - Standard for appeals. 
    The owner of a building or structure or real estate upon which construction is proposed or any other person may appeal from a decision of the building official for a modification to the provisions of this chapter. Such appeals shall be pursuant to the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Code 1972, § 5-56; Ord. No. 320-94, 11-15-94) 
Sec. 14-172. - Board of building code appeals established. 
    There is by the adoption of this chapter established a board of appeals, the membership, qualification, and procedures of which are more fully set forth and governed by the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. The board of building code appeals shall consist of five members. 
(Code 1972, § 5-57; Ord. No. 320-94, 11-15-94) 
Secs. 14-173-14-242. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - DANCE HALLS 

Sec. 14-243. - Defined. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, a dance hall shall mean any public place open to the public where dancing is permitted; provided however, that a restaurant located within the city limits and licensed to serve food and beverages having a dance floor with an area not exceeding ten per centum of the total floor area of the restaurant shall not be considered a public dance hall. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, 11-17-98) 
Sec. 14-244. - Hours of operation; presence of minors. 
(a)  No public dance hall in the city shall be kept open between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. No person other than the proprietor or manager and employees of any dance hall shall remain or be allowed in such place during such hours. 
(b)  In all public dance halls where alcoholic beverages are sold, no person under 18 years of age shall be allowed in such place during such hours. However, in the event that a restaurant, with a license to sell alcoholic beverages, is also deemed a public dance hall, as defined herein, persons under 18 years of age shall be allowed on the premises for the purpose of consuming food and nonalcoholic beverages sold therein, but such persons shall not be allowed to take part in any dancing activities or remain on the premises after they have consumed the food and nonalcoholic beverages as aforesaid. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, 11-17-98) 
Sec. 14-245. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any dance hall within the limits of the city without first obtaining a permit from the city manager. The fee for each such permit shall be $600.00. 
    Any person desiring to obtain a permit, as required in this section, shall make application therefor to the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, 11-17-98) 
Sec. 14-246. - Permit, application contents. 
    Any person desiring to obtain a permit for the operation of a public dance hall in the city shall first make written application to the city manager with such information as will enable the city manager to ascertain as to fitness and financial responsibility of the persons who will own, conduct or manage the same and, in addition, the applicant shall give the following information: 
(1)  The place where the proposed dance hall is to be located. 
(2)  The name and address of the person who is or who will be owner of the dance hall in question and, if the owner is not the manager, in addition thereto, the name and address of the manager. 
(3)  If the owner or operator is a corporation, then such application shall set forth the true or equitable owners of the stock of such corporation. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, 11-17-98) 
Sec. 14-247. - Conditions of permit. 
    Every permit granted for the operation of a dance hall as aforesaid shall be subject to the following conditions and restrictions: 
(1)  Such permit shall not be transferable without the approval of the city manager; 
(2)  The ownership, management or location of such dance hall shall not be changed without the permission of the city manager; 
(3)  The dance hall shall conform to the requirements of the building code of the city, the zoning ordinance of the city, as now in effect or as subsequently amended, together with all other ordinances of the city applicable thereto. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, 11-17-98) 
Sec. 14-248. - Exemptions. 
    Dances held for charitable or benevolent purposes, or those dances conducted under the auspices of religious, educational, civic, or military organizations shall be deemed exempt from these provisions. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, 11-17-98) 
Sec. 14-249. - Penalties for violation of sections 14-244 and 14-245. 
    Any person who shall operate a public dance hall in the city without first obtaining the permit required by this article, shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor. Failure to pay the permit fee when due shall constitute automatic revocation of any permit otherwise previously issued. Any person violating any other provision of this article shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and such conviction shall, ipso facto, constitute a revocation of such offender's permit to conduct such public dance hall in the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, 11-17-98) 
Sec. 14-250. - Revocation of permits required for granting of license. 
(a)  Any permit required to be obtained from the city manager for the operation of a dance hall shall be subject to revocation by the city manager. In any case where the city manager shall deem it proper, he shall, after ten (10) days' notice to the person to whom such permit was granted, conduct a hearing on the operation of the said dance hall and shall consider any complaints about said operation, any violations of any laws relating to the said dance hall operation or the facilities where said dance hall is operated, and breaches of the peace or failure to maintain safe and sanitary conditions on the premises. At such hearing, such person shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard. On the basis of his findings at such hearing, the city manager shall determine whether or not the permit previously granted to such person should be revoked. If it is determined, at such hearing, that such permit should be revoked, the city manager shall revoke the same. 
(b)  The revocation of any permit pursuant to this section shall operate to cancel the license granted upon the issuance of such permit, but there shall be refunded to the person whose license is so cancelled a pro rata part of the tax paid upon such license, based upon the number of full months remaining in the year for which such license was granted. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, 11-17-98) 
ARTICLE VIII. - REMOVAL, REPAIR, OR SECURING OF BUILDINGS AND OTHER STRUCTURES HARBORING ILLEGAL DRUG USE 

Sec. 14-251. - Findings. 
(a)  The city council finds that there is an increasing use of real property within the city for criminal violations of state laws governing controlled substances. The council also finds that such use continues despite law enforcement efforts of the city police, with repeated offenses being committed at the same properties. 
(b)  The council further finds that this problem has deleterious effects on the quality of life in the neighborhoods in which it occurs, diminishes the property values of other neighborhood properties, is detrimental to public safety and increases the cost of law enforcement in the city. 
(c)  Therefore, the council finds it to be in the public interest to authorize and empower the appropriate city officials to take corrective action to abate drug blight on real property in the city in cases in which property owners fail to take corrective action within the period set forth below. 
(Ord. No. 09-13, 3-17-09) 
Sec. 14-252. - Definitions. 
    The following words have the following meanings when used in this article. 
    Affidavit means the affidavit prepared in accordance subsection 14-251(a). 
    Controlled substance means illegally obtained controlled substances as defined in Code of Virginia, § 54.1-3401. 
    Corrective action means the taking of steps which are reasonably expected to be effective to abate drug blight on real property, such as removal, repair or securing of any building, wall or structure. 
    Drug blight means a condition existing on real property which tends to endanger the public health or safety of city residents and is caused by the regular presence of the property of persons under the influence of controlled substances or the regular use of the property for the purpose of illegally possessing, manufacturing or distributing controlled substances. 
    Owner means the record owner or owners of real property. 
    Property means real property or a portion thereof, including but not limited to, any room, building, structure, vacant or occupied. 
(Ord. No. 09-13, 3-17-09) 
Sec. 14-253. - Enforcement procedures. 
(a)  In the event that there exists drug blight on certain real property in the city despite law enforcement efforts to prevent such blight, the chief of police or designee of the chief shall execute an affidavit, citing Code of Virginia, § 15.2-907, affirming (i) that drug blight exists on the property and in the manner described therein; (ii) that the city has used due diligence without effect to abate the drug blight; and (iii) that the drug blight constitutes a present threat to the public's health, safety or welfare. 
(b)  This affidavit shall be submitted to the building official requesting that the last known owner of the property be notified of the drug blight by regular mail sent to the address of said owner as it appears in the assessment records of the city. 
(c)  The building official shall send out by regular mail a notice, with a copy of the affidavit, to the owner of record at such address advising that (i) the owner has up to 30 days from the date thereof to undertake corrective action to abate the drug blight described in the affidavit and (ii) the city will, if requested to do so, assist the owner in determining and coordinating the appropriate corrective action to abate the drug blight described in the affidavit. 
(d)  If no corrective action is taken by the owner within such 30-day period, the building official shall send a second notice by regular mail to the owner at the address used in the first notice stating a date, no earlier than 15 days after the mailing of the second notice, after which the city may commence corrective action to abate the drug blight on the property. This second notice shall also reasonably describe the corrective action contemplated to be taken by the city. 
(e)  Upon receipt of the second notice the owner shall have a right, upon notice given to the city within no more than 15 days of receipt of such second notice, to seek equitable relief from an appropriate court, and the city shall initiate no corrective action while a proper petition for relief is pending before a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(f)  If the city undertakes corrective action with respect to the property after complying with the notice requirements set forth above, the costs and expenses thereof shall be chargeable to and paid by the owner of such property and may be collected by the city as taxes are collected. 
(g)  Every charge authorized by this article with which the owner of any such property has been assessed and which remains unpaid shall constitute a lien on said property with the same priority as liens for unpaid local taxes and enforceable in the same manner as provided in Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3940 et seq. and 58.1-3965 et seq. 
(h)  If the owner of such property takes timely corrective action pursuant to this article, and the city determines that the drug blight is properly abated as verified by a final written report prepared by the building official and approved by the chief of police, then the proceedings shall promptly be terminated, there shall be no charge or cost to the owner and the owner shall be immediately notified in writing of the satisfactory closing of the abatement proceedings. The closing of a proceeding shall not bar the city from initiating a subsequent proceeding if the drug blight recurs. 
(i)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to abridge or waive any rights or remedies of an owner of property in law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 09-13, 3-17-09) 
State Law reference- Authority to require removal, repair, etc., of buildings and other structures harboring illegal drug use. Code of Virginia, § 15.2-907. 
Chapter 18 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Business licenses and regulations, § 3; treasurer and commissioner of the revenue, § 51 et seq. 
Cross reference- Amusements and entertainments, ch. 6; animals, ch. 10; dog licenses, § 10-51 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; contractors, § 14-141 et seq.; community development, ch. 22; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 50; pistol permit to be exhibited before sale, § 50-65; secondhand goods, ch. 58; subdivisions, ch. 66; taxation, ch. 70; local vehicle license, § 74-51 et seq.; vehicles for hire, ch. 86; zoning, ch. 90. 
State Law reference- Sale of ice cream and similar products, state preemption, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-562.4; certification to operate or maintain boiler or pressure vessel, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-11.6; sanitation in tattoo parlors, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-28.3; door-to-door vendors, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-37.3:1, 15.1-37.3:2; funding the construction or repair of rental property, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-37.3:9; municipal franchises, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-307 et seq.; dangerous, offensive or unhealthful business in municipality, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-865; regulation of auctions, peddlers, weights and measures, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-866; licenses and permits, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-906; going-out-of-business sales, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-223, 18.2-224; licensing of bail bondsmen, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-152.1; regulation of precious metals dealers, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4111; records of firearms dealers, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4200 et seq.; local license taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3700 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Gross expenditures means all expenditures incurred in connection with the acquisition or lease of real property, including cash, credits, fees, commissions, brokerage charges and rentals; all expenditures incurred in connection with the improvement or development of such property, including costs of all labor involved in such improvement or development, cost of materials and supplies, equipment rental or an equivalent charge therefor if equipment is owned by the builder or developer; and any other expenditure of whatever description incurred in connection with the improvement or development of such property. The term "gross expenditures" shall not include amounts expended for interest on or payment of principal of debt incurred in connection with such improvement or development work. 
    Gross receipts means the gross receipts from any business, profession, trade, occupation, vocation, calling or activity, including cash, credits, fees, commissions, brokerage charges and rentals, and property of any kind, nature or description from either sales made or services rendered without any deduction therefrom on account of cost of the property sold, the cost of material, labor or services or other costs, interest or discounts paid, or any expense whatsoever, and shall include in case of merchants the amount of the sale price of supplies and goods furnished to or used by the licensee or his family or other person for which no charge is made; provided, however, that the term "gross receipts" with respect to manufacturers, wholesale merchants and retail merchants manufacturing or dealing in articles upon which there is levied a direct excise tax or gasoline tax by the United States or the state shall not include such excise tax or gasoline tax by the United States or the state governments. The term "gross receipts" when used in connection with or in respect to financial transactions involving the sale of notes, stocks, bonds, or other securities or the loan, collection or advance of money or the discounting of notes, bills or other evidence of debt, shall mean the gross interest, gross discount, gross commission or other gross receipts earned by means of, or resulting from such financial transactions but the term "gross receipts" shall not include amount received as payment of debt. The term "gross receipts" shall include the gross receipts from all sales or services rendered or activities conducted within the city, both to persons within the city and to persons outside the city; provided, however, that the term "gross receipts" shall not include dues collected by trade, business, professional, service, or civic associations, or other similar organizations. In this connection, the word "person" shall be construed to include governmental agencies. The calculation of gross receipts, shall be on either a cash or accrual basis, determined by the accounting system of the taxpayer. 
    Person means any individual, firm, co-partnership, corporation, company, association or joint stock association. Such term shall include any trustee, receiver, assignee or personal representative thereof carrying on or continuing a business, profession, trade or occupation, but shall not include a court-appointed trustee, receiver or personal representative, in the liquidation of assets for immediate distribution or a sheriff, or any deputy, selling under authority of process or writ of a court of justice. The word "person" includes individuals, firms, partnerships, associations, corporations and combinations of individuals of whatever form or character, including any trustee, receiver, assignee or personal representative thereof carrying on or continuing a business, profession, trade or occupation. Such terms shall not include a volunteer fire department, a volunteer rescue squad or a nonprofit organization operating a community center, swimming pool, tennis court or other educational, cultural, recreational, and athletic facilities and facilities for the welfare of the residents of the area. 
(Code 1972, § 13-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Limitation on "gross receipts," Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3732. 
Sec. 18-2. - Businesses, professions, occupations and trades subject to tax. 
    Each and all of the taxes imposed in this chapter are in all cases imposed upon the privilege of doing business or exercising a profession, trade or occupation in the city including all phases of the business, profession, trade or occupation conducted in the city, as set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1972, § 13-2) 
Sec. 18-3. - Tax year. 
    For each and every year beginning with January 1 of each year and ending December 31 following, there are hereby levied the annual license taxes set forth in this chapter, except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, on persons conducting or engaged in any business, trade or occupation in the city, as set forth in this chapter. All such license taxes shall be paid by March 1 of each year. 
(Code 1972, § 13-3; Ord. No. 00-11, 10-3-00) 
Sec. 18-4. - Procedure for obtaining licenses. 
    All persons embraced by this chapter shall make application for business licenses to the commissioner of the revenue at his office in the municipal building. The commissioner of the revenue shall furnish application forms in triplicate which shall be completed by the applicant including all such information as requested in this section and such other information as may be requested by the commissioner of the revenue. The commissioner of the revenue, after receiving a sworn statement from the applicant as to the accuracy of the application, shall compute the amount of the license tax. Such tax shall be paid to the city treasurer who shall receipt such payment upon each copy of the application. He shall retain one copy of the form for his record, give one copy of the application and license to the applicant and return the third copy of the application to the commissioner of the revenue. 
(Code 1972, § 13-4) 
Sec. 18-5. - Information to be furnished by license applicants. 
    Every applicant for a license to conduct any business, profession, trade or occupation under the provisions of this chapter shall furnish the commissioner of the revenue, in writing, with his correct name and trade name, his correct residence address; the nature of the business, profession, trade or occupation to be pursued; the place where it is to be pursued; and a record of gross receipts, verified by oath, for the preceding year. In the event of a failure or refusal to file with the assessing officer the information necessary to enable him to assess a license tax on the basis provided by law, such assessing officer shall assess such license tax upon the best information he can obtain, adding thereto the penalty prescribed by law. 
(Code 1972, § 13-5) 
State Law reference- Penalties, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916. 
Sec. 18-6. - License requirement; requiring evidence of payment of business license, business personal property, meals and admissions taxes. 
    The commissioner of the revenue shall not issue any business license until the applicant has produced satisfactory evidence that all delinquent business license, business personal property, meals, transient occupancy and admissions taxes owed to the city have been paid which have been properly assessed against the applicant by the city. 
(Code 1972, § 13-5.1) 
Sec. 18-7. - Duties of commissioner of the revenue. 
(a)  In the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter the commissioner of the revenue of the city, in addition to the powers specifically granted in this section, shall have all the same enforcement authority with respect to city licenses that the state law confers upon the commissioner of the revenue generally with respect to state licenses. As one of the means of ascertaining the amount of any tax due under the provisions of this chapter, or of ascertaining any other pertinent information, the commissioner of the revenue may propound interrogatories to each applicant and may use such other evidence as he may procure. Such interrogatories shall be answered under oath, and it shall be unlawful for any applicant for a city license to refuse to answer such interrogatories. 
(b)  The commissioner of the revenue of the city or his duly qualified deputy shall have the power to summon any person by registered letter or otherwise to appear before him at his office at a time to be specified in such summons and to answer under oath questions touching the taxpayer's license liability. Failure to answer such summons without good cause or failing or refusing to answer under such oath questions touching his tax liability will be a misdemeanor and punishable as provided by this chapter. 
(Code 1972, § 13-6) 
State Law reference- Commissioners of the revenue, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3100 et seq. 
Sec. 18-8. - Required records and reports. 
    Every person liable for a license tax under the provisions of this chapter shall keep accurate and current accounts available for audit by the commissioner of the revenue or his representative. 
(Code 1972, § 13-7) 
Sec. 18-9. - Separate license for each place of business; separate license for each business. 
    No license shall be issued under this chapter to cover more than one place of business. No single license shall be issued for more than one business, profession, trade or occupation; provided, however, that an applicant engaged in two or more operations, all subject to the same rate, all conducted at the same location, and if all information on each operation is provided on the application form a single license may be issued. In those cases involving two or more business operations subject to more than one rate, the applicant shall maintain separate business license tax accounts for each operation and shall be separately licensed for each; provided, however, that the applicant may elect to maintain a single business license tax account for all operations. The license shall then be computed on the operation having the highest applicable license rate. 
(Code 1972, § 13-8) 
Sec. 18-10. - License for persons beginning a business, profession, trade or occupation. 
    Every person beginning a business, profession, trade or occupation, which is subject to a license tax under the provisions of this chapter, shall estimate the amount of the gross receipts he will receive between the date of beginning business and the end of the then current license year, and the license tax for the current year shall be computed on such estimate. Whenever a license tax is computed upon estimated gross receipts, such estimate shall be subject to adjustment by the commissioner of the revenue at the end of the tax year to reflect actual gross receipts, and he shall give credit for any overpayment on the license tax payable the following year. 
(Code 1972, § 13-9) 
Sec. 18-11. - Payment of taxes by corporations and partnerships. 
    All licenses issued and license taxes imposed under the provisions of this chapter upon the gross receipts of a business, trade or occupation conducted by a corporation or partnership shall be issued to and paid by the corporation or partnership, and when so paid, it shall be deemed to discharge the license tax liability of the members of such partnership insofar as it relates to partnership business. 
(Code 1972, § 13-10) 
Sec. 18-12. - Transfer of license. 
    No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred from one person to another, but may be transferred by the same licensee from one location to another, provided that no such transfer shall be valid unless and until notice in writing is given to the commissioner of the revenue. Failure to notify the commissioner of the revenue of the transfer of license within 30 days of such transfer shall invalidate such license. 
(Code 1972, § 13-11) 
Sec. 18-13. - Due date for license taxes, generally. 
    All license taxes imposed by this chapter except as otherwise provided in this chapter, shall become due and payable on or before May 31 of each license year. In all cases where the person shall begin the business, profession, trade or occupation upon which a license tax is imposed under this chapter after May 1 of the license tax year, such license tax shall become due and payable at the time which such person commences business. 
(Code 1972, § 13-12) 
Sec. 18-14. - Penalty for failure to pay license taxes when due. 
(a)  There shall be a penalty of ten percent with a minimum of $2.00 added to all license taxes imposed under the provision of this chapter that are unpaid on the due date, March 1 of each license year or in the case of any person first engaging in a business, profession, trade or occupation, a period of more than 30 days after he first engages in such business, profession, trade or occupation; provided, however, that the penalty provided for in this section for failure to pay the taxes shall not exceed the amount of the tax past due. 
(b)  In addition to such ten percent penalty, interest at the rate of ten percent per annum shall be charged from the first year of delinquency, and interest at the maximum rate allowable and established pursuant to section 6621 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended, shall be charged for the second and each subsequent year of delinquency, and shall accrue and be added to all due and unpaid license taxes imposed under this chapter, beginning May 31 of each license year. Taxes and penalty provided in this section shall be assessed and collected in the manner provided by law for the enforcement of the collection of other taxes. 
(Code 1972, § 13-13; Ord. No. 00-11, 10-3-00) 
State Law reference- Penalties and interest, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916. 
Sec. 18-15. - License required; compliance with chapter; penalty for violation of chapter. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and constitute a misdemeanor for any person to conduct a business, or to engage in a profession, trade or occupation without a license under the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Any person who is convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(c)  Each day any person shall continue to violate the provisions of this chapter after the due date of any license tax prescribed in this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1972, § 13-14) 
Secs. 18-16-18-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS CLASSIFICATIONS 

Sec. 18-46. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Affiliated group means: 
(1)  One or more chains of includible corporations connected through stock ownership with a common parent corporation which is an includible corporation if: 
a.  Stock possessing at least 80 percent of the voting power of all classes of stock and at least 80 percent of each class of the nonvoting stock of each of the includible corporations, except the common parent corporation, is owned directly by one or more of the other includible corporations; and 
b.  The common parent corporation directly owns stock possessing at least 80 percent of the voting power of all classes of stock and at least 80 percent of each class of the corporations. As used in this article, the term "stock" does not include nonvoting stock which is limited and preferred as to dividends. The term "includible corporation" means any corporation within the affiliated group irrespective of the state or country of its incorporation. The term "receipts" includes gross receipts and gross income. 
(2)  Two or more corporations if five or fewer persons who are individuals, estates or trusts own stock possessing: 
a.  At least 80 percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote or at least 80 percent of the total value of shares of all classes of the stock of each corporation; and 
b.  More than 50 percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote or more than 50 percent of the total value of shares of all classes of stock of each corporation, taking into account the stock ownership of each such person only to the extent such stock ownership is identical with respect to each such corporation. 
When one or more of the includible corporations, including the common parent corporation is a nonstock corporation, the term "stock" as used in this article shall refer to the nonstock corporation membership or membership voting rights, as is appropriate to the context. 
    Assessment means a determination as to the proper rate of tax, the measure to which the tax rate is applied, and ultimately the amount of tax, including additional or omitted tax, that is due. An assessment shall include a written assessment made pursuant to notice by the assessing official or a self-assessment made by a taxpayer upon the filing of a return or otherwise not pursuant to notice. Assessments shall be deemed made by an assessing official when a written notice of assessment is delivered to the taxpayer by the assessing official or an employee of the assessing official, or mailed to the taxpayer at his last known address. Self-assessments shall be deemed made when a return is filed, or if no return is required, when the tax is paid. A return filed or tax paid before the last day prescribed by ordinance for the filing or payment thereof shall be deemed to be filed or paid on the last day specified for the filing of a return or the payment of tax, as the case may be. 
    Assessor or assessing official means the commissioner of the revenue of this jurisdiction. 
    Base year means the calendar year preceding the license year, except for contractors subject to local licensing under state law. 
State Law reference- No contractor's license required except where principal office located, exceptions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3715. 
    Business means a course of dealing which requires the time, attention and labor of the person so engaged for the purpose of earning a livelihood or profit. It implies a continuous and regular course of dealing, rather than an irregular or isolated transaction. A person may be engaged in more than one business. The following acts shall create a rebuttable presumption that a person is engaged in a business: 
(1)  Advertising or otherwise holding oneself out to the public as being engaged in a particular business; or 
(2)  Filing tax returns, schedules and documents that are required only of persons engaged in a trade or business. 
    Contractor means as prescribed for local licensing in state law, as amended, whether such work is done or offered to be done by day labor, general contract or subcontract. 
State Law reference- "Contractor" defined, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3714(B). 
    Definite place of business means an office or a location at which occurs a regular and continuous course of dealing for 30 consecutive days or more. A definite place of business for a person engaged in business may include a location leased or otherwise obtained from another person on a temporary or seasonal basis; and real property leased to another. A person's residence shall be deemed to be a definite place of business if there is no definite place of business maintained elsewhere and the person is not licensable as a peddler or itinerant merchant. 
    Financial services means the service for compensation by a credit agency, an investment company, a broker or dealer in securities and commodities or a security or commodity exchange, unless such service is otherwise provided for in this article. 
    Broker means an agent of a buyer or a seller who buys or sells stocks, bonds, commodities, or services, usually on a commission basis. 
    Commodity means staples such as wool, cotton, etc., which are traded on a commodity exchange and on which there is trading in futures. 
    Dealer means any person engaged in the business of buying and selling securities for his own account, but does not include a bank, or any person insofar as he buys or sells securities for his own account, either individually or in some fiduciary capacity, but not as part of a regular business. 
    Financial services. Those engaged in rendering financial services include, but without limitation, the following: 
Buying installment receivables 
Chattel mortgage financing 
Consumer financing 
Credit card services 
Credit unions 
Factors 
Financing accounts receivable 
Industrial financing 
Inventory financing 
Loan or mortgage brokers 
Loan or mortgage companies 
Safety deposit box companies 
Security and commodity brokers and services 
Stockbroker 
Working capital financing 
    Gross receipts means the whole, entire, total receipts attributable to the licensed privilege, without deduction, except as may be limited by the provisions of state law on local license taxes. 
State Law reference- Local license taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3700 et seq. 
    License year means the calendar year for which a license is issued for the privilege of engaging in business. 
    Personal services means rendering for compensation any repair, personal, business or other services not specifically classified as "financial, real estate or professional service" under this article, or rendered in any other business or occupation not specifically classified in this article unless exempted from local license tax by state law. 
    With respect to persons engaged in or conducting personal services only, such persons having gross receipts of less than $3,000.00 per year shall be exempt from the payment of any annual license tax required herein, provided said persons make application to the commissioner of revenue for such exemption and provide the necessary information showing their annual gross receipts. 
    With respect to child care attendants, or schools and babysitting, which provide services to five or less children unrelated to the provider, such provider shall be exempt from the payment of any annual license tax required herein, provided said persons make application to the commissioner of revenue for such exemption and provide the necessary information showing their annual gross receipts. 
State Law reference- Taxation, Code of Virginia, tit. 58.1. 
    Professional services means rendering any service specifically enumerated in this definition or engaged in any occupation or vocation in which a professed knowledge of some department of science or learning, gained by a prolonged course of specialized instruction and study is used by its practical application to the affairs of others, either advising, guiding, or teaching them, and in serving their interests or welfare in the practice of an art or science founded on it. The words "profession" and "professional" imply attainments in professional knowledge as distinguished from mere skill, and the application of knowledge to uses for others as a vocation, and including, but without limitation, such attainments attributed to the following: 
Architects 
Attorneys-at-law 
Certified public accountants 
Dentists 
Engineers 
Land surveyors 
Practitioners of the healing arts (the art or science or group of arts or sciences dealing with the prevention, diagnosis, treatment and cure or alleviation of human physical or mental ailments, conditions, diseases, pain or infirmities) 
Surgeons 
Veterinarians 
    Purchases means all goods, wares and merchandise received or offered for sale at each definite place of business of every wholesaler or wholesale merchant, and shall not be construed to exclude any goods, wares or merchandise otherwise coming within the meaning of such word, including such goods, wares and merchandise manufactured by a wholesaler or wholesale merchant and sold or offered for sale as merchandise. 
    Real estate services means rendering a service for compensation as lessor, buyer, seller, agent or broker and providing a real estate service, unless the service is otherwise specifically provided for in this article, and such services include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Appraisers of real estate 
Escrow agents, real estate 
Fiduciaries, real estate 
Lessors of real property 
Real estate agents, brokers and managers 
Real estate selling agents 
Rental agents for real estate 
    Retailer or retail merchant means any person or merchant who sells goods, wares and merchandise for use or consumption by the purchaser or for any purpose other than resale by the purchaser, but does not include sales at wholesale to institutional, commercial and industrial users. 
    Security means as in the state law on securities, or in similar laws of the United States regulating the sale of securities. 
State Law reference- Securities Act, Code of Virginia, § 13.1-501 et seq. 
    Services means things purchased by a customer which do not have physical characteristics, or which are not goods, wares, or merchandise. 
    For persons furnishing utility services the license tax rate shall be as follows: 
(a)  All persons furnishing electric service for heat, light, or power for domestic, commercial and industrial consumption in the city shall pay for the privilege an annual license tax equal to one-half of one percent (1/2 of 1%) of the gross receipts from within the city during the preceding year. 
(b)  All persons furnishing gas fro domestic, commercial and industrial consumption in the city shall pay for the privilege an annual license tax equal to one-fourth of one percent (1/4 of 1%) of the gross receipts, as hereinabove defined, of such business derived from within the city during the preceding year; the minimum annual license tax shall be $300.00. 
(c)  All persons furnishing telephonic communications for domestic, commercial and industrial consumers in the city shall pay for the privilege an annual license tax equal to one-half of one percent (1/2 of 1%) of the gross receipts during the preceding year, as hereinabove defined, from local telephone exchange service, including flat rate service and message rate service; and intrastate long distance calls from within the city, excluding business done between the city and points outside the state and messages sent by the government of the United States, or this state their agents and officers. 
(d)  All persons furnishing telegraphic communications for domestic, commercial and industrial consumers in the city shall pay for the privilege an annual license tax equal to one-half of one percent (1/2 of 1%) of the gross receipts during the preceding year from the sending of telegrams and telegraphic communications of any kind from the City of Emporia to a point within this state, excluding telegrams and telegraphic communications sent to the government of the United States or this state or to the agents or officers of such governments. 
(e)  All persons furnishing cable television service for consumers in the city shall pay for the privilege an annual license tax equal to three percent of the gross receipts, as hereinabove defined, of such business derived from within the city during the preceding year. 
(f)  All persons furnishing bus service, using vehicles carrying more than seven passengers over the city streets shall pay for the privilege one-fifth of one cent ( 1/5 of $0.01) per mile of the preceding year, for vehicles weighing 5,000 pounds or less; two-fifths of one cent ( 2/5 of $0.01) per mile of the preceding year for vehicles weighing 5,000 pounds to 15,000 pounds; and three-fifth of one cent ( 3/5 of $0.01) per mile of the preceding year for vehicles weighing 15,000 pounds or more. 
    Wholesaler or wholesale merchant means any person or merchant who sells wares and merchandise for resale by the purchaser, including sales when the goods, wares and merchandise will be incorporated into goods and services for sale, and also includes sales to institutional, commercial and industrial users which because of the quantity, price, or other terms indicate that they are consistent with sales at wholesale. 
(Ord. No. 332-95, § 13-21.2, 12-19-95; Ord. No. 98-9, 7-7-98; Ord. No. 00-11, 10-3-00) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-47. - Overriding conflicting ordinances. 
    Except as may be otherwise provided by the laws of the commonwealth, and notwithstanding any other current ordinances or resolutions enacted by the council, whether or not compiled in this Code, to the extent of any conflict, the following provisions shall be applicable to the levy, assessment, and collection of licenses required and taxes imposed on businesses, trades, professions and callings and upon the persons engaged therein within this locality. 
(Ord. No. 332-95, § 13-21.1, 12-19-95) 
Sec. 18-48. - License requirements. 
(a)  Every person engaging in this jurisdiction in any business, trade, profession, occupation or calling (collectively called "a business" in this article) unless otherwise exempted by law, shall apply for a license for each such business if: 
(1)  In the case of professional services, such person maintains a definite office in this jurisdiction, or if such person does not maintain a definite office in the commonwealth but does maintain an abode in this jurisdiction, which abode for the purposes of this article shall be deemed a definite place of business; or 
(2)  In the case of any other business, such person has a definite place of business or maintains an office in this jurisdiction; or 
(3)  Such person is engaged as a peddler or itinerant merchant, carnival or circus as specified in state law, or is a contractor subject to state law, or is a public service corporation subject to state law. 
(b)  A separate license shall be required for each definite place of business. A person engaged in two or more businesses or professions carried on at the same place of business may elect to obtain one license for all such businesses and professions if all of the following criteria are satisfied: 
(1)  Each business or profession is licensable at the location and has satisfied any requirements imposed by state law or other provisions of the ordinances of this jurisdiction; 
(2)  All of the businesses or professions are subject to the same tax rate, or, if subject to different tax rates, the licensee agrees to be taxed on all businesses and professions at the highest rate; and 
(3)  The taxpayer agrees to supply such information as the assessor may require concerning the nature of the several businesses and their gross receipts. 
State Law reference- No contractor's license required except where principal office located, exceptions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3715; peddlers, itinerant merchants, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3717; peddlers at wholesale, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3718; carnivals, circuses, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3728; public service corporations, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3731. 
(c)  Each person subject to a license tax shall apply for a license prior to beginning business. The application shall be on forms prescribed by the assessing official. 
(d)  The tax shall be paid with the application in the case of any license not based on gross receipts or purchases. If the tax is measured by the gross receipts or purchases of the business, the tax shall be paid on or before May 31. 
(e)  The assessing official may grant an extension of time, not to exceed 90 days, in which to file an application for a license, for good cause. The extension may be conditioned upon the timely payment of a reasonable estimate of the appropriate tax, subject to adjustment to the correct tax at the end of the extension, together with interest from the due date until the date paid and, if the estimate submitted with the extension is found to be unreasonable under the circumstances, a penalty of ten percent of the portion paid after the due date. 
(f)  A penalty of ten percent of the tax may be imposed upon the failure to file an application or the failure to pay the tax by the appropriate due date. Only the late filing penalty shall be imposed by the assessing official if both the application and payment are late. However, both penalties may be assessed if the assessing official determines that the taxpayer has a history of noncompliance. In the case of an assessment of additional tax made by the assessing official, if the application and, if applicable, the return were made in good faith and the understatement of the tax was not due to any fraud, reckless or intentional disregard of the law by the taxpayer, there shall be no late payment penalty assessed with the additional tax. If any assessment of tax by the assessing official is not paid within 30 days, the treasurer may impose a ten percent late payment penalty. The penalties shall not be imposed, or if imposed, shall be abated by the official who assessed them, if the failure to file or pay was not the fault of the taxpayer. In order to demonstrate lack of fault, the taxpayer must show that he acted responsibly and that the failure was due to events beyond his control. The term "acted responsibly" means that: 
(1)  The taxpayer exercised the level of reasonable care that a prudent person would exercise under the circumstances in determining the filing obligations for the business; and 
(2)  The taxpayer undertook significant steps to avoid or mitigate the failure, such as requesting appropriate extensions, where applicable, attempted to prevent a foreseeable impediment; acted to remove an impediment once it occurred, and promptly rectified a failure once the impediment was removed or the failure discovered. 
The term "events beyond the taxpayer's control" include, but are not limited to, the unavailability of records due to fire or other casualty; the unavoidable absence (e.g., due to death or serious illness) of the person with the sole responsibility for tax compliance; or the taxpayer's reasonable reliance in good faith upon erroneous written information from the assessing official, who was aware of the relevant facts relating to the taxpayer's business when he provided the erroneous information. 
(g)  Interest shall be charged on the late payment of the tax from the due date until the date paid without regard to fault or other reason for the late payment. Whenever an assessment of additional or omitted tax by the assessing official is found to be erroneous, all interest and penalties charged and collected on the amount of the assessment found to be erroneous shall be refunded together with interest on the refund from the date of payment or the due date, whichever is later. Interest shall be paid on the refund of any tax paid under this article from the date of payment or due date, whichever is later, whether attributable to an amended return or other reason. Interest on any refund shall be paid at the same rate charged under state law. No interest shall accrue on an adjustment of estimated tax liability to actual liability at the conclusion of a base year. No interest shall be paid on a refund or charged on a late payment, in event of such adjustment, provided the refund or the late payment is made not more than 30 days from the date of the payment that created the refund, the due date of the tax, or the date of the taxpayer's application for a refund, whichever is later. 
(Ord. No. 332-95, § 13-21.3, 12-19-95) 
State Law reference- Interest, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916. 
Sec. 18-49. - Situs of gross receipts. 
(a)  General rule. Whenever the tax imposed by this article is measured by gross receipts, the gross receipts included in the taxable measure shall be only those gross receipts attributed to the exercise of a licensable privilege at a definite place of business within this jurisdiction. In the case of activities conducted outside of a definite place of business, such as during a visit to a customer location, the gross receipts shall be attributed to the definite place of business from which such activities are initiated, directed, or controlled. The situs of gross receipts for different classifications of business shall be attributed to one or more definite places of business or offices as follows: 
(1)  The gross receipts of a contractor shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which his services are performed, or if his services are not performed at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which his services are directed or controlled, unless the contractor is subject to state law on local licensing. 
State Law reference- No contractor's license required except where principal office located, exceptions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3715. 
(2)  The gross receipts of a retailer or wholesaler shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which sales solicitation activities occur, or if sales solicitation activities do not occur at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which sales solicitation activities are directed or controlled. 
(3)  The gross receipts of a business renting tangible personal property shall be attributed to the definite place of business from which the tangible personal property is rented or, if the property is not rented from any definite place of business, then the definite place of business at which the rental of such property is managed. 
(4)  The gross receipts from the performance of personal services shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which the services are performed or, if not performed at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which the services are directed or controlled. 
(b)  Apportionment. If the licensee has more than one definite place of business and it is impractical or impossible to determine to which definite place of business gross receipts should be attributed under the general rule, except as to a business in more than one jurisdiction, the gross receipts of the business shall be apportioned between the definite places of businesses on the basis of payroll. Gross receipts shall not be apportioned to a definite place of business unless some activities under the applicable general rule occurred at, or were controlled from, such definite place of business. Gross receipts attributable to a definite place of business in another jurisdiction shall not be attributed to this jurisdiction if the other jurisdiction does not impose a tax on the gross receipts attributable to the definite place of business in such other jurisdiction. 
State Law reference- Business located in more than one jurisdiction, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3709. 
(c)  Agreements. The assessor may enter into agreements with any other political subdivision of the state concerning the manner in which gross receipts shall be apportioned among definite places of business. However, the sum of the gross receipts apportioned by the agreement shall not exceed the total gross receipts attributable to all of the definite places of business affected by the agreement. If the assessing official is notified or becomes aware that its method of attributing gross receipts is fundamentally inconsistent with the method of one or more political subdivisions in which the taxpayer is licensed to engage in business and that the difference has, or is likely to, result in taxes on more than 100 percent of its gross receipts from all locations in the affected jurisdictions, the assessor shall make a good faith effort to reach an apportionment agreement with the other political subdivisions involved. 
(d)  Limitations, extensions, appeals and rulings. The enforcement of the provisions of this article including limitations with respect thereto, the correction of any assessment hereunder and any appeal by this jurisdiction of a correction made by its assessing official or by any person assessed with taxes hereunder and aggrieved by such assessment shall be pursuant to state law; provided, however: 
State Law reference- Enforcement collection, refund, remedies and review of local taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3900 et seq. 
(1)  Any person assessed with a licensing tax under this article as the result of an audit may, within the period provided by law, apply to the assessing official for a correction of the assessment. The application must be filed in good faith and sufficiently identify the taxpayer, audit period, remedy sought, each alleged error in the assessment, the grounds upon which the taxpayer relies, and any other facts relevant to the taxpayer's contention. The assessor may hold a conference with the taxpayer, if requested by the taxpayer, or require submission of additional information and documents, further audit, and request other evidence deemed necessary for a proper and equitable determination of the applications. The assessment shall be deemed prima facie correct. The assessor shall undertake a full review of the taxpayer's claims and issue a determination to the taxpayer setting forth its position. Every assessment pursuant to an audit shall be accompanied by a written explanation of the taxpayer's right to seek correction and the specific procedure to be followed in the jurisdiction (e.g., the name and address to which an application should be directed). 
State Law reference- Application to commissioner of the revenue or other official for correction of assessment, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3980. 
(2)  Provided an application is made within 90 days of an assessment, collection activity shall be suspended until 30 days after the final determination is issued by the assessor, unless the assessor determines that collection would be jeopardized by delay or that the taxpayer has not responded to a request for relevant information after a reasonable time. Interest shall accrue in accordance with the provisions of section 18-48(g), but no further penalty shall be imposed while collection action is suspended. The term "jeopardized by delay" includes a finding that the application is frivolous, or that a taxpayer desires to:depart quickly from the locality, remove his property therefrom, conceal himself or his property therein, or do any other act tending to prejudice, or to render wholly or partially ineffectual, proceedings to collect the tax for the period in question. 
(3)  Any taxpayer may request a written ruling regarding the application of the tax to a specific situation from the assessor. Any person requesting such a ruling must provide all the relevant facts for the situation and may present a rationale for the basis of an interpretation of the law most favorable to the taxpayer. Any misrepresentation or change in the applicable law or the factual situation, as presented in the ruling request, shall invalidate any such ruling issued. A written ruling may be revoked or amended prospectively if: 
a.  There is a change in the law, a court decision; or 
b.  The assessor notifies the taxpayer of a change in the policy or interpretation upon which the ruling was based. However, any person who acts on a written ruling which later becomes invalid shall be deemed to have acted in good faith during the period in which such ruling was in effect. 
(e)  Recordkeeping and audits. Every person who is assessable with a license tax shall keep sufficient records to enable the assessor to verify the correctness of the tax paid for the license years assessable and to enable the assessor to ascertain what is the correct amount of tax that was assessable for each of those years. All such records, books of accounts and other information shall be open to inspection and examination by the assessor in order to allow the assessor to establish whether a particular receipt is directly attributable to the taxable privilege exercised within this jurisdiction. The assessor shall provide the taxpayer with the option to conduct the audit in the taxpayer's local business office, if the records are maintained there. If the records are maintained outside this jurisdiction, copies of the appropriate books and records shall be sent to the assessor's office upon demand. 
(Ord. No. 332-95, § 13-21.4, 12-19-95) 
Sec. 18-50. - Exclusions and deductions from gross receipts. 
(a)  General rule. Gross receipts for license tax purposes shall not include any amount not derived from the exercise of the licensed privilege to engage in a business or profession in the ordinary course of business or profession. 
(b)  Enumeration. The following items shall be excluded from gross receipts: 
(1)  Amounts received and paid to the United States, the commonwealth or any county, city or town for the state retail sales or use tax, or for any local sales tax or any local excise tax on cigarettes or for any federal or state excise taxes on motor fuels. 
(2)  Any amount representing the liquidation of a debt or conversion of another asset to the extent that the amount is attributable to a transaction previously taxed (e.g., the factoring of accounts receivable created by sales which have been included in taxable receipts even though the creation of such debt and factoring are a regular part of its business). 
(3)  Any amount representing returns and allowances granted by the business to its customer. 
(4)  Receipts which are the proceeds of a loan transaction in which the licensee is the obligor. 
(5)  Receipts representing the return of principal of a loan transaction in which the licensee is the creditor, or the return of principal or basis upon the sale of a capital asset. 
(6)  Rebates and discounts taken or received on account of purchases by the licensee. A rebate or other incentive offered to induce the recipient to purchase certain goods or services from a person other than the offeror, and which the recipient assigns to the licensee in consideration of the sale of goods and services shall not be considered a rebate or discount to the licensee, but shall be included in the licensee's gross receipts, together with any handling or other fees related to the incentive. 
(7)  Withdrawals from inventory for which no consideration is received and the occasional sale or exchange of assets other than inventory, whether or not a gain or loss is recognized for federal income tax purposes. 
(8)  Investment income not directly related to the privilege exercised by a licensable business not classified as rendering financial services. This exclusion shall apply to interest on bank accounts of the business, and to interest, dividends and other income derived from the investment of its own funds in securities and other types of investments unrelated to the licensed privilege. This exclusion shall not apply to interest, late fees and similar income attributable to an installment sale or other transaction that occurred in the regular course of business. 
(Ord. No. 332-95, § 13-21.5, 12-19-95) 
Sec. 18-51. - Rates of license taxes. 
    Except as may be specifically otherwise provided by ordinance or other law, the annual license tax imposed under this article shall be $30.00, or the rate set forth in this section for the class of enterprise listed, whichever is greater. 
(1)  For contractors and persons constructing for their own account for sale, $0.16 per $100.00 of gross receipts; 
(2)  For retailers, $0.20 per $100.00 of gross receipts; 
(3)  For financial, real estate and professional services, $0.58 per $100.00 of gross receipts; 
(4)  For personal and business services and all other businesses and occupations not specifically listed or exempted in this article or otherwise by law, $0.36 per $100.00 of gross receipts; repair services, $0.36 per $100.00 of gross receipts; 
(5)  For wholesalers, $0.50 per $100.00 of gross purchases; 
(6)  For carnivals, speedways, circuses, animal shows, or wildwest shows, $1,000.00 for each performance held in this jurisdiction; every person, firm, company or corporation which exhibits or gives a performance or exhibition of any of the shows, carnivals, or circuses, as described in this section, without the license required shall be fined $500.00 for each offense; 
(7)  For fortunetellers, clairvoyants and practitioners of palmistry, $1,000.00 per year; 
(8)  For massage parlors, $1,500.00 per year; 
(9)  For itinerant merchants or peddlers, $500.00 per year; except the following shall apply to itinerant food merchants: 
a.  Each person or group of people operating as an itinerant food merchant shall provide to the commissioner of revenue a copy of a legal agreement between said merchant and the property owner of the property on which the merchant shall conduct his itinerant food vending business. Said property shall meet all applicable zoning requirements as set forth in this Code for the conduct of such business. 
b.  Each itinerant food merchant shall not move the location of his itinerant food business without first notifying the commissioner of revenue of such move and providing the commissioner with the agreement required in subsection (9)(a) above. 
c.  Each itinerant food merchant shall have the appropriate permit(s) from the Virginia Department of Health. 
d.  Each itinerant food merchant shall pay the licenses taxes as set forth in subsection (2) and shall collect all applicable meals taxes and remit the same to the commissioner of revenue; 
(10)  For dealers in precious metals, $0.20 per $100.00 gross receipts; 
(11)  For savings institutions or state-chartered credit unions where the main office of such savings institution or credit union is located within the corporate limits of the city, $50.00 per year; 
(12)  For direct sellers, as defined in state law, with total annual sales in excess of $4,000.00; $0.20 per $100.00 of total annual retail sales; for direct sellers engaged in wholesale sales, $0.05 per $100.00 of total annual sales. 
State Law reference- Counties, cities and towns may impose local license taxes and fees; limitation of authority Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3703; (for applicability, see editor's note) Limitation on rate of license taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3706; Wholesale merchants, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3716; Carnivals, circuses, speedways, penalties, certain restriction, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3728; Fortune-tellers, clairvoyants and practitioners of palmistry, § 58.1-3726; Peddlers, itinerant merchants, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3717; Savings institutions and credit unions, limitations, Code of Virginia, 58.1-3730; Direct sellers, rate limitation, Code of Virginia, 58.1-3719.1. 
(Ord. No. 332-95, § 13-21.6, 12-19-95; Ord. No. 02-27, § 1, 10-15-02; Ord. No. 05-23, § 1, 6-21-05; Ord. No. 05-30, § 1, 6-28-05; Ord. No. 05-38, § 1, 7-5-05) 
Sec. 18-52. - Effective date of article. 
    This article shall become effective on January 1, 1997. Until that date, sections 13-21.1-13-21.25 of the 1972 City Code, as amended, are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 332-95, 12-19-95) 
Secs. 18-53-18-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PRECIOUS METALS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Precious metals dealers, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4100 et seq.; local ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4111. 

Sec. 18-81. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Coin means any piece of gold, silver or other metal fashioned into a prescribed shape, weight and degree of fineness, stamped by authority of a government with certain marks and devices, and having a certain fixed value as money. 
    Dealer means any person, firm, partnership, or corporation engaged in the business of purchasing secondhand precious metals or gems; removing in any manner precious metals or gems from manufactured articles not then owned by the person, firm, partnership, or corporation; or buying, acquiring, or selling precious metals or gems removed from manufactured articles. The term "dealer" includes all employers and principals on whose behalf a purchase is made, and any employee or agent who makes any purchase for or on behalf of his employer or principal. The definition of "dealer" shall not include persons engaged in the following: 
(1)  Purchases of precious metals or gems directly from other dealers, manufacturers, or wholesalers for retail or wholesale inventories, provided that the selling dealer has complied with the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Purchases of precious metals or gems from a qualified fiduciary who is disposing of the assets of an estate being administered by the fiduciary. 
(3)  Acceptance by a retail merchant of trade-in merchandise previously sold by the retail merchant to the person presenting that merchandise for trade-in. 
(4)  Repairing, restoring or designing jewelry by a retail merchant, if such activities are within his normal course of business. 
(5)  Purchases of precious metals or gems by industrial refiners and manufacturers, insofar as such purchases are made directly from retail merchants, wholesalers, dealers, or by mail originating outside the commonwealth. 
(6)  Persons regularly engaged in the business of purchasing and processing nonprecious scrap metals which incidentally may contain traces of precious metals recoverable as a byproduct. 
    Gems means any item containing precious or semiprecious stones customarily used in jewelry. 
    Precious metals means any item except coins composed in whole or in part of gold, silver, platinum, or platinum alloys. 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4100. 
Sec. 18-82. - Records to be kept by dealer; copy furnished to local authorities. 
(a)  Every dealer shall keep at his place of business an accurate and legible record of each purchase of precious metals or gems. The record of each purchase shall be retained by the dealer for at least 24 months and shall set forth the following: 
(1)  A complete description of all precious metals or gems purchased from each seller. The description shall include all names, initials, serial numbers or other identifying marks or monograms on each item purchased, the true weight or carat of any gem, and the price paid for each item; 
(2)  The date, time and place of receiving the items purchased; 
(3)  The full name, residence address, work place, home and work telephone numbers, date of birth, sex, race, height, weight, hair and eye color, and other identifying marks; 
(4)  Verification of the identification by the exhibition of a government-issued identification card, such as a driver's license or military identification card, and the record shall contain the type of identification exhibited, the issuing agency, and the number thereon; and 
(5)  A statement of ownership from the seller. 
(b)  The information required by subsections (a)(1)-(a)(3) of this section shall appear on each bill of sale for all precious metals and gems purchased by a dealer, and a copy shall be mailed or delivered within 24 hours of the time of purchase to the chief law enforcement officer of the city. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4101. 
Sec. 18-83. - Officers may examine records or property; warrantless search and seizure authorized. 
    Every dealer or his employee shall admit to his place of business during regular business hours the chief law enforcement officer or his designee of the city or any law enforcement officer of the state or federal government. The dealer or his employee shall permit the officer to examine all records required by this article and any article listed in a record which is believed by the officer to be missing or stolen and search for and take into possession any article known to him to be missing, or known or believed by him to have been stolen. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4101.1. 
Sec. 18-84. - Credentials and statement of ownership required from seller. 
    No dealer shall purchase precious metals or gems without first ascertaining the identity of the seller by requiring an identification issued by a governmental agency with a photograph of the seller thereon, and at least one other corroborating means of identification, and obtaining a statement of ownership from the seller. The council may determine the contents of the statement of ownership. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4102. 
Sec. 18-85. - Prohibited purchases. 
(a)  No dealer shall purchase precious metals or gems from any seller who is under the age of 18 years. 
(b)  No dealer shall purchase precious metals or gems from any seller who the dealer believes or has reason to believe is not the owner of such items, unless the seller has written and duly authenticated authorization from the owner permitting and directing such sale. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4103. 
Sec. 18-86. - Dealer to retain purchases. 
(a)  The dealer shall retain all precious metals or gems purchased for a minimum of ten calendar days from the date on which a copy of the bill of sale is received by the chief law enforcement officer of the locality in which the purchase is made. Until the expiration of this period, the dealer shall not sell, alter, or dispose of a purchased item in whole or in part, or remove it from the county, city, or town in which the purchase was made. 
(b)  If a dealer performs the service of removing precious metals or gems, he shall retain the metals or gems removed and the article from which the removal was made for a period of ten calendar days after receiving such article and precious metals or gems. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4104. 
Sec. 18-87. - Record of disposition. 
    Each dealer shall maintain for at least 24 months an accurate and legible record of the name and address of the person to whom he sells any precious metal or gem in its original form after the waiting period required by section 18-86. This record shall also show the name and address of the seller from whom the dealer purchased the item. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4105. 
Sec. 18-88. - Bond or letter of credit required of dealers when permit obtained. 
(a)  Every dealer shall secure a permit as required by section 18-90, and each dealer at the time of obtaining such permit shall enter into a recognizance to the commonwealth secured by a corporate surety authorized to do business in this commonwealth, in the penal sum of $10,000.00, conditioned upon due observance of the terms of this article. In lieu of a bond, a dealer may cause to be issued by a bank authorized to do business in the commonwealth a letter of credit in favor of the commonwealth for $10,000.00. 
(b)  A single bond upon an employer or principal may be written or a single letter of credit issued to cover all employees and all transactions occurring at a single location. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4106. 
Sec. 18-89. - Private action on bond or letter of credit. 
    Any person aggrieved by the misconduct of any dealer which violated the provisions of this article may maintain an action for recovery in any court of proper jurisdiction against the dealer and his surety. Recovery against the surety shall be only for that amount of the judgment which is unsatisfied by the dealer. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4107. 
Sec. 18-90. - Permit required; method of obtaining permit; no convictions of certain crimes; approval of weighing devices; renewal; permanent location required. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the activities of a dealer as defined in section 18-81 without first obtaining a permit from the chief law enforcement officer of each county, city, or town in which he proposes to engage in business. 
(b)  To obtain a permit, the dealer shall file with the proper chief law enforcement officer an application form which includes the dealer's full name, any aliases, address, age, date of birth, sex, and fingerprints; the name, address, and telephone number of the applicant's employer, if any; and the location of the dealer's place of business. Upon filing this application and the payment of an application fee of $200.00, the dealer shall be issued a permit by the chief law enforcement officer or his designee, provided that the applicant has not been convicted of a felony or crime of moral turpitude within seven years prior to the date of application. The permit shall be denied if the applicant has been denied a permit or has had a permit revoked under this article or any ordinance similar in substance to the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Before a permit may be issued, the dealer must have all weighing devices used in his business inspected and approved by local or state weights and measures officials and present written evidence of such approval to the proper chief law enforcement officer. 
(d)  This permit shall be valid for one year from the date issued and may be renewed in the same manner as such permit was initially obtained with an annual permit fee of $200.00. No permit shall be transferable. 
(e)  If the business of the dealer is not operated without interruption, with Saturdays, Sundays, and recognized holidays excepted, the dealer shall notify the proper chief law enforcement officer of all closings and reopenings of such business. The business of a dealer shall be conducted only from the fixed and permanent location specified in his application for a permit. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4108. 
Sec. 18-91. - Exemptions from article. 
(a)  The chief law enforcement officer of the city, or his designee, may waive by written notice implementation of any one or more of the provisions of this chapter, except section 18-85, for particular numismatic, gem, or antique exhibitions or craft shows sponsored by nonprofit organizations, provided that the purpose of the exhibitions is nonprofit in nature, notwithstanding the fact that there may be casual purchases and trades made at such exhibitions. 
(b)  This article shall not apply to the sale or purchase of coins. 
(c)  This article shall not apply to any bank, branch thereof, trust company or bank holding company, or any wholly owned subsidiary thereof, engaged in buying and selling gold and silver bullion. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4109. 
Sec. 18-92. - Penalties for violation of article; first and subsequent offenses. 
(a)  Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor for the first offense. Upon conviction of any subsequent offense he shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Upon the first conviction of a dealer for violation of any provision of this article, the chief law enforcement officer may revoke the dealer's permit for one full year from the date the conviction becomes final. Such revocation shall be mandatory upon a second conviction. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4110. 
Secs. 18-93-18-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 18-116. - Prohibited acts; application of section. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or any other entity responsible for the operation of any establishment, regardless whether it is a public or private facility, to operate as a massage salon, bath parlor, or any similar type business, where any physical contact with the recipient of such services is provided by a person of the opposite sex. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, whether as an employee of a massage parlor, massage salon, bath parlor, an out-call massage service, or of any similar type business, or an individual, whether licensed under any section of this Code, to massage or rub the body of a person of the opposite sex. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, naturopath, physical therapist, or massage therapist duly licensed by the commonwealth, or to a licensed nurse acting under the direct prescription and direction of any such physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, or naturopath. Also, this section shall not apply to barbershops or beauty parlors in which massage is given to the scalp, the face, the neck or the shoulders. 
(Code 1972, § 14-225; Ord. No. 04-11, § 1, 3-16-04) 
Secs. 18-117-18-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TATTOO PARLORS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Sanitation in tattoo parlors, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-28.3. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-141. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Tattoo means to mark or color the skin by pricking in coloring matter so as to form indelible marks or figures or by the production of scars. 
    Tattoo artist means any person who actually performs the work of tattooing. 
    Tattoo operator means any person who controls, operates, conducts, or manages any tattoo establishment, whether actually performing the work of tattooing or not. 
    Tattoo parlor means any room or space where tattooing is practiced or where the business of tattooing is conducted or any part thereof. 
(Code 1972, § 14-400) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-142. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person who shall conduct a tattoo parlor or engage in business as a tattoo operator or tattoo artist without first securing a permit therefor, or when such permit previously issued has been revoked or suspended, or who shall violate any of the other provisions of this article shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. The director of public health shall revoke the permit of any person who shall be convicted once within a 24-month period of violating any of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1972, § 14-409; Ord. No. 08-08, 3-18-08) 
Sec. 18-143. - Physical examinations of and health requirements for tattoo artists. 
    Each tattoo artist shall have an annual physical examination reported on a form to be prescribed by the department of public health, which physical examination shall include an X-ray of the chest and such other laboratory tests as may be deemed necessary by the department of public health. A report of the physical examination and laboratory tests shall be presented with the application for each permit for a tattoo parlor or for any renewal thereof. No persons shall engage in tattooing as a tattoo artist while in the communicable state of any disease, including the common cold. 
(Code 1972, § 14-404) 
Sec. 18-144. - Records required to be kept by operators. 
    Proper records for each patron or customer shall be kept and maintained by the tattoo operator of each tattoo parlor, which record shall include the patron or customer's name, address, date, and signature of patron or customer. All records shall be available for inspection upon request of department of public health. 
(Code 1972, § 14-405) 
Sec. 18-145. - Minors. 
    No tattoo operator or tattoo artist shall tattoo any person who is under the age of 18 unless such person shall present to the tattoo operator or artist notarized consent to such tattooing from a parent or guardian of such person. In this event, the notarized consent shall be attached to and become a part of the records referred to in section 18-44. 
(Code 1972, § 14-406; Ord. No. 08-08, 3-18-08) 
Sec. 18-146. - Prohibited designs, words or phrases. 
    No tattoo operator or tattoo artist shall tattoo on any person any obscene word, phrase, or design. 
(Code 1972, § 14-407) 
State Law reference- "Obscene" defined, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-372. 
Sec. 18-147. - Removal of tattoo. 
    No tattoo operator or artist shall remove or attempt to remove any tattoo. 
(Code 1972, § 14-408) 
Sec. 18-148. - Required facilities for parlors. 
    Each tattooing parlor shall have an operating room, which operating room shall be separate and apart from a waiting room or such other rooms as may be used. Patrons or customers shall be tattooed only in such operating room. The operating room shall be equipped with hot and cold running water, together with such sinks and basins as may be necessary. Sufficient toilet, urinal, and handwashing facilities shall be accessible to customers, operators, and artists within the tattoo parlor or the building in which the tattoo parlor is located. 
(Code 1972, § 14-410) 
Sec. 18-149. - Personal cleanliness of tattoo artist; required equipment. 
    There shall be available within the tattoo parlor adequate hot and cold running water, soap, approved germicidal solution, individual hand brushes and fingernail files for each tattoo artist. Each tattoo artist shall clean his fingernails with an individual file, wash his hands with soap and hot water, using an individual hand brush, and thoroughly rinse his hands in a germicidal solution to be approved by the department of public health before working on each patron or customer. An individual paper towel or napkin shall be used for drying the tattoo artists' hands after rinsing. Each tattoo artist shall wear sterile rubber gloves and a clean gown or coat while actually engaged in tattooing. 
(Code 1972, § 14-411) 
Sec. 18-150. - Cabinets for storage of equipment. 
    Adequate cabinets for the storage of instruments, dyes, carbon, and stencils shall be provided for each operator and shall be maintained in a sanitary condition. 
(Code 1972, § 14-412) 
Sec. 18-151. - Floors; disposition of waste material. 
    The floor of tattoo parlors shall be of impervious material and shall be at all times maintained in a clean condition. The tattoo parlor shall have proper facilities for the disposition of waste material. 
(Code 1972, § 14-413) 
Sec. 18-152. - Ventilation; walls and ceilings. 
    Tattoo parlors must have adequate light and ventilation, and all walls and ceilings shall be painted a light color. 
(Code 1972, § 14-414) 
Sec. 18-153. - Instructions as to care of skin after tattooing. 
    Printed or mimeographed instructions, approved by the director of public health, shall be given to each patron or customer on the care of the skin after tattooing as a precaution to prevent infection after each tattooing. A copy of these instructions shall also be posted in a conspicuous place in the tattoo parlor, clearly visible to the person being tattooed. 
(Code 1972, § 14-415) 
Sec. 18-154. - Preparation of area to be tattooed. 
    When it is necessary to shave the area to be tattooed, a new blade for each patron shall be used when a safety razor is employed, and the permanent parts of such safety razor shall be treated as set forth in this section for the treatment of a straight razor. If a straight razor is used, it shall be cleansed with soap and water, rinsed in clean water, and then sterilized by being immersed for 15 minutes in an approved germicidal solution, or by boiling for a period of at least five minutes before the razor is used again on another person. After shaving the area to be tattooed, such area shall be cleaned with an approved germicidal solution in a sanitary manner before the design is placed on the skin. 
(Code 1972, § 14-416) 
Sec. 18-155. - Stencil for transferring design. 
    The stencil for transferring the design to the skin shall be thoroughly cleaned and rinsed in an approved germicidal solution. 
(Code 1972, § 14-417) 
Sec. 18-156. - Removal of excess dye; bandages. 
    The excess dye originally applied to the skin shall be removed with individual sterile gauze or sterile cotton only. The area tattooed shall then be allowed to dry and the entire area covered with a piece of sterile gauze only, which may in turn be covered with a piece of tissue and fastened with adhesive. 
(Code 1972, § 14-418) 
Sec. 18-157. - Needles. 
    A sterile set of needles must be used for each patron or customer. Needles used in tattooing shall be sterilized by being placed in boiling water for a period of at least five minutes, shaken dry, and if not immediately used, stored in sterile containers. The open end of the needle tube of the tattooing machine shall be cleaned and sterilized in a similar manner before each use. 
(Code 1972, § 14-419) 
Sec. 18-158. - Sterilizing device required. 
    Each tattoo parlor shall be equipped with a sterilizing device to be approved by the director of public health. 
(Code 1972, § 14-420) 
Secs. 18-159-18-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 18-176. - Application; inspections. 
    No person shall operate a tattoo parlor, or engage in the practice or business of tattooing as a tattoo operator or as a tattoo artist, unless such person shall first secure a permit from the director of public health or his duly authorized assistant. Applications for any such permit shall be made in writing on a form prescribed by the director of public health, wherein the applicant shall agree to conform to all ordinances, rules, and regulations governing such places now in effect or as subsequently enacted, and to permit such examination and inspections as may be deemed necessary by the director of public health. Before such permit is granted, it shall be the duty of the health officer to cause an inspection to be made of the premises or tattoo parlor in which the business is to be conducted and to refuse the permit if the condition of the premises, its equipment, or the health of the applicant shall not conform to the requirements of this article, but if the same do conform to the requirements of this article, the director of public health shall issue the permit requested. It shall be the further duty of the health officer to cause inspections to be made from time to time of all tattoo parlors and the equipment thereof, and if the place of business is not maintained, conducted or operated in conformity with the requirements of this article, as now enacted or as subsequently amended, then the director of public health may suspend the permit of the operator or artist until the tattoo parlor and the operation thereof is made to conform to the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1972, § 14-401) 
Sec. 18-177. - Term; renewal. 
    All permits issued pursuant to this article shall, unless sooner revoked, expire on December 31 following their date of issue. Applications for the renewal of permits shall be made on or before December 1 following their date of issue and the requirements for the renewal thereof shall be the same as for new permits, as set 
(Code 1972, § 14-402; Ord. No. 08-08, 3-18-08) 
Sec. 18-178. - Form and transfer. 
    All permits granted shall be issued in the name of the individual person applying therefor, shall give the location of the tattoo parlor where the applicant will operate and shall not be transferable. 
(Code 1972, § 14-403) 
Secs. 18-179-18-205. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - GOING-OUT-OF-BUSINESS SALES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-206. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to trustees selling under deeds of assignment; to sheriffs, constables or other public or court officers or any person acting under the license, direction or authority of any court, state or federal, selling goods, wares or merchandise in the course of official duties; to a merchant who has been conducting a business in the city continuously for at least one year immediately prior thereto under an ordinary merchant's license, and who is closing out his stock of goods, wares and merchandise and advertises as such; or to a merchant whose stock of goods, wares and merchandise has been damaged by fire, smoke, water or otherwise and the merchant advertises as such. 
(Code 1972, § 14-138) 
Secs. 18-207-18-225. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 18-226. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise or conduct a sale for the purpose of discontinuing a retail business, or to modify the word "sale" in any advertisement with the words "going-out-of-business" or any other words which tend to insinuate that the retail business is to be discontinued and the merchandise liquidated unless such person obtains a permit to conduct such sale from the city manager. 
(Code 1972, § 14-131) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-223. 
Sec. 18-227. - Application; filing; inventory; issuance. 
(a)  Any person desiring a permit as required by this article shall make to the city manager an application. 
(b)  All applications for special sale permits shall be accompanied by an inventory, including the kind and quantity of all goods which are to be offered for sale during the sale and only the goods specified in the inventory list may be advertised or sold during the sale period. Goods not included on the inventory of special sale goods shall not be commingled with or added to the special sale goods. The city shall have the right to revoke a special sale permit upon proof that goods not appearing on the original inventory of special sale goods have been commingled with or added to the special sale goods. 
(c)  Each special sale permit shall be valid for a period of no longer than 60 days, and any extension of that time shall constitute a new special sale and shall require an additional permit and inventory. A maximum of one permit beyond the initial 60-day permit may be granted solely for the purpose of liquidating only those goods contained in the initial inventory list which remain unsold. 
(d)  Any person who advertises such sale shall conspicuously include in the advertisement the permit number assigned for the sale by the city and the effective dates of the sale as authorized in the permit. 
(Code 1972, § 14-132) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-224. 
Sec. 18-228. - Fees. 
    The applicant for a permit as required in this article shall pay a fee therefor of $15.00 per permit. 
(Code 1972, § 14-133) 
State Law reference- Permit fee, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-224. 
Secs. 18-229-18-245. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - YARD SALES 

Sec. 18-246. - Permit required. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, it shall be unlawful for any person to offer for sale any items of tangible property at sales, commonly known as "yard, garage, rummage, or backyard sales," whereby such sale is conducted on property on which is located a "dwelling" as defined in this Code, without first paying a fee of $5.00 to obtain a permit for the privilege of conducting such a sale. Such permit shall be issued by the city manager's office upon proper application at least 24 hours in advance of such sale. No more than four permits for one day each shall be issued per dwelling in any 12-month period, and no sale shall be held on Sunday. No permit shall be issued except upon sworn statement or affidavit of the applicant that only secondhand or used items owned by the applicant shall be offered for sale. Any person offering for sale such items without a permit, or who have been found guilty of giving a false statement of affidavit in order to obtain a permit, shall be subject to a fine as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1972, § 14-77; Ord. No. 05-50, § 1, 8-16-05; Ord. No. 05-62, § 1, 11-15-05) 
Sec. 18-247. - Charitable, civic, religious and nonprofit organizations; permit required. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, it shall be unlawful for any charitable, civic, religious, or nonprofit organization to offer for sale any items of tangible property at sales, commonly known as "yard, rummage, garage, or backyard sales," without first obtaining a permit for the privilege of conducting such a sale. Such permit shall be issued by the city manager's office upon proper application at least seven days in advance of such sale. No more than four such permits for one day each shall be issued per organization in any 12-month period. Any organization found guilty of giving a false statement in order to obtain a permit shall be subject to a fine as provided by section 1-11. 
(Code 1972, § 14-78) 
Chapter 22 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18; planning, ch. 54; subdivisions, ch. 66; zoning, ch. 90. 
State Law reference- Open-Space Land Act, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1700 et seq.; promoting resources and advantages of city, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-10; Industrial Development and Revenue Bond Act, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-1373 et seq.; Housing Authorities Law, Code of Virginia, § 36-1 et seq.; Virginia Housing Development Authority Act, Code of Virginia, § 36-55.24 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1-22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 15-32, adopted Sept. 1, 2015, changed the title of Art. II from "Industrial Development Authority" to read as set out herein. 

Sec. 22-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    The authority means the Economic Development Authority of the City of Emporia, Virginia. 
(Code 1972, § 2-146; Ord. No. 15-32, 9-1-15) 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 15.2-4902, Definitions. 
Sec. 22-32. - Created. 
(a)  There is hereby created a political subdivision of the commonwealth with such public and corporate powers as are set forth in the Industrial Development and Revenue Bond Act, including such powers as may be set forth from time to time in the state law. 
(b)  The name of the political subdivision created hereby shall be the Economic Development Authority of the City of Emporia, Virginia. 
(Code 1972, § 2-146; Ord. No. 15-32, 9-1-15) 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, ch. 49, Industrial Development and Revenue Bond Act, §15.2-4903, Creation of industrial development authorities. 
Sec. 22-33. - Governed by board of directors; composition of board; appointment and terms of members. 
(b)  Appointments of the directors shall be for terms of four years, except appointments to fill vacancies which shall be for the unexpired terms. All terms of office shall be deemed to commence upon the date of the initial appointment to the authority. 
(c)  Each director shall, before entering upon his or her duties, take and subscribe the oath prescribed by state law and shall serve until their successors are appointed and qualified. 
(d)  No director shall be an officer or employee of the City of Emporia. Virginia. Every director shall, at the time of his or her appointment and thereafter, be a resident of Emporia or Greensville County. When a director ceases to be a resident of Emporia or Greensville County, the director's office shall be vacant and a new director may be appointed for the remainder of the term. 
(Code 1972, § 2-147; Ord. No. 15-32, 9-1-15) 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 15.2-4904, Directors; qualifications; terms; vacancies; compensation and expenses; quorum; records; certification and distribution of report concerning bond issuance. 
Chapter 26 - COURTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Judicial provisions, § 33 et seq. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Criminal and traffic jurisdiction of general district courts, Code of Virginia, § 16.1-123.1; criminal jurisdiction of juvenile and domestic relations district courts, Code of Virginia, § 16.1-278.14. 

Sec. 26-1. - General district court. 
(a)  Established. There is established for the city a court which shall be known as the general district court. 
(b)  Jurisdiction. The general district judge shall have exclusive original jurisdiction to hear and determine all cases involving city ordinances, and all civil and criminal jurisdiction conferred on general district courts and courts not of record by the Charter and general law. 
(Code 1972, §§ 2-86, 2-87) 
Sec. 26-2. - Juvenile and domestic relations district court. 
(a)  Established. There is established a juvenile and domestic relations district court for the city. 
(b)  Jurisdiction. The juvenile and domestic relations district court of the city shall have the jurisdiction as set forth in state law governing the jurisdiction of such courts. 
(Code 1972, §§ 2-88, 2-89) 
State Law reference- Jurisdiction, Code of Virginia, § 16.1-241. 
Sec. 26-3. - Judges. 
(a)  Qualifications generally. The person appointed as general district judge for the city and the person appointed as judge of the juvenile and domestic relations district court of the city shall be a member of the state bar and a resident of the commonwealth. 
(b)  Qualifications as required by law. The general district judge and the judge of the juvenile and domestic relations district court shall qualify as such as required by law before entering into their duties. 
(Code 1972, §§ 2-90, 2-91) 
Sec. 26-4. - Assessment for local law library. 
(a)  Specified. There is hereby assessed the sum of $2.00 as a part of the costs incident to each civil action filed in the courts located within the boundaries of the city. 
(b)  Collection. Such assessment shall be collected by the clerk of the court in which the action is filed and remitted to the treasurer of the city, and held by such treasurer, subject to periodic disbursements per order of the circuit court to trustees appointed by order of the circuit court for the purposes set forth in state law. 
(c)  Location and regulation of library. The clerk of the county circuit court along with the trustees appointed by the order of the circuit court shall keep the law library in the county courthouse according to the provisions of state law and pursuant to rules and regulations as may be established by order of the circuit court. 
(Code 1972, § 1-8.1; Ord. No. 317-94, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 318-94, 9-6-94) 
State Law reference- Local law libraries in charge of circuit court clerks, Code of Virginia, § 42.1-65; assessment for law library as part of costs in civil actions, Code of Virginia, § 42.1-70. 
Sec. 26-5. - Assessment for courthouse construction, renovation or maintenance. 
(a)  Specified. There is hereby assessed the sum of $2.00 as a part of the fees taxed as costs in each civil, criminal and traffic case filed in the city general district and each case filed in the city juvenile and domestic relations court, and all cases arising out of the city filed in the county circuit court. 
(b)  Collection. The assessment described in subsection (a) of this section shall be collected by the clerk of the court in which the action is filed and remitted to the treasurer of the city and held by such treasurer subject to disbursements by the council for the construction, renovation or maintenance of a courthouse or jail and court-related facilities and to defray increases in the cost of heating, cooling, electricity and ordinary maintenance. The assessment provided for in this section shall be in addition to any other fees prescribed by law. 
(Code 1972, § 1-8.2; Ord. No. 316-94, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 319-94, 9-6-94) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 14.1-133.2. 
Sec. 26-6. - Payment of fines and costs. 
    If any person does not pay a fine or costs imposed for violation of a city ordinance, the court shall follow the procedures established by law. 
(Code 1972, § 1-9) 
State Law reference- Payment of fines and costs on installment basis, etc., Code of Virginia, § 19.2-354 et seq. 
Sec. 26-7. - Assessment for courtroom security fee. 
    There is hereby assessed a fee of $10.00 as part of the cost in each criminal or traffic case in the city general district or circuit court in which the defendant is convicted of a violation of any statute or ordinance. The assessment shall be collected by the clerk of the court in which the case is heard and remitted to the city treasurer, to be appropriated by the city council to the sheriff's office for the funding of courthouse security personnel. The assessment hereby imposed shall be in addition to any other fees prescribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 06-58, 6-19-07) 
Sec. 26-8. - Jail processing fee. 
    There is hereby assessed a processing fee of $25.00 on any individual admitted to the Southside Regional Jail following conviction. The fee shall be ordered as a part of court costs collected by the clerk of court and remitted to the city treasurer. The fees shall be appropriated by city council to the Southside Regional Jail to defray the costs of processing arrested persons. 
(Ord. No. 09-55.1, 9-15-09) 
State Law reference- Processing fee may be imposed on certain individuals, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1613.1. 
Sec. 26-9. - Assessment for electronic summons system. 
    There is hereby assessed an electronic summons system fee of $5.00 as part of the costs in each criminal or traffic case in the city general district or circuit court in which the defendant is charged with a violation of any statute or ordinance. The assessment shall be collected by the clerk of the court in which the action is filed, remitted to the city treasurer, and held by such treasurer subject to appropriation by the city council to a local law-enforcement agency solely to fund software, hardware, and associated equipment costs for the implementation and maintenance of an electronic summons system. 
(Ord. No. 15-30, 8-18-15) 
State Law reference- Additional assessment for electronic summons system. Code of Virginia, §17.1-279.1 
Chapter 30 - ELECTIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Elections, Code of Virginia, tit. 24.2; requirements for election districts, precincts and polling places, Code of Virginia, § 24.2-305 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1-30-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DISTRICTS, VOTING PRECINCTS AND POLLING PLACES 

Sec. 30-31. - Authority of article. 
    Pursuant to the requirements of Article VII, Section 5 of the Constitution of Virginia and authority contained in Sections 24.2-304.1 and 24.2-311 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, the election districts, voting precincts, and polling places for the City of Emporia are hereby created and established as set forth in this article. 
(Code 1972, § 6-21; Ord. No. 11-31, § 1, 12-6-11) 
State Constitution reference- Election of city governing bodies, art. VII, § 5. 
State Law reference- Composition of election districts and precincts, Code of Virginia, § 24.2-305; requirements for city precincts, Code of Virginia, § 24.2-307; requirements for polling places, Code of Virginia, § 24.2-310. 
Sec. 30-32. - Election districts. 
    The city shall be divided into seven election districts, whose boundaries shall be as follows: 
(1)  Election district 1: Starting at the entrance of Georgia-Pacific and Davis Street eastward to the corporate limits, then southward along the corporate limits which bears to the east, then bears to the south, then bears to the west to the Metcalf Branch, then southward across Meherrin River along Falling Run Creek, then westward along the corporate limits to Falling Run Road, then eastward to Brink Road, then from Brink Road northward along South Main Street to Adam Street, then eastward to Old Halifax Road, then northward to Lowground Road, then southeastward to the railroad tracks and along the railroad track northward to Greensville Avenue, then eastward along Greensville Avenue to Tillar Street, then southward to Grove Avenue, then eastward to a point approximately half way between South Oak Hill and Anchura Court, then northwest to the Meherrin River, then northward to Hicksford Avenue, then eastward to Center Street, then northward to High Street, then eastward to Lee Street, then northward to Monroe Avenue, then eastward to Franklin Street , then northward to Madison Avenue, then eastward to Broad Street, then northward to East Atlantic Street, then eastward to the southern entrance of Georgia-Pacific then northward across Georgia-Pacific to Davis Street, the point of the beginning. 
(2)  Election district 2: Starting at the intersection of Market Drive and Route 58 Bypass eastward to Halifax Street, then southward to Parham Street, then along Parham Street to Bethune Square, then along Bethune Square to Evans Street, then southward to Turner Street, then westward to Halifax Street, then southward to the Norfolk Southern Railroad, then westward to the intersection of Norfolk Southern Railroad and East Atlantic Street, then westward to North Main Street, then southward to Little Street, then along Little Street to Carroll Street, then westward to Taylor Street, then southward to West End Boulevard, then westward to Suiter Street, then northward to Carroll Street, then eastward to Pennsylvania Avenue (paper street), then northward to a point behind the first row of houses that border Norfolk Southern Railroad toward Walker Street, then eastward on Walker Street to Smith Street, then northward to West Atlantic Street, then westward to Market Drive, then northward to the point of the beginning. 
(3)  Election district 3: Starting at the intersection of Norfolk Southern Railroad and Interstate 95 eastward, then southward along Suiter Street toward West End Boulevard, then eastward to Taylor Street, then northward to Carroll Street then eastward to Main Street, then southward to Valley Street, then eastward to Halifax, then southward to Virginia Avenue, then eastward to CSX Railward, then southward to Hicksford Avenue, then eastward to Tillar Street, then southward to Greensville Avenue, then westward to Clay Street, then southward to Briggs Street, then westward to South Main Street, then westward along Jefferson Street to Ingleside Avenue, then northward to Church Street then, westward to Ashby Street, then northward to Brunswick Avenue, then westward to West Avenue, then southward to Jefferson Street, then westward to Everett Street, then northward to Brunswick Avenue, then eastward to West York Drive, then northward to York Drive, then eastward to along East York Drive to Shady Lane, then westward to Interstate 95, then northward to the point of the beginning. 
(4)  Election district 4: Starting at the intersection of Church Street and Interstate 95 along the City limits northward, then eastward, to the intersection of North Main Street and the City limits, then southward to Halifax Street, then southward to Route 58, then westward to Market Drive, then southward to West Atlantic Street, then eastward to Smith Drive, then southward to Walker Street, then westward to Walker Street (paper street), then southward to the houses north of Railroad Avenue (not including houses on Railroad Avenue), then westward to Pennsylvania Avenue, then southward to Norfolk Southern Railroad, then eastward to Interstate 95, then southward to Norfolk Southern Railroad, then eastward to Interstate 95, then southward to Shady Lane, then eastward to East York Drive, then southward to West York Drive, then southward to Brunswick Avenue, then westward to Echols Street, then southward to Church Street, then westward to the point of the beginning. 
(5)  Election district 5: Starting where North Main Street intersects with the City limits, then eastward and southward along the City limits to the Norfolk Southern Railroad, then westward to the intersection of Norfolk Southern Railroad and Route 58, then southward to the Davis Street, then westward along Davis Street to Deal Street, then westward to Center Street, then southward to Southampton Street, then westward along Southampton and Valley to Main Street, then northward to Carroll Street, then westward, to Little Street, then eastward to Main Street, then northward to Atlantic Street, then eastward to Norfolk Southern Railroad, then eastward to Halifax Street, then northward to Turner Street, then eastward to Evans Street, then northward to Bethune Square, then along Bethune Square to the intersection of Parham Street, then along Parham Street to Halifax Street, then northward to North Main Street, then northward to the City limits to the point of the beginning. 
(6)  Election district 6: Starting at the intersection of Interstate 95 and Route 611, then eastward to Everett Street, then southward to Jefferson Street, then eastward to West Avenue, then northward to Brunswick Avenue, then eastward to Ashby Street, then southward to Church Street, then eastward to Ingleside Avenue, then southward to Jefferson Street, then eastward to CSX Railroad, then southward to Lowground Road, then westward to Old Halifax Road, then southward to Adam Street then westward to South Main Street, then southward to Brink Road, then westward to Falling Run Road, then westward to the City limits, then westward along the City limits to the point of the beginning. 
(7)  Election district 7: Starting at the intersection of Deal Street and Davis Street, then northward as Davis Street bends to the east, to northern entrance of Georgia-Pacific property, then southward across Georgia Pacific to the Atlantic Street entrance of Georgia-Pacific, then westward to Broad Street, then southward to Madison Avenue, then westward to Franklin Street, then southward to Monroe Street, then westward to Lee Street, then southward to High Street, then westward to Center Street, then southward to Hicksford Avenue, then westward to the Meherrin River, then southward to a point approximately half-way between South Oak Hill Drive and Anchura Court on Grove Avenue, then westward to Tillar Street, then northward to Hicksford Avenue, then westward to CSX Railroad, then northward to Park Avenue, then westward to Halifax Street, then northward to Southampton Street, then eastward to Center Street, then northward to Deal Street, then eastward to Davis Street, which is the point of the beginning. 
(Code 1972, § 6-22; Ord. No. 01-22, §§ 1, 2, 10-30-01; Ord. No. 11-31, § 2, 12-6-11) 
Sec. 30-33. - Candidates. 
    One member of city council shall be elected from each district. Candidates seeking election to the city council shall be residents of the district for which they qualify to run and shall be elected solely by the voters of that district. The mayor of the City of Emporia shall continue to be elected at-large by the voters of the entire city. 
(Code 1972, § 6-23; Ord. No. 01-22, § 3, 10-30-01; Ord. No. 11-31, § 3, 12-6-11) 
Sec. 30-34. - Terms. 
    At the regularly scheduled election in November of 2014, one member of city council shall be elected from each of election districts 1, 4, 5, and 7 to serve four-year terms ending December 31, 2018. At the regularly scheduled election in November of 2012, one member of city council shall be elected from each of election districts 2, 3, and 6 to serve four-year terms ending December 31, 2016. 
(Code 1972, § 6-24; Ord. No. 01-22, § 4, 10-30-01; Ord. No. 11-31, § 4, 12-6-11) 
Sec. 30-35. - Voting precincts. 
    There shall be one voting precinct for each election district in the City of Emporia, and the boundaries of the election districts shall constitute the boundaries of the voting precincts of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 6-25; Ord. No. 01-22, § 5, 10-30-01; Ord. No. 11-31, § 5, 12-6-11) 
Sec. 30-36. - Polling places. 
    The polling place for each voting precinct in the city shall be as follows: 
(1)  Election district 1, voting precinct 1-1; Greensville Volunteer Rescue Squad Building, 513 South Main Street. 
(2)  Election district 2, voting precinct 2-1: Royal Baptist Church, 106 West Atlantic Street. 
(3)  Election district 3, voting precinct 3-1: Emporia Municipal Building, 201 South Main Street. 
(4)  Election district 4, voting precinct 4-1: Greensville County High School, 309 Harding Street. 
(5)  Election district 5, voting precinct 5-1: Emporia Volunteer Fire Department Building, 209 Halifax Street. 
(6)  Election district 6, voting precinct 6-1: Greensville County High School, 309 Harding Street. 
(7)  Election district 7, voting precinct 7-1: Emporia Volunteer Fire Department Building, 209 Halifax Street. 
(Code 1972, § 6-26; Ord. No. 01-22, § 6, 10-30-01; Ord. No. 11-31, § 6, 12-6-11; Ord. No. 15-24, 7-21-15) 
Sec. 30-37. - Central absentee precinct. 
    There is hereby established a permanent central absentee precinct in the City of Emporia. The central absentee precinct shall be located at 201 S. Main Street, Emporia, Virginia 23847 for the purpose of receiving, counting, and recording absentee ballots for all elections conducted in the city. 
(Ord. No. 17-13, 6-6-17) 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 24.2-712. 
Chapter 34 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Amusements and entertainments, ch. 6; animals, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; fire prevention and protection, ch. 38; health and sanitation, ch. 42; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 50; abandoned motor vehicles, § 74-221 et seq.; utilities, ch. 78; vegetation, ch. 82; zoning, ch. 90. 
State Law reference- Erosion and sediment control, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-560 et seq.; stormwater management, Code of Virginia, §§ 10.1-603.3, 15.1-292.4; local air pollution ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1321; municipal abatement of nuisances, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-14(5); action for abatement of nuisance or the costs thereof, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-29.21; drainage, condemnation for drainage systems, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-283; extraterritorial powers in prevention of water pollution, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-292; contracts relating to prevention of water pollution, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-318; municipal power to have nuisances removed, collection of costs, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-867; nuisances generally, Code of Virginia, tit. 48. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1-34-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NOISE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 09-53, adopted Aug. 18, 2009, repealed Art. II, §§ 34-31-34-60, and enacted a new Art. II, §§ 34-31-34-41, to read as set out herein. Former Art. II, §§ 34-31-34-60, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1972, §§ 14-151-14-157. 
State Law reference- Motorcycle noise, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-29.12; use of air cannons, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-29.13. 

Sec. 34-31. - Declaration of findings and policy. 
    City council hereby finds and declares that excessive sound is a serious hazard to the public health, welfare, peace and safety and the quality of life; that a substantial body of science and technology exists by which excessive sound may be substantially abated; that the people have a right to and should be ensured an environment free from excessive sound that may jeopardize the public health, welfare, peace and safety or degrade the quality of life; and that it is the policy of the city to prevent such excessive sound. 
(Ord. No. 09-53, 8-18-09) 
Sec. 34-32. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    A-weighted sound level means the sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level so read is designated dB(A) or dBA. 
    Background noise level shall mean the aggregate of all sound sources impacting at the place where a specific sound generation is measured or evaluated, excluding the specific sound generation itself. 
    Decibel (dB) means a unit for measuring the volume of a sound, equal to 20 times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals (20 micronewtons per square meter). 
    Emergency means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical injury or illness or property damage that requires immediate action. 
    Emergency work means any work performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating the physical injury or illness or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency. 
    Gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) means the value specified by the manufacturer as the recommended maximum loaded weight of a single motor vehicle. In cases where trailers and tractors are separable, the gross combination weight rating (GCWR), which is the value specified by the manufacturer as the recommended maximum loaded weight of the combination vehicle, shall be used. 
    Instrument, machine or device means and refers to any musical instrument, radio, phonograph, compact disc player, cassette tape player, amplifier or any other machine or device for producing, reproducing or amplification of sound. 
    Motor carrier vehicle engaged in interstate commerce means any vehicle for which regulations apply pursuant to section 18 of the Federal Noise Control Act of 1972 (P.L. 92-574), as amended, pertaining to motor carriers engaged in interstate commerce. 
    Motorcycle means any motor vehicle designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground and any four-wheeled vehicle weighing less than 500 pounds and equipped with an engine of less than six horsepower, excepting farm tractors. 
    Motor vehicle means any self-propelled device or device designed for self-propulsion, upon or by which any person or property is or may be drawn or transported upon a street or highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary wheels or tracks. 
    Noise means any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans. 
    Public area means any real property owned by the government, including, but not limited to, public rights-of-way, sidewalks, parks, and buildings. 
    Residential dwelling means any building or other structure in which one or more persons resides on a permanent or temporary basis, including, but not limited to, houses, apartments, condominiums, hotels, and motels. 
    Restaurant means any building or structure where in the normal course of business food or drink is available for eating on the premises, in consideration for payment. For purposes of this chapter, the term restaurant includes, but is not limited to, bars, lounges, taverns, coffee shops and cafes. 
    Sound means an oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces that causes compression and rarefaction of that medium. The description of sound may include any characteristic of such sound, including duration, intensity and frequency. 
    Sound generation means any conduct, activity or operation, whether human, mechanical, electronic or other, and whether continuous, intermittent or sporadic, and whether stationary or ambulatory in nature, which produces or results in an audible sound. 
    Sound level means the weighted sound pressure level obtained by the use of a sound level meter and the A-frequency weighting network, as specified in American National Standards Institute specifications for sound level meters. 
    Sound level meter means an instrument used to measure sound pressure levels. 
(Ord. No. 09-53, 8-18-09) 
Sec. 34-33. - Administration and enforcement. 
    The police department shall be responsible for enforcement of the noise control program established by this article and may be assisted by other city departments as required. 
(Ord. No. 09-53, 8-18-09) 
Sec. 34-34. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be deemed to be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor for a first offense. Any person who violates a provision of this article within one year after a previous conviction under this article shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
(b)  The person operating or controlling a noise source shall be guilty of any violation caused by that source. If said person cannot be determined, any owner, tenant, resident or manager physically present on the property where the violation is occurring is rebuttably presumed to be operating or controlling the noise source. 
(c)  In addition to and not in lieu of the penalties prescribed in this section, the city may apply to the circuit court for an injunction against the continuing violation of any of the provisions of this article and may seek any other remedy or relief authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 09-53, 8-18-09) 
Sec. 34-35. - Exceptions. 
    No provisions of this article shall apply to (1) the emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency; (2) the emission of sound in the performance of emergency work; (3) activities sponsored by the city; (4) activities authorized by a permit issued by the city; or (5) activities for which the regulation of noise has been preempted by federal law. 
(Ord. No. 09-53, 8-18-09) 
Sec. 34-36. - Use of sound level meters. 
    The decibel level of any noise regulated by this article shall be measured by a sound level meter. In order to implement and enforce this article effectively, the chief of police shall promulgate standards and procedures for using and testing sound level meters used in the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 09-53, 8-18-09) 
Sec. 34-37. - Maximum sound levels and residential dwellings. 
(a)  Nighttime. No person shall permit, operate or cause any source of sound to create a sound level that can be heard in another person's residential dwelling during the hours between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in excess of 55 dBA when measured inside the residence at least four feet from the wall nearest the source, with doors to the receiving area closed and windows in the normal position for the season. 
(b)  Daytime. No person shall permit, operate or cause any source of sound to create a sound level in another person's residential dwelling during the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. in excess of 65 dBA when measured inside the residence at least four feet from the wall nearest the source, with doors to the receiving area closed and windows in the normal position for the season. 
(c)  Measurements in multifamily dwellings or mixed use structures. In a structure used as a multifamily dwelling or a mixed use structure, the police department may take measurements to determine sound levels from common areas within or outside the structure or from other dwelling units within the structure, when requested to do so by the residential occupant in possession and control thereof. Such measurement shall be taken at a point at least four feet from the wall, ceiling or floor nearest the noise source, with doors to the receiving area closed and windows in the normal position for the season. 
(d)  Exemptions. The following activities or sources of noise shall be exempt from the daytime prohibition set forth in subsection (b) of this section: 
(1)  Band performances or practices, athletic contests or practices and other school-sponsored activities on the grounds of public or private schools, colleges, or universities. 
(2)  Athletic contests and other officially sanctioned activities in city parks or facilities. 
(3)  Activities related to the construction, repair, maintenance, remodeling or demolition, grading or other improvement of real property. 
(4)  Gardening, lawn care, tree maintenance or removal, and other landscaping activities. 
(5)  Agricultural activities. 
(6)  Church bells, carillons, or calls to worship by other sound-producing devices. 
(7)  Religious or political gatherings to the extent that those activities are protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. 
(8)  Public transportation, refuse collection and sanitation services. 
(Ord. No. 09-53, 8-18-09) 
Sec. 34-38. - Motor vehicle maximum sound levels; amplified sound from vehicles. 
(a)  No person shall operate or cause to be operated a public or private motor vehicle or motorcycle on a public right-of-way at any time in such a manner that the sound level emitted by the motor vehicle or motorcycle, when measured at a distance of 50 feet or more, exceeds the level set forth in the following table: 
Sound level in dBA Vehicle Class Speed limit 35 MPH or less Speed limit over 35 MPH All motor vehicles of GVWR or GCWR of 6,000 lbs. or more 86 90 Any motorcycle 82 86 Any other motor vehicle or any combination of vehicles towed by any motor vehicle 76 82  
(b)  This section shall not apply to any motor carrier vehicle engaged in interstate commerce. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section or article, it shall be unlawful for any person to play or operate, or permit the playing, use or operation of, any radio, tape player, compact disc player, loud speaker or other electronic device used for the amplification of sound, which is located within a motor vehicle being operated or parked on public or private property within the city, including any public or private street or alley, in such a manner as to be audible to the human ear at a distance of 100 or more feet from the vehicle in which it is located. 
    The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to motor vehicles driven in a duly authorized parade, nor to motor vehicle alarms or other security devices, nor to the emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency or the emission of sound in the performance of emergency work. 
(Ord. No. 09-53, 8-18-09) 
Sec. 34-39. - Specific prohibitions. 
    The following acts are declared to be violations of this article. This enumeration shall not be construed to limit, in any way, the general prohibitions contained in section 23-69: 
(1)  Vehicle horns, signaling devices and similar devices. Sounding any horn, signaling device, or similar device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any right-of-way or in any public space continuously or intermittently for more than ten consecutive seconds, except when the sounding of any such device is intended as a danger warning. 
(2)  Non-emergency signaling devices. Sounding or permitting the sounding of any amplified signal continuously or intermittently from any bell, chime, siren, whistle or similar device intended primarily for non-emergency purposes from any one location for more than ten consecutive seconds in any hourly period; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to the sounding of such devices by religious uses or by public bodies or agencies for testing, traffic control or other public purposes. 
(3)  Emergency signaling devices, security, burglar and fire alarms, etc . Sounding or permitting the continuous or intermittent sounding outdoors of any emergency signaling device, or any security, burglar or fire alarm, siren, whistle, or similar device, including without limitation any motor vehicle security alarm, siren, whistle, or similar device, for a period in excess of ten minutes in any residential area and 15 minutes in any other area, except in response to a burglary, attempted burglary, fire, or other emergency. 
(4)  Audio and audio-visual devices, musical instruments, etc. The playing of any television, boombox, stereo, phonograph, radio, tape player, compact disc player, MP3 player, video player, musical instrument, drum, or any other device that produces, reproduces or amplifies sound, including any such device in a motor vehicle, where the sound is plainly audible to any person other than the players(s) or operator(s) of the device and those who are voluntarily listening to the sound and is plainly audible and discernable at a distance of 50 feet or more from the source of the sound; provided, however that the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any outdoor performance, parade, gathering, dance, concert, show, sporting event, or other event sponsored by the city or for which the city has granted a permit. 
(5)  Noise-sensitive areas. The making of any unreasonably loud and raucous noise within 200 feet of any school, place of worship, court, hospital, nursing home, or assisted-living facility while the same is being used as such, that interferes with the workings of the institution. 
(6)  Construction equipment. The operation of any bulldozer, crane, backhoe, front loader, pile driver, jackhammer, pneumatic drill, or other construction equipment between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. except when operated in the course of emergency work or as authorized by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 09-53, 8-18-09) 
Sec. 34-40. - Sound levels; restaurants. 
    No person shall permit, operate or cause any source of sound to create a sound level emanating from a restaurant during the hours between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. (1) in excess of 75 dB(A) when measured from any public area, including but not limited to adjacent streets or sidewalks; or (2) that is plainly audible and discernable at a distance of 50 feet from any of the restaurant's external walls when measured from any property other than the property on which the restaurant is located. 
(Ord. No. 09-53, 8-18-09) 
Secs. 34-41-34-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NUISANCES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Abatement of nuisances, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-14(5), 15.1-29.21, 15.1-867. 

Sec. 34-86. - General definition; determination; lot cleanliness. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article, every condition or activity in the city which is offensive, or prejudicial to the health or general welfare of the residents, shall be deemed to be a nuisance, and where not so specified by law or ordinance, the city manager shall have the power and authority to determine that an activity or condition constitutes a nuisance as defined in this section. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every occupant of any lot within the corporate limits of the city, or the owner, if the premises are unoccupied, to keep such lot well cleaned, free from all offensive and deleterious substances, and also to prevent or remove any accumulation of stagnant water on such lot and to keep the lot well drained, as far as possible, to prevent dampness. If there is any cellar on any such lot, such cellar shall be kept clean and free from all stagnant or standing water. If there are any low, flat or marshy places on such lot, the same shall be drained, either by open or blind ditches, by the occupant of such lot, or by the owner thereof if the premises are unoccupied. 
(c)  No occupant of any lot in the city shall cause or suffer any thing or condition on such lot occupied by him to become offensive or a nuisance. 
(Code 1972, § 14-41) 
Cross reference- Failure to connect to public sewer, § 78-166. 
Sec. 34-87. - Abatement-City manager's authority. 
    When the city manager shall declare any condition or activity in the city to be a nuisance, the city manager is vested with authority to require the abatement of such nuisance. When necessary, he shall cause to have instituted legal proceed- ings in the name of the city for the abatement of such nuisance and for the recovery of any expenses incurred by the city in abating the same. 
(Code 1972, § 14-42) 
Sec. 34-88. - Same-Notice. 
    Whenever a nuisance is found by the city manager to exist on any premises in the city, it shall be his duty to serve notice on the person who created the nuisance or, if such person cannot be ascertained, upon the occupant, to cause such nuisance to be abated within 48 hours, and that if he fails to do so, a summons will be issued against such person, occupant or owner, as the case may be, to appear in a court having jurisdiction to show cause why the nuisance should not be abated, and that the nuisance may be abated by the city at the expense of such person, occupant or owner, as the case may be. When such premises are unoccupied, such notice shall be served upon the owner thereof, if a resident of the city, and, if not, then upon the owner's agent in charge of the premises or upon the owner by publication as follows: If the owner of such unoccupied land or premises is not a resident of the city, and has no agent in the city upon whom such notice may be served, the notice required in this section shall be given by publication by posting in not less than two public places within the city, and a certified copy of the notice shall be mailed to nonresident owners at the last shown address on the tax records. The cost of such publication, if any, shall be collected as a part of the expense of effecting an abatement. 
(Code 1972, § 14-43) 
Sec. 34-89. - Procedure for abatement-Residents. 
    If a nuisance remains unabated after the expiration of the time specified in such notice, the city manager shall forthwith issue, or cause to be issued, a summons upon the person on whom the notice was served stating that the person has failed or refused to comply with the provisions of the notice, which summons shall be served on the defendant requiring the defendant to appear before the court to answer such summons at the time indicated in the summons. If, upon the hearing, the court shall order the nuisance abated, such court shall order the defendant to abate such nuisance within such period of time as it may specify. If the defendant shall fail or refuse to abate such nuisance in the time fixed by the court, he shall be punished as provided in section 1-11, and the city manager shall abate such nuisance in the most practical manner. The defendant shall be liable for the costs thereof. 
(Code 1972, § 14-44) 
Sec. 34-90. - Same-Nonresident owners. 
    If the owner of any unoccupied land or premises determined to be a nuisance under section 34-87 is not a resident of the city, and has no agent in the city upon whom summons may be served, the city manager shall forthwith file, in duplicate, a written petition in the name of the city with the court having jurisdiction, setting forth the determination of the city manager, the manner in which the notice required by section 34-88 has been served, the location of the nuisance and a statement that the person upon whom the notice was served has failed or refused to comply with the provisions of the notice. Such court shall issue a summons against the defendant named in the petition to show cause why such nuisance should not be abated, which summons and a copy of the petition shall be served on the defendant by posting it in two public places and mailing a copy of the notice to such person by certified mail at the last shown address on the tax records requiring the defendant to appear before the court to answer such summons and petition, at the time indicated in the summons. If, upon hearing, the court shall order the nuisance abated, such court shall order the defendant to abate such nuisance within such period of time as it may specify. If the defendant shall fail or refuse to abate such nuisance in the time fixed by the court, the city manager shall abate such nuisance in the most practical manner and the defendant shall be liable for all expenses incurred by the city. Such expenses shall be paid by the owner of the property and shall be collected by the city as taxes and levies are collected. 
(Code 1972, § 14-44.1) 
Secs. 34-91-34-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Erosion and sediment control, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-560. 

Sec. 34-116. - Title, purpose, and authority of article. 
    This article shall be known as the "Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance of the City of Emporia." The purpose of this article is to conserve the land, water, air and other natural resources of the city by establishing requirements for the control of erosion and sedimentation, and by establishing procedures whereby this article shall be administered and enforced. This article is authorized by state law. 
(Ord. No. 330-95, 12-5-95; Ord. No. 97-7, 7-15-97; Ord. No. 06-46, 5-1-07) 
State Law reference- Erosion and Sediment Control Law, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-560 et seq. 
Sec. 34-117. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Agreement in lieu of a plan means a contract between the plan-approving authority and the owner which specifies conservation measures which must be implemented in the construction of a single-family residence. This contract may be executed by the plan-approving authority in lieu of a formal site plan. 
    Applicant means any person submitting an erosion and sediment control plan for approval or requesting the issuance of a permit, when required, authorizing land disturbing activities to commence. 
    Board means the state soil and water conservation board. 
    Certified inspector means an employee or agent of a program authority who holds a certificate of competence from the board in the area of project inspection, or is enrolled in the board's training program for project inspection and successfully completes such program within one year after enrollment. 
    Certified plan reviewer means an employee or agent of a program authority who holds a certificate of competence from the board in the area of plan review, is enrolled in the board's training program for plan review and successfully completes such program within one year after enrollment, or is licensed as a professional engineer, architect, certified landscape architect or land surveyor pursuant to state law. 
State Law reference- Architects, engineers, surveyors and landscape architects, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-400 et seq. 
    Certified program administrator means an employee or agent of a program authority who holds a certificate of competence from the board in the area of program administration or is enrolled in the board's training program for program administration and successfully completes such program within one year after enrollment. 
    City means the City of Emporia. 
    Clearing means any activity which removes the vegetative ground cover including, but not limited to, root mat removal or topsoil removal. 
    Conservation plan, erosion and sediment control plan or plan means a document containing material for the conservation of soil and water resources of a unit or group of units of land. It may include appropriate maps, an appropriate soil and water plan inventory, and management information with needed interpretations and a record of decisions contributing to conservation treatment. The plan shall contain all major conservation decisions to ensure that the entire unit or units of land will be so treated to achieve the conservation objectives. 
    County means the County of Greensville. 
    Department means the department of conservation and recreation. 
    Development means a tract of land developed or to be developed as a single unit under single ownership or unified control which is to be used for any business or industrial purpose or is to contain three or more residential dwelling units. 
    Director means the director of the department. 
    District or soil and water conservation district means the J. R. Horsley Soil and Water Conservation District. 
    Erosion impact area means an area of land not associated with current land disturbing activity but subject to persistent soil erosion resulting in the delivery of sediment onto neighboring properties or into state waters. This definition shall not apply to any lot or parcel of land of 10,000 square feet or less used for residential purposes or to shorelines where the erosion results from wave action or other coastal processes. 
    Excavating means any digging, scooping or other methods of removing earth materials. 
    Filling means any depositing or stockpiling of earth materials. 
    Grading means any excavating or filling of earth material or any combination thereof, including the land in its excavated or filled conditions. 
    Land disturbing activity means any land change which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands in the commonwealth including, but not limited to, clearing, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, except that the term shall not include: 
(1)  Minor land disturbing activities such as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs and maintenance work; 
(2)  Individual service connections; 
(3)  Installation, maintenance, or repairs of any underground public utility lines when such activity occurs on an existing hard-surfaced road, street or sidewalk, provided such land disturbing activity is confined to the area of the road, street or sidewalk which is hard-surfaced; 
(4)  Septic tank lines or drainage fields unless included in an overall plan for land disturbing activity relating to construction of the building to be served by the septic tank system; 
(5)  Surface or deep mining; 
(6)  Exploration or drilling for oil and gas including the well site, roads, feeder lines, and off-site disposal areas; 
(7)  Tilling, planting, or harvesting of agricultural, horticultural, or forest crops, or livestock feedlot operations; including engineering operations as follows: construction of terraces, terrace outlets, check dams, desilting basins, dikes, ponds, ditches, strip cropping, lister furrowing, contour cultivating, contour furrowing, land drainage, and land irrigation; however, this exception shall not apply to harvesting of forest crops unless the area on which harvesting occurs is reforested artificially or naturally in accordance with the provisions of state law or is converted to bona fide agricultural or improved pasture use as described in state law; 
State Law reference- Forest resources and department of forestry, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1100 et seq.; exemptions from seed tree law, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1163(B). 
(8)  Repair or rebuilding of the tracts, rights-of-way, bridges, communication facilities and other related structures and facilities of a railroad company; 
(9)  Agricultural engineering operations including, but not limited to, the construction of terraces, terrace outlets, check dams, desilting basins, dikes, ponds not required to comply with state law, ditches, strip cropping, lister furrowing, contour cultivating, contour furrowing, land drainage, and land irrigation; 
State Law reference- Dam Safety Act, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-604 et seq. 
(10)  Disturbed land areas of less than 10,000 square feet in size; 
(11)  Installation of fences and signposts or telephone and electric poles and other kinds of posts or poles; 
(12)  Shore erosion control projects on tidal waters when the projects are approved by local wetlands boards, the Marine Resources Commission or the United States Army Corps of Engineers; and 
(13)  Emergency work to protect life, limb or property, and emergency repairs; provided, however, that if the land disturbing activity would have required an approved erosion and sediment control plan, if the activity were not an emergency, then the land area disturbed shall be shaped and stabilized in accordance with the requirements of the plan-approving authority. 
    Land disturbing permit means a permit issued by the administrator for the clearing, filling, excavating, grading, transporting of land or for any combination thereof or for any purpose set forth in this article. 
    Local erosion and sediment control program or program means an outline of the various methods employed by the city to regulate land disturbing activities and thereby minimize erosion and sedimentation in compliance with the state program and may include such items as local ordinances, policies and guidelines, technical materials, inspection, enforcement, and evaluation. 
    Natural channel design concepts means the utilization of engineering analysis and fluvial geomorphic processes to create, rehabilitate, restore, or stabilize an open conveyance system for the purpose of creating or recreating a stream that conveys its bankfull storm event within its banks and allows larger flows to access its bankfull bench and its floodplain. 
    Owner means the owner of the freehold of the premises or lesser estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of a property. 
    Peak flow rate means the maximum instantaneous flow from a given storm condition at a particular location. 
    Permittee means the person to whom the permit authorizing land disturbing activities is issued or the person who certifies that the approved erosion and sediment control plan will be followed. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, county, city, town or other political subdivision of the commonwealth, any interstate body, or any other legal entity. 
    Plan-approving authority means the zoning administrator responsible for determining the adequacy of a conservation plan submitted for land disturbing activities on units of lands and for approving plans. 
    Program authority means the city which has adopted a soil erosion and sediment control program approved by the board. 
    Runoff volume means the volume of water that runs off the land development project from a prescribed storm event. 
    Single-family residence means a noncommercial dwelling that is occupied exclusively by one family. 
    State erosion and sediment control program or state program means the program administered by the state soil and water conservation board pursuant to the state code, including regulations designed to minimize erosion and sedimentation. 
    State waters means all waters on the surface and under the ground wholly or partially within or bordering the commonwealth or within its jurisdictions. 
    Transporting means any moving of earth materials from one place to another place other than such movement incidental to grading, when such movement results in destroying the vegetative ground cover either by tracking or the buildup of earth materials to the extent that erosion and sedimentation will result from the soil or earth materials over which such transporting occurs. 
    Water quality volume means the volume equal to the first one-half inch of runoff multiplied by the impervious surface of the land development project. 
(Ord. No. 330-95, 12-5-95; Ord. No. 97-7, 7-15-97; Ord. No. 06-46, 5-1-07) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Definitions, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-560. 
Sec. 34-118. - Local erosion and sediment control program. 
(a)  Pursuant to state law, the city hereby adopts the regulations, references, guidelines, standards and specifications promulgated by the state soil and water conservation board for the effective control of soil erosion and sediment deposition to prevent the unreasonable degradation of properties, stream channels, waters and other natural resources. Such regulations, references, guidelines, standards and specifications for erosion and sediment control are included in, but not limited to, the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Regulations and the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, as amended from time to time. 
State Law reference- Local erosion and sediment control programs, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-562. 
(b)  Before adopting or revising regulations, the city shall give due notice and conduct a public hearing on the proposed or revised regulations, except that a public hearing shall not be required when the city is amending its program to conform to revisions in the state program. However, a public hearing shall be held if the city proposes or revises regulations that are more stringent than the state program. 
(c)  Pursuant to state law, an erosion control plan shall not be approved until it is reviewed by a certified plan reviewer. Inspections of land disturbing activities shall be conducted by a certified inspector. The erosion control program of the city shall contain a certified program administrator, a certified plan reviewer, and a certified inspector, who may be the same person. 
State Law reference- Certification of local program personnel, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-561.1. 
(d)  The city hereby designates the zoning administrator as the plan-approving authority. 
(e)  The program and regulations provided for in this article shall be made available for public inspection at the office of the zoning administrator. 
(f)  In accordance with the Code of Virginia § 10.1-561, stream restoration and relocation projects that incorporate natural channel design concepts are not manmade channels and shall be exempt from any flow rate capacity and velocity requirements for natural or manmade channels. 
(g)  In accordance with Code of Virginia, § 10.1-561, any land disturbing activity that provides for stormwater management intended to address any flow rate capacity and velocity requirements for natural or manmade channels shall satisfy the flow rate capacity and velocity requirements for natural or manmade channels if the practices are designed to (i) detain the water quality volume and to release it over 48 hours; (ii) detain and release over a 24-hour period the expected rainfall resulting from the one year, 24-hour storm; and (iii) reduce the allowable peak flow rate resulting from the 1.5, 2, and 10-year, 24-hour storms to a level that is less than or equal to the peak flow rate from the site assuming it was in a good forested condition, achieved through multiplication of the forested peak flow rate by a reduction factor that is equal to the runoff volume from the site in its proposed condition, and shall be exempt from any flow rate capacity and velocity requirements for natural or manmade channels. 
(Ord. No. 330-95, 12-5-95; Ord. No. 97-7, 7-15-97; Ord. No. 06-46, 5-1-07) 
Sec. 34-119. - Regulated land disturbing activities; submission and approval of plans; contents of plans. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, no person may engage in any land disturbing activity until he has submitted to the administrator for the city an erosion and sediment control plan for the land disturbing activity and such plan has been approved by the plan-approving authority. Where land disturbing activities involve lands under the jurisdiction of more than one local control program, an erosion and sediment control plan, at the option of the applicant, may be submitted to the board for review and approval rather than to each jurisdiction concerned. Where the land disturbing activity results from the construction of a single-family residence, an agreement in lieu of a plan may be substituted for an erosion and sediment control plan if executed by the plan-approving authority. 
(b)  The standards contained within the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Regulations, and the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook are to be used by the applicant when making a submittal under the provisions of this article and in the preparation of an erosion and sediment control plan. The plan-approving authority, in considering the adequacy of a submitted plan, shall be guided by the same standards, regulations and guidelines. When the standards vary between the publications, the state regulations shall take precedence. 
(c)  The plan-approving authority shall, within 45 days, approve any such plan if it is determined that the plan meets the requirements of the local control program and if the person responsible for carrying out the plan certifies that he will properly perform the erosion and sediment control measures included in the plan and will conform to the provisions of this article. 
(d)  The plan shall be acted upon within 45 days from receipt thereof by either approving the plan in writing or by disapproving the plan in writing and giving specific reasons for its disapproval. When the plan is determined to be inadequate, the plan-approving authority shall specify such modifications, terms and conditions that will permit approval of the plan. If no action is taken within 45 days, the plan shall be deemed approved and the person authorized to proceed with the proposed activity. 
(e)  An approved plan may be changed by the plan-approving authority when: 
(1)  The inspection reveals that the plan is inadequate to satisfy applicable regulations; or 
(2)  The person responsible for carrying out the plan finds that because of changed circumstances or for other reasons the approved plan cannot be effectively carried out and proposed amendments to the plan, consistent with the requirements of this article, are agreed to by the plan-approving authority and the person responsible for carrying out the plans. 
(f)  In order to prevent further erosion, the city may require approval of a conservation plan for any land identified in the local program as an erosion impact area. 
(g)  When land disturbing activity will be required of a contractor performing construction work pursuant to a construction contract, the preparation, submission, and approval of an erosion and sediment control plan shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(h)  Whenever electric and telephone utility companies or railroad companies undertake any of the activities included in subsections (h)(1) and (h)(2) of this section, they shall be considered exempt from the provisions of this article. However, they shall file general erosion and sediment control specifications annually with the board. 
(1)  Construction, installation and maintenance of electric and telephone utility lines; and 
(2)  Construction of the tracks, rights-of-way, bridges, communication facilities and other related structures and facilities of the railroad company. 
Projects not included in subsections (h)(1) and (h)(2) of this section shall comply with the requirements of the city erosion and sediment control program, pursuant to state law. 
State Law reference- Filing of specifications, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-563(D). 
(i)  State agency projects are exempt from the provisions of this article except as provided for in state law. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-563; state agency projects, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-564. 
(j)  In accordance with Code of Virginia, § 10.1-563.B, as a prerequisite to engaging in the land-disturbing activities shown on the approved plan, the person responsible for carrying out the plan shall provide the name of the individual holding a certificate of competence to the program authority, as provided by Code of Virginia, § 10.1-561, who will be in charge of and responsible for carrying out the land disturbance activity. The city also has the option to require or waive the responsible land disturber (RLD) for an agreement in lieu of plan. 
(k)  In accordance with the procedure set forth by Code of Virginia, § 10.1-563 (E), any person engaging in the creation and operation of wetland mitigation banks in multiple jurisdictions, which have been approved and are operated in accordance with applicable federal and state guidance, laws, or regulations for the establishment, use, and operation of mitigation banks, pursuant to a permit issued by the Department of Environmental Quality, the Marine Resources Commission, or 
the U.S. Army Corp of Engineers, may, at the option of that person, file general erosion and sediment control specifications for wetland mitigation banks annually with the board for review and approval consistent with guidelines established by the board. 
(Ord. No. 330-95, 12-5-95; Ord. No. 97-7, 7-15-97; Ord. No. 06-46, 5-1-07) 
Sec. 34-120. - Permits; fees; bonding. 
(a)  Agencies authorized under any other law to issue grading, building, or other permits for activities involving land disturbing activities may not issue any such permit unless the applicant submits with his application an approved erosion and sediment control plan and certification that the plan will be followed. 
(b)  No person may engage in any land disturbing activity until he has acquired a land disturbing permit, unless the proposed land disturbing activity is specifically exempt from the provisions of this article, and has paid the fees and posted the required bond. 
(c)  Land-disturbance permit fees shall be in accordance with subsection 14-35(7) of this Code. Erosion and sediment control plans shall be reviewed by a certified plan review professional, in good standing with all Virginia Department of Conservation and Recreation requirements. All fees associated with such review shall be charged to the proposed developer. 
(d)  No land disturbing permit shall be issued until the applicant submits with his application an approved erosion and sediment control plan and certification that the plan will be followed. 
(e)  All applicants for permits shall provide to the city a performance bond, cash escrow, or an irrevocable letter of credit acceptable to the administrator to ensure that measures could be taken by the city at the applicant's expense should the applicant fail, after proper notice, within the time specified to initiate or maintain appropriate conservation measures required of him as a result of his land disturbing activity. Should it be necessary for the city to take such conservation action, the city may collect from the applicant any costs in excess of the amount of the surety held. Within 60 days of the achievement of adequate stabilization of the land disturbing activity, such bond, cash escrow or letter of credit, or the unexpended or unobligated portion thereof, shall be either refunded to the applicant or terminated. 
(Ord. No. 330-95, 12-5-95; Ord. No. 97-7, 7-15-97; Ord. No. 03-49, § 1, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 06-46, 5-1-07; Ord. No. 09-45, 7-21-09) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-565. 
Sec. 34-121. - Monitoring, reports and inspections. 
(a)  The city may require the person responsible for carrying out the plan to monitor and maintain the land disturbing activity. The person responsible for carrying out the plan will maintain records of these inspections and maintenance to ensure compliance with the approved plan and to determine whether the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. 
(b)  The administrator shall periodically inspect the land disturbing activity as required under the state program to ensure compliance with the approved plan and to determine whether the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. The owner, permittee, or person responsible for carrying out the plan shall be given notice of the inspection. If the administrator determines that there is a failure to comply with the plan, notice shall be served upon the permittee or person responsible for carrying out the plan by registered or certified mail to the address specified in the permit application or in the plan certification, or by delivery at the site of the land disturbing activities to the agent or employee supervising such activities. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. Upon failure to comply within the specified time, the permit may be revoked and the permittee or person responsible for carrying out the plan shall be deemed to be in violation of this article and, upon conviction, shall be subject to the penalties provided by this article. 
(c)  Upon determination of a violation of this article, the administrator, or his designee, may, in conjunction with or subsequent to a notice to comply as specified in this article, issue an order requiring that all or part of the land disturbing activities permitted on the site be stopped until the specified corrective measures have been taken. If land disturbing activities have commenced without an approved plan, the administrator may, in conjunction with or subsequent to a notice to comply as specified in this article, issue an order requiring that all of the land disturbing activities be stopped until an approved plan or any required permits are obtained. Where the alleged noncompliance is causing or is in imminent danger of causing harmful erosion of lands or sediment deposition in waters within the watersheds of the commonwealth, or where the land disturbing activities have commenced without an approved plan or any required permits, such an order may be issued without regard to whether the permittee has been issued a notice to comply as specified in this article. Otherwise, such an order may be issued only after the permittee has failed to comply with such a notice to comply. The order shall be served in the same manner as a notice to comply and shall remain in effect for a period of seven days from the date of service pending application by the enforcing authority or permitholder for appropriate relief to the county circuit court. If the alleged violator has not obtained an approved plan or any required permits within seven days from the date of service of the order, the administrator may issue an order to the owner requiring that all construction and other work on the site, other than corrective measures, be stopped until an approved plan and any required permits have been obtained. Such an order shall be served upon the owner by registered or certified mail to the address specified in the permit application or the land records of the city. The owner may appeal the issuance of an order to the county circuit court. Any person violating or failing, neglecting or refusing to obey an order issued by administrator may be compelled in a proceeding instituted in the county circuit court to obey the order and to comply therewith by injunction, mandamus or other appropriate remedy. Upon completion and approval of corrective action or obtaining an approved plan or any required permits, the order shall immediately be lifted. Nothing in this section shall prevent the administrator from taking any other action authorized by this article. 
(Ord. No. 330-95, 12-5-95; Ord. No. 97-7, 7-15-97; Ord. No. 06-46, 5-1-07) 
Sec. 34-122. - Penalties for violations of article; injunctions; other legal actions. 
(a)  Violators of this article shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon a finding of the district court of the city, be assessed a civil penalty. The civil penalty for any one violation shall be $100.00, except that the civil penalty for commencement of land disturbing activities without an approved plan shall be $1,000.00. Each day during which the violation is found to have existed shall constitute a separate offense. In no event shall a series of specified violations arising from the same operative set of facts result in civil penalties which exceed a total of $3,000.00, except that a series of violations rising from the commencement of land disturbing activities without an approved plan for any site shall not result in civil penalties which exceed a total of $10,000.00. 
(c)  The administrator may apply to the county circuit court to enjoin a violation or a threatened violation of this article without the necessity of showing that an adequate remedy at law does not exist. 
(d)  In addition to any criminal penalties provided under this article, any person who violates any provision of this article may be liable to the city in a civil action for damages. 
(e)  Without limiting the remedies which may be obtained in this section, any person violating or failing, neglecting, or refusing to obey any injunction, mandamus or other remedy obtained pursuant to this section shall be subject, in the discretion of the court, to a civil penalty not to exceed $2,000.00 for each violation. A civil action for such violation or failure may be brought by the city. Any civil penalties assessed by a court shall be paid into the treasury of the city, except that where the violator is the locality itself, or its agent, the court shall direct the penalty to be paid into the state treasury. 
(f)  With the consent of any person who has violated or failed, neglected or refused to obey any regulation or condition of a permit or any provision of this article, the city may provide for the payment of civil charges for violation in specific sums, not to exceed the limit specified in subsection (e) of this section. Such civil charges shall be instead of any appropriate civil penalty which could be imposed under subsection (e) of this section. 
(g)  The commonwealth's attorney shall, upon request of the city or the permit issuing authority, take legal action to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(h)  Compliance with the provisions of this article shall be prima facie evidence in any legal or equitable proceeding for damages caused by erosion, siltation or sedimentation that all requirements of law have been met, and the complaining party must show negligence in order to recover any damages. 
(Ord. No. 330-95, 12-5-95; Ord. No. 97-7, 7-15-97; Ord. No. 06-46, 5-1-07) 
State Law reference- Penalties, Code of Virginia, §§ 10.1-562(J), 10.1-569. 
Sec. 34-123. - Appeals and judicial review. 
(a)  Any applicant under the provisions of this article who is aggrieved by any action of the city or its agent in disapproving plans submitted pursuant to this article shall have the right to apply for and receive a review of such action by the city council, provided an appeal is filed within 30 days from the date of the action. Any applicant who seeks an appeal hearing before the city shall be heard at the next regularly scheduled council public hearing, provided that the city and other involved parties have at least 30 days' prior notice. In reviewing the agent's actions, the city shall consider evidence and opinions presented by the aggrieved applicant and agent. After considering the evidence and opinions, the city may affirm, reverse or modify the action. The city's decision shall be final, subject only to review by the county circuit court. 
(b)  Final decisions of the city under this article shall be subject to review by the county circuit court, provided an appeal is filed within 30 days from the date of any written decision adversely affecting the rights, duties, or privileges of the person engaging in or proposing to engage in land disturbing activities. 
(Ord. No. 330-95, 12-5-95; Ord. No. 97-7, 7-15-97; Ord. No. 06-46, 5-1-07) 
ARTICLE V. - DROUGHT 

Sec. 34-124. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the City of Emporia Drought Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 09-52, 8-18-09) 
Sec. 34-125. - Authority to declare a potential shortage of water and to impose water conservation measures. 
    The mayor is authorized to take special measures of prudent management to prevent a critical water shortage when a potential shortage and/or emergency condition exists in the water system(s), and to declare drought watch, drought warning or drought emergency conditions within the jurisdiction. Drought emergency conditions may also be declared by the jurisdiction in the event of equipment failure, contamination or other non-drought related event that prevents short-term provision of adequate water supplies. 
(Ord. No. 09-52, 8-18-09) 
Sec. 34-126. - Authority granted to local jurisdictions by the Code of Virginia. 
    The Code of Virginia states that localities have the power to declare water supply emergency, and to restrict citizens' water use for the prevention of or the duration of a water supply emergency. When such restrictions are put into place, any local water supply system may apply to the state water control board for assistance if they are able to provide evidence that they have exhausted their available means. Water can be bought from one water supplier for the benefit of another to alleviate local water shortages; in such cases, water will be paid for at the established rate of the supplier. 
(Ord. No. 09-52, 8-18-09) 
Sec. 34-127. - Conditions for the declaration of potential shortage of water. 
    The drought contingency and response plan, included in the Greensville-Sussex-Emporia Regional Water Supply Plan (WSP), provides guidance for evaluating the potential for, or existence of, drought conditions and implementation of response and contingency activities. 
    Upon a determination by the mayor of the existence of the following conditions, the mayor shall take the following actions: 
(1)  Drought watch. Drought watch stage targets increased monitoring of drought conditions and increased public awareness of incipient drought conditions. Required actions under the drought watch include notifying the public of incipient drought via newspaper, public service announcement, notices with water bills, and to request voluntary reduction in non-essential water use. 
(2)  Drought warning. Drought warning target is to increase public awareness, and reduce water withdrawals by ten percent through voluntary water conservation. Required actions include notifying public of the drought warning, and requesting voluntary reduction in the following non-essential water use: 
a.  Water to wash down streets, sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, service station aprons, tennis courts, other hard surfaced areas, buildings, and structures, except as required for safety concerns; 
b.  Water to wash automobiles, trucks, trailers, and any other types of mobile equipment, except where required to meet air quality standards; 
c.  Watering of shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass, plants, and other vegetation; 
d.  Water from fire hydrants for construction purposes or any purpose other than fire suppression or other public emergency; 
e.  Water to fill or refill swimming pools; 
f.  Customer not served drinking water in restaurant unless requested; 
g.  Urge customers to refrain from outdoor watering with sprinklers or irrigation systems between 10:00 am and 6:00 pm; 
h.  Implement alternate-day use schedules based on last digit of residential or commercial address: odd-number addresses - Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday; even-number addresses - Wednesday, Friday and Sunday; watering by hand (with cans, wands, hand-held hoses) is allowed any day of the week. 
(3)  Drought emergency. Drought emergency target is to increase public awareness and reduce water withdrawals by 15 percent. Required actions include notifying public of the drought emergency, and implementing mandatory reduction in the following non-essential water uses: 
a.  Water to wash down streets, sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, service station aprons, tennis courts, other hard surfaced areas, buildings, and structures, except as required for safety concerns; 
b.  Use of water to wash automobiles, trucks, trailers, and any other type of mobile equipment prohibited, except where required to meet air quality standards; 
c.  Watering of shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass, plants, and other vegetation (exception: customers may water first-year foundations, trees and shrubs up to two hours a day by a hand-held or soaker hose, and new planting of grass within the first 30 days up to one hour a day by any means; restrictions do not apply to locations using treated wastewater effluent for irrigation); 
d.  Water from fire hydrants for construction purposes or any purpose other than fire suppression or other public emergency; 
e.  Water to fill or refill swimming pools; 
f.  Customer not served drinking water in restaurant unless requested; 
g.  Require customers to refrain from outdoor watering with sprinklers or irrigation systems between 10:00 am and 6:00 pm; 
h.  Implement alternate-day use schedules based on last digit of residential or commercial address: odd-number addresses - Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday; even-number addresses - Wednesday, Friday and Sunday; watering by hand (with cans, wands, hand-held hoses) is allowed any day of the week; 
i.  The drought emergency stage implements higher water rates for excess use. For tier II and III water uses (2,000-50,000 and 50,000+ gallons per month) water rates shall be increased by a minimum of five percent or as determined by city council depending upon the severity of drought conditions. 
(Ord. No. 09-52, 8-18-09) 
Sec. 34-128. - Penalties. 
    Violations of this article when a drought emergency stage is declared may result in penalties being assessed to the customer: 
(1)  First offense: written warning; 
(2)  Second offense: $50.00 fine; 
(3)  Third offense: $100.00 fine; 
(4)  Fourth offense: $250.00 fine and water service suspension. 
(Ord. No. 09-52, 8-18-09) 
Sec. 34-129. - Appeals and exceptions. 
(a)  Upon implementation of a drought emergency stage, the mayor shall appoint an appeals board consisting of three representatives from the jurisdiction administration and utilities offices. The jurisdiction attorney or designee shall serve as legal counsel to the appeals board. 
(b)  The appeals board shall be empowered to review customer applications for exemptions from the provisions of the mandatory conservation on a case-by-case basis and, if warranted, to make equitable adjustments to such provisions. The board shall also be empowered to establish regulations governing the granting of temporary exemptions applicable to all or some of the uses of the water supply as set forth. The board shall, in deciding applications, balance economic and other hardships to the applicant resulting from the imposition of water use restrictions or allocations against the individual and cumulative impacts to the water supply resulting from the granting of exemptions. Individual applications shall be decided by the board within two weeks of receipt of an application in proper form and containing all necessary information. 
(c)  Rescinding orders. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the mayor from rescinding any orders issued hereunder when the conditions creating the need for such orders have abated. 
(Ord. No. 09-52, 8-18-09) 
Chapter 38 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 34; health and sanitation, ch. 42; law enforcement, ch. 46; burning of inflammable material, causing damage to another person's property, § 50-8; traffic and vehicles, ch. 74; authority of fire department officials to direct traffic, § 74-3; utilities, ch. 78; use of fire hydrants, § 78-38. 
State Law reference- Municipal regulation of the keeping of combustibles, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-14(6); guarding against danger from accidents by fire, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-15(4); smoke detectors, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-29.9; municipal regulation of explosives, inflammable substances and fireworks, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-865; municipal regulation of the making of fires, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-872; local fire departments and fire companies, Code of Virginia, § 27-6.1 et seq.; local fire marshals, Code of Virginia, § 27-30 et seq.; relief for firefighters, Code of Virginia, § 27-39 et seq.; effect of Statewide Fire Prevention Code, Code of Virginia, § 27-97; explosives, Code of Virginia, § 59.1-137 et seq.; fireworks, Code of Virginia, § 59.1-142 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Police powers of fire marshal. 
    The fire marshal shall have police powers for the duration of any fire, but only for the specific purpose of safeguarding life and property. The fire marshal shall have the authority and responsibilities as set forth in the Code of Virginia, Title 27, Chapter 3 "Local Fire Marshals" (Code of Virginia § 27-30 through § 27-37.1). 
(Code 1972, § 2-11; Ord. No. 00-05, 5-2-00) 
Sec. 38-2. - Interference with firefighters; fire lines. 
    It shall be the duty of the police officers of the city to prevent any interference on the part of anyone with the members of the fire companies in their efforts to put out a fire. If the police deem it necessary, they may establish lines or stretch ropes to prevent all persons, except the members of the fire companies, from approaching the fire. Any person who shall interfere with or impede the work of the firefighters, who shall disregard the requests of the police officers as to the fire lines, or who shall pass beyond the fire lines, so established, shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1972, § 2-12) 
Sec. 38-3. - Duties of chief of police at fires. 
    The chief of police or his designee shall so direct traffic and enforce traffic regulations in the vicinity of the fire as to expedite the approach and work of the fire department. He shall also safeguard property during the progress of the fire. 
(Code 1972, § 2-13) 
Sec. 38-4. - Cadet firefighters. 
    Subject to any restriction that may be placed by the volunteer fire department, any person who is 16 years of age or older, after first obtaining his parents' or guardians' approval, in writing, is authorized to work or to participate fully in all activities of the city volunteer fire department, provided such person has attained certification under National Fire Protection Association 1001, Level One, firefighters standards, as administered by the state department of fire programs. The certification record and parental or guardian consent shall be kept on file in the office of the volunteer fire department for each participant who is enrolled pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1972, § 2-17) 
State Law reference- Department of fire programs, Code of Virginia, § 9-153 et seq. 
Sec. 38-5. - Open burning-Prohibited. 
    Except as otherwise provided in subsection (1) below, no person shall ignite or maintain, or cause or permit to be ignited or maintained, any open fire on any street, alley or other public property or on private property outside of a building in the city. A violation of this section shall constitute a class 3 misdemeanor. 
    Open burning shall be permitted in the following circumstances: 
(1)  Open fires may be used for cooking food, provided no fire or smoke hazard or other nuisance is created. 
(2)  Open fires may be set for recreational purposes or for ceremonial occasions, provided no fire or smoke hazard or other nuisance is created, the fire is not left unattended, and it is totally extinguished after use. 
(3)  Open fires may be set in the performance of official duties by the fire chief or his designee when necessary for any of the following purposes: 
a.  For the abatement of a fire hazard which cannot be abated by other means; 
b.  For training in firefighting or research in control of fires under supervision of the fire chief or his designee; or 
c.  In cases where the fire chief determines open burning is in the public interest and therefore is allowed, a permit shall first be issued by the fire chief and fire official prior to commencing burning. 
(4)  Salamanders and similar heating devices may be used for heating by outdoor workers provided no fire or smoke hazard or other nuisance is created and provided such devices are used not less than 15 feet from any structure. 
(Ord. No. 11-20, 7-19-11) 
Secs. 38-6-38-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code Act, Code of Virginia, § 27-94 et seq. 

Sec. 38-31. - Adopted. 
    Pursuant to state law, and insofar as not inconsistent with the laws of the state and the ordinances of the city, there is hereby adopted by the city council, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, that certain code known as the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code as adopted and promulgated by the board of housing and community development, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length in this section and the provisions of such code shall be controlling within the city. 
(Code 1972, § 81/2-21) 
State Law reference- Adoption of fire prevention code, Code of Virginia, § 27-97. 
Sec. 38-32. - Definitions. 
    Whenever the bracketed phrase "city" shall be found in the code adopted by this article, the words "City of Emporia" shall be substituted therefor. The term "fire official," as defined in section F- 102.1 of such code and wherever else found therein, shall mean the fire marshal or his designated representative. The terms "legal officer" or "legal counsel" when used in such code, shall mean the city attorney. The term "educational use" shall include public or private schools, child day care centers, adult care centers, or any other similar use. 
(Code 1972, § 81/2-22; Ord. No. 00-05, 5-2-00) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 38-33. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this fire prevention code, or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made under such code, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved under such code or any certificate or permit issued under such code, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the board of fire prevention code appeals or by a court of competent jurisdiction within the time fixed in this section, shall, severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. All persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1972, § 81/2-23) 
Sec. 38-34. - Availability of copies. 
    Copies of the fire prevention code adopted by this article may be obtained during regular business hours at the office of the building official. 
(Code 1972, § 81/2-24) 
Sec. 38-35. - Enforcement of article. 
    The fire prevention code adopted by this article shall be enforced by the fire marshal or his duly authorized representative. 
(Code 1972, § 81/2-25; Ord. No. 00-05, 5-2-00) 
Sec. 38-36. - Annual report; recommendations of amendments. 
    A report of the fire marshal shall be made annually and transmitted to the city manager. Such report shall contain all proceedings under the fire prevention code adopted by this article, with such statistics as the fire marshal may wish to include therein. The fire marshal shall also recommend any amendments to the fire prevention code, which in his judgment, shall be desirable. 
(Code 1972, § 81/2-26; Ord. No. 00-05, 5-2-00) 
Sec. 38-37. - Modifications. 
    The fire marshal may modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code adopted by this article, upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of such fire prevention code; provided, however, that the spirit of such code shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the fire administrator marshal thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department, and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. 
(Code 1972, § 81/2-27; Ord. No. 00-05, 5-2-00) 
Sec. 38-38. - New materials, processes or occupancies which require permits. 
    The city manager and the fire marshal shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies, which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in the fire prevention code adopted by this article. The fire marshal shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his office, and distribute copies thereof to interested persons. 
(Code 1972, § 81/2-28; Ord. No. 00-05, 5-2-00) 
Secs. 38-39-38-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIREWORKS 

Sec. 38-66. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Fireworks means firecrackers, rockets, torpedoes, Roman candles, toy cannons, detonating canes, blank cartridges and other devices designed and intended for noise making or pyrotechnic display. 
(Code 1972, § 14-34) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 38-67. - Manufacture and sale. 
    The manufacture or the possession or display of fireworks for sale is prohibited in the city. 
(Code 1972, § 14-35) 
Sec. 38-68. - Use and discharge. 
    The use or discharge of fireworks is prohibited except that pyrotechnic displays may be authorized by resolution of the council when under the control of qualified individuals, and the time, place and manner of such display is approved by the fire marshal. 
(Code 1972, § 14-36; Ord. No. 00-05, 5-2-00; Ord. No. 08-01, 1-15-08) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate or prohibit the use, etc., of fireworks, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-974. 
Chapter 42 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Department of public works, § 41 et seq.; health, § 45 et seq. 
Cross reference- Amusements and entertainments, ch. 6; animals, ch. 10; environment, ch. 34; fire prevention and protection, ch. 38; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 50; utilities, ch. 78; vegetation, ch. 82. 
State Law reference- Certain local regulations pertaining to food and beverage containers prohibited, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1425; removal of trash, weeds, etc., Code of Virginia, § 15.1-11; state funds for drug enforcement, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-131.12; local ordinances regulating smoking, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-291.4 et seq.; municipal regulation of health, safety and general welfare, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-839; municipal regulation of beverages, foods and sanitation of food establishments, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-853; garbage and refuse disposal, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-857; regulation of well covers, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-318; inspection warrant for inspecting or testing for toxic substances, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-393 et seq.; sanitation in transportation terminals, festivals, fairs, service stations, etc., Code of Virginia, § 32.1-202. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 13-07, § 1, adopted June 4, 2013, amended Art. I in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. I, §§ 42-1-42-12, pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for a complete derivation of these former provisions. 

Sec. 42-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bulky waste means discarded stoves, washers, refrigerators, large furniture pieces, stumps and tires or any item in non-working or inoperable condition and possessing minimal monetary value. 
    Contractor or subcontractor means any person who for a fixed price, commission, fee, or by day labor, contracts to perform or supervise, in whole or in part, any activity governed by this Code. 
    Foreign growth means any unfamiliar, unsightly, troublesome growth, growing wild and similar to a weed. 
    Garbage means residential, institutional, or commercial waste which can spoil, rot, sour, or in any way become putrescible, including containers from which such materials have been removed prior to preparation. 
    Litter means all waste material, disposal packages or containers but not including the wastes of the primary processes of mining, logging, sawmilling, farming or manufacturing. 
    Rubbish means residential, institutional, or commercial waste including ashes, cans, discarded cartons, and similar wastes which cannot become putrescible. 
    Trade waste means dirt, mortar, wood, yarn, fabric, and similar waste materials discarded in building construction or in a manufacturing process. 
    Tree trimmings means limbs, brush, stumps generated in the maintenance of a premises. 
    Waste means any animal, vegetable or mineral substance which has been changed or altered from its original form or use through a physical or manufacturing process and has been used or partially consumed and has been rejected for its intended use. 
    Weeds means any common, unsightly, or troublesome plant or other vegetation injurious to improved land, growing wild and is undesirable. 
    Yard and garden waste means waste produced in lawn and garden maintenance of a premises and includes leaves and grass. 
(Ord. No. 13-07, § 1, 6-4-13) 
Sec. 42-2. - Cleanliness of premises, weeds and foreign growth abatement required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited on any public thoroughfare, lot, or premises in the city, or permit to be deposited upon his premises or any premises contiguous thereto any animal carcass, garbage, rubbish, tree trimmings, bulky, trade, yard or garden wastes, or any other unsightly, injurious or offensive waste of any kind. In addition, it shall be unlawful for any person to place or leave any items not designed or intended for exterior use such as, but not limited to, upholstered furniture, appliances, and machinery, on the exterior of any property, including porches and decks. Bulky waste, as defined, remaining on any lot, shall be placed in a fully enclosed structure or storage building. Nor shall the owner or occupant of any premises permit weeds or other foreign growth material to exceed, in growth, a height of 18 inches, in violation of this chapter, and all trash, garbage, refuse, litter and other substances which might endanger the health or safety of other residents of the city. 
    Additionally, the owner of any premises in the corporate limits of the city shall cut or caused to be cut, weeds and other foreign growth on all such lots, which have been improved by the erection of residential or commercial structures, when such weeds or other foreign growth exceed a height of 12 inches. Further, for premises upon which no improvements have been made or exist, the maximum height of any such weeds and other foreign growth shall not exceed a height of 18 inches. 
(1)  Notice to destroy or remove. The city manager is hereby authorized and empowered to notify, in writing, the owner of any such premises within the city or the agent of such owner, to cut, destroy and/or remove any such trash, garbage, refuse, litter and other substances which might endanger the health or safety of other residents of the city. Such notice shall be by certified mail, addressed to the owner or agent of the owner, at his last known address as shown on the tax books of the city. 
(2)  Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect, or refusal of any owner or agent so notified, to cut, destroy and/or remove any such trash, garbage, refuse, litter and other substances which might endanger the health or safety of other residents of the city within ten days after receipt of the written notice provided for in subsection (1) of this section, or within ten days after the date of such notice, if the same is returned by the post office department because of its inability to make delivery thereof, provided the same was properly addressed to the last known address of such owner, or agent, the city manager is hereby authorized and empowered to pay for the cutting, destroying and/or removal of such trash, garbage, refuse, litter and other substances which might endanger the health or safety of other residents of the city, or order the removal of same by the city. The provisions of section 1-11 of this Code, at the discretion of the city manager, may be applied to the unlawful deposition of any trash, garbage, refuse, litter and other substances which might endanger the health or safety of other residents of the city. 
(3)  Charge included in tax bill. When the city has effected the removal of such trash, garbage, refuse, litter and other substances which might endanger the health or safety of other residents of the city, or has paid for its removal the actual cost thereof, including an administrative fee of $75.00, the city shall send the owner a statement for such costs. The costs shall be collected by the city as taxes and levies are collected. 
(Ord. No. 13-07, § 1, 6-4-13) 
Sec. 42-3. - Filling of lots or spaces with wastes. 
    No garbage or other waste material shall be dumped in any lot or space within the city for the purpose of filling or for any other purpose, without the consent of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 13-07, § 1, 6-4-13) 
Sec. 42-4. - Development of administrative rules and regulations authorized. 
    The city manager is authorized to develop and enforce such rules and regulations necessary for the safe and efficient administration of the city's solid waste collection and disposal program. Rules and regulations, promulgated by the city manager, adopted by the city council, and published in a newspaper having general circulation in the city, shall be interpreted as an integral part of this chapter as if set out in full, and violations of such rules and regulations shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 13-07, § 1, 6-4-13) 
Sec. 42-5. - Waste authorized for collection. 
    The city shall collect and dispose of garbage, rubbish, tree trimmings, yard and garden waste, bulky waste, and similar wastes when properly prepared and set out for collection as prescribed in this chapter, or in accordance with rules and regulations properly established. 
(Ord. No. 13-07, § 1, 6-4-13) 
Sec. 42-6. - Waste unauthorized for collection. 
    The city will not collect rejected trade waste, bulky waste, tree trimmings, nor yard or garden waste when produced by a commercial establishment or contractor. Such waste shall be removed by the contractor, owner or occupant of the premises. 
(Ord. No. 13-07, § 1, 6-4-13) 
Sec. 42-7. - Collections. 
(a)  Garbage and rubbish. Garbage and rubbish shall be placed in containers provided by the city. The city shall not collect garbage or rubbish placed in non-city issued containers. The city maintains the authority to determine the type of disposal and collection method utilized at each property or by each customer and the frequency of collection. 
(b)  Recyclables. Recyclable materials, as accepted by the city, shall be placed in containers provided by the city. 
(c)  Tree trimmings; yard and garden waste. The owner or occupant of any premises shall prepare all tree trimmings and yard and garden waste for collection by the city. Tree trimmings shall not exceed a size and weight which would prevent their being loaded on the collection vehicle by one man. Yard and garden waste shall be boxed or bagged, except as provided in subsection (d) of this section, and no box or bag shall be of a size and weight which would prevent it being loaded on the collection vehicle by one person. 
(d)  Leaves. The owner or occupant of any premises shall box or bag all leaves for collection by the city as prescribed for yard and garden waste in this chapter. However, during the months of October, November, December and January fallen leaves may be raked to the curbside adjacent to a premises for collection by vacuum equipment. Leaves so placed shall be free of stones, gravel, limbs, or other extraneous material. 
(e)  Bulky waste. The owner or occupant of any residential premises may set out for collection by the city such waste items as not specified in this chapter including white goods (abandoned refrigerators, stoves, and freezers), televisions, furniture and other waste. The city manager, in addition to the authority granted by this chapter, is further authorized to charge such fees as may be required for the proper collection and disposal of bulky waste. However, such charges shall not be in excess of actual collection and disposal cost, together with such administrative expenses incidental to such collection and disposal. 
(Ord. No. 13-07, § 1, 6-4-13) 
Sec. 42-8. - Charges for collection and disposal generally. 
    The rates for providing sanitation collection and disposal service shall be as follows: 
(1)  Residential service ..... $20.50/month 
Per residence base fee for the first trash receptacle issued by the city. The owner or occupant of each residence shall be charged an additional $5.00/month for each additional trash receptacle issued by the city. Fees shall be charged based on the number of receptacles issued by the city, regardless of actual use. When a city issued dumpster is utilized on the premises of a multifamily dwelling, the occupant of each individual dwelling unit shall be charged a flat fee of $20.50/month. The landlord or property owner shall construct the dumpster pad and enclosure at his/her own expense. The dumpster pad and enclosure must meet city specifications and receive city approval before construction commences. For making residential service available, all owners or occupants of residential property with active billing accounts shall be charged the applicable fees and billed on a monthly basis. For the purposes of this section, residence shall include single-family, two-family, and multifamily dwellings. 
(2)  Commercial service ..... 5.00/cubic 
yard when 
utilizing a 
city issued dumpster 
When a city issued trash receptacle is utilized on the premises of a commercial establishment, the owner or occupant of such property shall be charged $20.50/month for the first trash receptacle issued by the city. The owner or occupant of such property shall be charged an additional $5.00/month for each additional trash receptacle issued by the city. Fees shall be charged based on the number of receptacles issued by the city, regardless of actual use. Owner or occupants of commercial establishment utilizing city sanitation collection and disposal services shall be charged the applicable fees and billed on a monthly basis. For the purposes of this section, commercial establishments include businesses, industries, civic organizations, public agencies, non-profits, and any other non-residential customer. 
(Ord. No. 13-07, § 1, 6-4-13) 
Sec. 42-9. - Billing and payment of charges. 
    The charges prescribed by section 42-8 shall be billed monthly. Bills shall be paid by 5:00 p.m. on the 4th of each month and in accordance with section 78-95 of City Code to avoid discontinuation of sanitation collection and disposal service. Upon discontinuation of service, the city shall remove the container(s) from the premises. 
(Ord. No. 13-07, § 1, 6-4-13; Ord. No. 13-15, § 1, 9-17-13) 
Sec. 42-10. - Receptacle-Time to place for collection. 
(a)  The owner or occupant of any premises shall set out all receptacles containing garbage and other waste in such locations as may be specified by the city manager, not more than one day before, nor later than 7:00 a.m. on the designated collection day. All receptacles shall be readily accessible to the collection personnel, and no city employee shall enter any building for the removal of any waste or waste receptacles. 
(b)  The owner or occupant of any premises shall remove all waste receptacles on or adjacent to any public street, lane, or alley not later than 24 hours following waste collection by the city. 
(Ord. No. 13-07, § 1, 6-4-13) 
Sec. 42-11. - Same-Interference with. 
    No person, other than under the direction of the city manager, shall haul away any garbage or other waste set out for collection, nor shall any person scavenge, dump, or interfere with any waste receptacles or contents therein which has been placed for collection. 
(Ord. No. 13-07, § 1, 6-4-13) 
Secs. 42-12-42-40. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 01-14, adopted Feb. 20, 2001, repealed § 42-13, which pertained to weeds and foreign growth and derived from Code 1972, § 9-11. For similar material, see § 42-2. 
ARTICLE II. - LITTER CONTROL[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Litter control and recycling, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1414 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 42-41. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Institution means any public or private establishment which educates, instructs, teaches, treats for health purposes, or otherwise performs a service or need for the community, region, state or nation. 
    Litter means all waste material, disposal packages or containers but not including the wastes of the primary processes of mining, logging, sawmilling, farming or manufacturing. 
    Litter receptacle means containers acceptable to the state department of waste management for depositing of litter. 
    Person means any natural person, association, firm, receiver, guardian, trustee, executor, administrator, fiduciary, representative or group of individuals or entities of any kind. 
    Private property means property owned by any person, including but not limited to yards, grounds, driveways, entrances or passageways, parking areas, storage areas, any body of water, vacant land, and recreational facilities. 
    Public place means any area that is used or held out for use by the public, whether owned or operated by public or private interests. 
    Vehicle means every device capable of being moved upon a public highway and in, upon, or by which any person or property may be transported upon a public highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Code 1972, § 10-2) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Definitions pertaining to litter, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1414. 
Sec. 42-42. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drop, deposit, discard or otherwise dispose of litter in or upon any public or private property within the city including, but not restricted to, any street, sidewalk, park, body of water, vacant or occupied lot, except in public litter receptacles, or covered private litter receptacles, or in any area designated by the city as a permitted disposal site. 
(b)  When a violation of the provisions of this section has been observed by any person, and the litter disposed of in the highway, right-of-way, city street, or property adjacent to such highway or right-of-way, city street or private property, and such litter has been ejected from a motor vehicle, the owner or operator of such motor vehicle carrying a load shall be presumed to be the person ejecting such trash, garbage, refuse, or other unsightly matter; provided, however, that such presumption shall be rebuttable by competent evidence. 
(Code 1972, § 10-3(a), (b)) 
Sec. 42-43. - Escape of vehicle load; penalty for violation of section. 
    No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless the vehicle is constructed or loaded to prevent any of its load from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom. However, sand or any substance for increasing traction during times of snow and ice may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water or other substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining the roadway by the commonwealth or local government agency having that responsibility. Any person operating a vehicle from which any glass or objects have fallen or escaped which could constitute an obstruction or damage a vehicle or otherwise endanger travel upon a public highway shall immediately cause the highway to be cleaned of all glass or objects and shall pay any costs therefor. Violation of this section shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor, and any person convicted of violating this section shall be punished as set out in section 1-11. 
(Code 1972, § 10-4) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1424. 
Sec. 42-44. - Cleanup of premises by government authorization. 
    After complying with the following requirements, the city shall be entitled to remove litter from private property. Before such authority may be exercised, the city shall afford written notice to the owner of such private property. Mailing of such notice to the address to which real estate tax statements are mailed shall be deemed adequate. The notice shall state the city's intent to remove litter, and to charge the owner the cost thereof. If the litter has not been removed within ten days of such mailing, the city may remove, or cause to be removed, the litter and collect the costs thereof from such owner. Such costs shall be a lien on the real estate and collected as taxes and levies are collected. 
(Code 1972, § 10-19) 
Sec. 42-45. - Enforcement; prosecution for violation of article provisions. 
(a)  The following agencies are hereby empowered to enforce this article: state police, city police, and other law enforcement agency personnel with powers to arrest. 
(b)  The duly authorized enforcement officers are hereby empowered to issue citations, or arrest persons violating any provision of this article and may serve and execute all warrants, and other processes, duly issued. 
(c)  Whenever any person is arrested for a violation, the arresting officer shall take the name and address of such person and issue a complaint or summons or otherwise notify him in writing to appear at a time and place to be specified in such complaint, or summons. Such time shall be no sooner than five days after such arrest unless the person arrested shall demand an earlier hearing. 
(Code 1972, § 10-18) 
State Law reference- State police, Code of Virginia, tit. 52. 
Secs. 42-46-42-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LITTER RECEPTACLES 

Sec. 42-61. - Household solid waste contain-erization and removal. 
    All household solid waste shall be deposited in approved litter receptacles and placed for collection according to the following requirements: 
(1)  All litter receptacles containing refuse to be hauled away shall be placed at the curb in front of the house by 7:00 a.m. on days of collection. Collectors will not be allowed to enter buildings or grounds for removal of trash or garbage. 
(2)  All garbage and refuse set out for collection must be placed in suitable litter receptacles as determined by the city. It is recommended that for the use of plastic bags, that they are of material thickness of two mils. with a 50-pound weight limit. They must be tied at the top. Any other trash or litter receptacle must be securely covered and of durable material, and total weight with refuse shall be no more than 50 pounds. Exceptions are as follows: 
a.  Excess material as a result of special circumstances, such as a holiday, will be collected (i.e. Thanksgiving, Christmas); 
b.  Items too large to fit into litter receptacles such as, but not limited to, household appliances, furniture, and mattresses, may be disposed of in any area designated by the city as a permitted disposal site. 
(Code 1972, § 10-12) 
Sec. 42-62. - Commercial and institutional solid waste. 
(a)  All solid waste generated by any institution, business, or industrial establishment shall be placed for collection in a litter receptacle, unless a nuisance is created, or unless otherwise prohibited. 
(b)  Large bulk items too big for a litter receptacle shall be disposed of in any area designated by the city as a permitted disposal site. 
(Code 1972, § 10-13) 
Sec. 42-63. - Conformance to city standards. 
    The use of any litter receptacle which does not conform to the standards established by the city is prohibited. 
(Code 1972, § 10-14) 
Sec. 42-64. - Use. 
(a)  Unless otherwise prohibited, all waste shall be deposited in an approved litter receptacle. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to remove any item from a litter receptacle. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to deposit in any litter receptacle waste which constitutes a nuisance or health hazard including, though not exclusively, hot ashes and/or liquid waste. 
(Code 1972, § 10-15) 
Sec. 42-65. - Provision by owner/operator. 
    It shall be the duty of any person owning or operating any business, or establishment open to the public, to provide receptacles adequate to contain the litter generated there. 
(Code 1972, § 10-16) 
Sec. 42-66. - Penalties for violations of division. 
    Any person violating this division shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor, or spend not less than eight hours and no more than 40 hours picking up litter under the supervision of the department of sanitation to be completed within two months of the sentence. Either or both punishments shall be imposed at the discretion of the court. 
(Code 1972, § 10-17) 
Secs. 42-67-42-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES 

Sec. 42-86. - Areas surrounding commercial establishments and institutions. 
    It shall be the duty of each owner and tenant of commercial property to keep such property clear and free of litter. 
(Code 1972, § 10-5) 
Sec. 42-87. - Keeping residential property clean. 
    It shall be the duty of each residential property owner and tenant to keep all exterior private property free of litter. These areas shall include, but not be restricted to, sidewalks, alleys, and driveways; yards and grounds; fences, walls, and property lines; drainages; and vacant lots in residential areas. 
(Code 1972, § 10-6) 
Sec. 42-88. - Keeping sidewalks clean. 
    Each owner, agent, occupant, or lessee whose property faces a sidewalk, or strip between a sidewalk and street, shall be responsible for keeping the sidewalk and strip free of litter. 
(Code 1972, § 10-7) 
Sec. 42-89. - Sweeping litter into the streets. 
    It shall be unlawful to sweep or push litter from a sidewalk into a street. Such litter shall be deposited in an authorized litter receptacle which shall be covered to prevent scattering by wind and animal. 
(Code 1972, § 10-8) 
Sec. 42-90. - Construction and demolition sites. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent, or contractor to permit the accumulation of litter before, during, or after completion of any construction or demolition project. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the owner, agent or contractor in charge of a construction or development site to furnish litter receptacles and to collect and contain to prevent scattering other bulk litter on a daily basis. All litter shall be removed from such site not less than once a week. 
(Code 1972, § 10-9) 
Sec. 42-91. - Handbills and advertising materials. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person distributing commercial handbills, leaflets, flyers, or any other advertising and information materials to distribute material in such a manner that it litters either public or private property. 
(Code 1972, § 10-10) 
Sec. 42-92. - Penalties for violation of division. 
    Any person convicted of violating any section of this division shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor and/or spend not less than four hours and not more than 20 hours of picking up litter as supervised by the department of sanitation, to be completed within one month of sentence. Either or both punishments shall be imposed at the discretion of the court. 
(Code 1972, § 10-11) 
Chapter 46 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- City sergeant, § 51 et seq. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; fire prevention and protection, ch. 38; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 50; traffic and vehicles, ch. 74. 
State Law reference- Police and public order, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-131 et seq.; city jail, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-257; local correctional facilities, Code of Virginia, § 53.1-68 et seq.; work forces, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-404, 53.1-128. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Fleeing from officer. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to flee from an officer. 
(Code 1972, § 14-58) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-817. 
Sec. 46-2. - Refusal to aid officer in execution of his office. 
    If any person on being required by any sheriff or other officer refuses or neglects to assist him: 
(1)  In the execution of his office in a criminal case; 
(2)  In the preservation of the peace; 
(3)  In the apprehending or securing of any person for a breach of the peace; or 
(4)  In any case of escape or rescue, 
he shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1972, § 14-59) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-463. 
Sec. 46-3. - Impersonation of officer. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely assume or exercise the functions, powers, duties or privileges incident to the office of sheriff, police officer, marshal or other peace officer, or falsely assume or pretend to be any such officer. 
(Code 1972, § 14-61) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-174. 
Sec. 46-4. - Unlawful wearing of officer's uniform. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, not a member of the police department of the city, to wear any such uniform as is designated for the use of the members of the police department. 
(Code 1972, § 14-62) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-175. 
Secs. 46-5-46-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PRISONERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 46-31-46-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WORK FORCE 

Sec. 46-46. - Established; purpose. 
    There is hereby established a work force in the city for the purpose of working on the streets, roads and public property therein, and of working in or on any other public property of works owned, leased or operated by the city, whether the property is located in the city or in the county. 
(Code 1972, § 1-10) 
State Law reference- Work forces, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-904, 53.1-128. 
Sec. 46-47. - Persons liable to work; no abridgement of right as to minor. 
    Unless physically unfit as determined by the jail physician, every person above the age of 18 years who is imprisoned for any violation of an ordinance of the city, which violation is punishable by confinement in jail or is fined and imprisoned for failure to pay such fine, shall be liable to work, on the city work force established in this division. 
(Code 1972, § 1-11) 
Sec. 46-48. - Supervision. 
    The work force provided for under the provisions of this division shall be under the direct supervision of the chief of police or of some other officer so designated for this purpose. 
(Code 1972, § 1-12) 
Sec. 46-49. - Regulations. 
    The work of the work force provided for under the provisions of this division shall be subject to reasonable regulations adopted by the council. 
(Code 1972, § 1-13) 
Chapter 50 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Amusements and entertainments, ch. 6; businesses, ch. 18; environment, ch. 34; health and sanitation, ch. 42; law enforcement, ch. 46. 
State Law reference- Attempts to commit misdemeanors, how punished, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-27; extortion and other threats, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-59 et seq.; threats to bomb or damage buildings or means of transportation, false information as to danger to such buildings, etc., punishment, venue, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-83; petit larceny defined, how punished, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-96; impersonating officer, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-174; defrauding hotels, motels, campgrounds, boardinghouses, etc., Code of Virginia, § 18.2-188; calling or summoning ambulance or firefighting apparatus without just cause, maliciously activating fire alarms in public buildings, venue, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-212; disorderly conduct in public places, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-415; use of profane, threatening or indecent language over public airways, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-427. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Abandoned or discarded containers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to discard, abandon, leave or allow to remain in any place, any icebox, refrigerator or other container, device or equipment of any kind with an interior storage area of more than two cubic feet of clear space which is airtight, without first removing the door or hinges from such icebox, refrigerator, container, device or equipment. This section shall not apply to any icebox, refrigerator, container, device or equipment which is being used for the purpose for which it was originally designed or is being used for display purposes by any retail or wholesale merchant or is crated, strapped or locked to such an extent that it is impossible for a child to obtain access to any airtight compartment thereof. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1972, § 14-7) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-319. 
Sec. 50-2. - Abusive language. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, in the presence or hearing of another, to curse or abuse such person, or use any violent abusive language to such person concerning himself or any of his relatives, or otherwise use such language under circumstances reasonably calculated to provoke a breach of the peace. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1972, § 14-8) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-416. 
Sec. 50-3. - Assault and battery. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an unjustified assault or battery upon another, which does not amount to a felony under the laws of the state. 
(Code 1972, § 14-10) 
State Law reference- Assault and battery, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-57. 
Sec. 50-4. - Attempts to commit misdemeanors; punishment. 
    Every person who attempts to commit an offense which is a misdemeanor shall be punishable by the same punishment prescribed for the offense the commission of which was the object of the attempt. 
(Code 1972, § 14-11) 
State Law reference- Attempt to commit misdemeanor, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-27. 
Sec. 50-5. - Solicitation on public streets, et cetera. 
(a)  No person shall be upon or go upon any street, highway, roadway, alley, or upon the shoulder of any street, highway, roadway, or alley, or upon the median of any street, highway, roadway, or alley, or upon any neutral ground or any street, highway, roadway, or alley, within the city, for the purpose of soliciting charitable or other contributions of any kind from the driver or occupant of a motor vehicle, except as provided in this section. 
(b)  Rules governing roadblocks and/or street solicitation. 
(1)  No roadblock or street solicitation may be established, maintained, or conducted within the city limits unless they are soliciting funds as a department by the Emporia Volunteer Fire Department, Greensville Volunteer Rescue Squad or the Fraternal Order of Police until the said department(s) operating such roadblock or making such solicitation shall have first filed the following items with the chief of police, at least seven calendar days prior to any such roadblock/street solicitation, and received a permit for the same: 
a.  An application in writing of the dates, times, and locations where the roadblock or street solicitation will occur and the number of persons who will be participating in the roadblock or street solicitation. 
b.  Reserved. 
c.  A copy of the city's "Agreement to Defend, Indemnify, and Hold Harmless Form," signed by the chief administrator of said department. 
(2)  No person under the age of 16 years shall be allowed inside the roadblock/solicitation area at any time. Each person soliciting donations at a roadblock or other street solicitation shall be at least 16 years of age. Persons under the age of 18 must be under adult supervision at all times. 
(3)  Each person soliciting donations at a roadblock or street solicitation area shall wear a reflector vest at all times. 
(4)  Each roadblock or street solicitation area shall be clearly and visibly marked with brightly colored land cones, which shall not obstruct traffic. 
(Code 1972, § 14-12; Ord. No. 05-65, § 1, 12-20-05, Ord. No. 07-02, 9-4-07) 
State Law reference- Virginia State Code References: Local ordinances, §57-63 
Sec. 50-6. - Bribery; accepting to neglect service of process. 
    It shall be unlawful for any officer, authorized to serve legal process, to receive any money or other thing of value, for omitting or delaying to perform any duty pertaining to his office. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1972, § 14-13) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-440. 
Sec. 50-7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11-21, adopted July 19, 2011, repealed § 50-7, which pertained to burning woods, brush, and other inflammable material-generally; bonfires, and derived from Code 1972, § 14-14. 
Sec. 50-8. - Same-Setting fire intentionally whereby another's property is damaged. 
    Any person who intentionally, carelessly or negligently, sets or procures another to set fire to any woods, brush, leaves, grass, straw or any other inflammable substance capable of spreading fire, and who intentionally allows the fire to escape to lands not his own, whereby the property of another is damaged or jeopardized, shall be punished as provided in section 1-11, and shall be liable for the full amount of all expenses incurred in fighting the fire. 
(Code 1972, § 14-15) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 38. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-87. 
Sec. 50-9. - Calling or summoning ambulance or firefighting apparatus without just cause; maliciously activating fire alarms in public buildings; venue. 
(a)  Any person who without just cause therefor, calls or summons, by telephone or otherwise, any ambulance, or firefighting apparatus, or any person who maliciously activates a manual or automatic fire alarm in any building used for public assembly or for other public use including, but not limited to, schools, theaters, stores, office buildings, shopping centers and malls, coliseums and arenas, regardless of whether fire apparatus responds or not, shall be deemed guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  A violation of this section may be prosecuted either in the jurisdiction from which the call or summons was made or in the jurisdiction where the call or summons was received. 
(Code 1972, § 14-31) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-212. 
Sec. 50-10. - Cemeteries-Trespassing at night. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner, proprietor or custodian, to go or enter in the nighttime, upon the premises, property, driveways or walks of any cemetery, either public or private, for any purpose other than to visit the burial lot or grave of some member of his family. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1972, § 14-16) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-125. 
Sec. 50-11. - Same-Defacing monuments, tombstones or other structures. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deface any monument, tombstone or structure of any sort in any graveyard or cemetery or do any sort of injury thereto. 
(Code 1972, § 14-17) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-127. 
Sec. 50-12. - Charitable solicitations; illegal use of name. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, by any manner or means, directly or indirectly, to solicit funds or other things of value in the city by use of the name or emblem of a charitable, civic or religious organization without the prior written consent of such charitable, civic or religious organization. 
(Code 1972, § 14-18) 
State Law reference- Solicitation of contributions, Code of Virginia, § 57-48 et seq. 
Sec. 50-13. - Concealing or compounding offense. 
    If any person knowing of the commission of an offense takes any money or reward, or an engagement therefor, upon an agreement or understanding, expressed or implied, to compound or conceal such offense, or not to prosecute therefor, or not to give evidence thereof, he shall, if such offense is a felony, be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor; and if such offense is not a felony, unless it is punishable merely by forfeiture to him, he shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1972, § 14-22) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-462. 
Sec. 50-14. - Concealing or taking possession of merchandise-Altering price tags; transferring goods from one container to another; counseling another in performance of such acts. 
    Whoever, without authority, with the intention of converting goods or merchandise to his own or another's use without having paid the full purchase price thereof, or of defrauding the owner of the value of the goods or merchandise, willfully conceals or takes possession of the goods or merchandise of any store or other mercantile establishment; alters the price tag or other price marking on such goods or merchandise; transfers the goods from one container to another, or counsels, assists, aids or abets another in the performance of any of the above acts, when the value of the goods or merchandise involved in the offense is less than $200.00, shall be guilty of a petit larceny. The willful concealment of goods or merchandise of any store or other mercantile establishment, while still on the premises thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of an intent to convert and defraud the owner thereof out of the value of the goods or merchandise. 
(Code 1972, § 14-19) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-103. 
Sec. 50-15. - Same-Exemption from civil liability in connection with arrest or detention of suspected person. 
    A merchant, agent or employee of the merchant, who causes the arrest or detention of any person pursuant to the provisions of section 50-14, shall not be held civilly liable for unlawful detention if such detention does not exceed one hour, slander, malicious prosecution, false imprisonment, false arrest, or assault and battery of the person so arrested or detained, whether such arrest or detention takes place on the premises of the merchant, or after close pursuit from such premises by such merchant, his agent or employee; provided, however, that in causing the arrest or detention of such person, the merchant, agent or employee of the merchant, had at the time of such arrest or detention probable cause to believe that the person had shoplifted or committed willful concealment of goods or merchandise. The activation of an electronic article surveillance device as a result of a person exiting the premises or an area within the premises of a merchant where an electronic article surveillance device is located shall constitute probable cause for the detention of such person by such merchant, his agent or employee, provided such person is detained only in a reasonable manner and only for such time as is necessary for an inquiry into the circumstances surrounding the activation of the device, and provided that clear and visible notice is posted at each exit and location within the premises where such a device is located indicating the presence of an antishoplifting or inventory control device. For purposes of this section, the term "electronic article surveillance device" means an electronic device designed and operated for the purpose of detecting the removal from the premises, or a protected area within such premises, of specially marked or tagged merchandise. 
(Code 1972, § 14-20) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-105. 
Sec. 50-16. - Same-"Agents of the merchant" defined. 
    As used in section 50-15, the term "agent of the merchant" shall include attendants at any parking lot owned or leased by the merchant, or generally used by customers of the merchant through any contract or agreement between the owner of the parking lot and the merchant. 
(Code 1972, § 14-21) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-106. 
Sec. 50-17. - Dangerous, offensive or unhealthful businesses. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, without the written consent of the council, to conduct any slaughterhouse, soap or candle factory, or exercise any dangerous, offensive or unhealthful business, trade, or employment. 
(Code 1972, § 14-23) 
Sec. 50-18. - Disorderly houses-Keeping. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or operate, for himself or as an officer of, or agent for any corporation, association, club, lodge or other organization, or under the guise of any corporation, association, club, lodge or other organization, any disorderly house or place where disorderly persons meet or may meet for the purpose of illegally dispensing or indulging in intoxicating liquors, gaming or boisterous or other disorderly conduct. 
(Code 1972, § 14-24) 
Sec. 50-19. - Same-Frequenting. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to frequent, reside in or visit any place referred to in section 50-18 for the purpose of illegally dispensing or indulging in intoxicating liquors, gaming or boisterous or other disorderly conduct. 
(Code 1972, § 14-25) 
Sec. 50-20. - Disturbance of religious worship. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person wilfully to interrupt or disturb any assembly met for the worship of God or, being intoxicated, disturb the assembly, whether wilfully or not. 
(Code 1972, § 14-26) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-415. 
Sec. 50-21. - Disturbance of schools and literary societies. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully interrupt, molest or disturb the exercise of any school or any literary society or, being intoxicated, disturb the same, whether wilfully or not. 
(Code 1972, § 14-27) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-415. 
Sec. 50-22. - Escape; assisting and rescuing prisoner. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to convey anything into a jail or prison with intent to facilitate a prisoner's escape therefrom; in any way aid a prisoner to escape or attempt to escape, from a jail, prison or custody; or forcibly rescue, or attempt to rescue a prisoner. 
(Code 1972, § 14-30) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-473. 
Sec. 50-23. - Expectorating in public places. 
    No person shall spit, expectorate, or deposit any sputum, saliva, mucus, or any form of saliva or sputum upon the floor, stairways, or upon any part of any public building or place where the public assembles, or upon the floor of any part of any public conveyance, or upon any sidewalk abutting on any public street, alley or lane of any town or city. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1972, § 14-30.1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-322. 
Sec. 50-24. - False publications. 
    Any person who knowingly and willfully states, delivers or transmits by any means whatever to any publisher, or employee of a publisher, of any newspaper, magazine, or other publication or to any owner, or employee of an owner, of any radio station, television station, news service or cable service, any false and untrue statement, knowing the same to be false or untrue, concerning any person or corporation, with intent that the statement shall be published, broadcast or otherwise disseminated, shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1972, § 14-33) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-209. 
Sec. 50-25. - Giving false reports to police officers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to give a false report as to the commission of any crime to any law enforcement official with intent to mislead. Violation of the provisions of this section shall be punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1972, § 14-32) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-461. 
Sec. 50-26. - Loitering, assembling or collecting of persons on streets and sidewalks. 
    The loitering, assembling, or collecting of persons on the streets and sidewalks in such manner as to block and obstruct free passage shall be unlawful. Should any person neglect or refuse to leave such place on being notified or required to do so by a uniformed police officer, or other officer, he shall be guilty of a further violation. 
(Code 1972, § 14-40; Ord. No. 08-04, 2-5-08) 
State Law reference- Prohibiting loitering, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-926. 
Sec. 50-27. - Obstructing justice-Generally. 
    If any person without just cause knowingly obstructs a judge, magistrate, justice, juror, attorney for the commonwealth, witness or any law enforcement officer in the performance of his duties as such or fails or refuses without just cause to cease such obstruction when requested to do so by such judge, magistrate, justice, juror, attorney for the commonwealth, witness, or law enforcement officer, he shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1972, § 14-57) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-460(A). 
Sec. 50-28. - Same-Threats or force. 
    If any person, by threats or force, knowingly attempts to intimidate or impede a judge, magistrate, justice, juror, attorney for the commonwealth, witness, or any law enforcement officer, lawfully engaged in his duties as such, or to obstruct or impede the administration of justice in any court, he shall be deemed to be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1972, § 14-60) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-460(B). 
Sec. 50-29. - Profane swearing and intoxication in public; penalty; transportation of public inebriates to detoxification center. 
    If any person profanely curses or swears or is intoxicated in public, whether such intoxication results from alcohol, narcotic drug or other intoxicant or drug of whatever nature, he shall be deemed guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. In any area in which there is located a court-approved detoxification center, a law enforcement officer may authorize the transportation, by police or otherwise, of public inebriates to such detoxification center in lieu of arrest; however, no person shall be involuntarily detained in such center. 
(Code 1972, §§ 14-28, 14-48) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-388. 
Sec. 50-30. - Radio and television reception interference. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate within the city any machine, sign, device or equipment using or operated by electric power or current in a manner or under conditions causing interference with the use of radio or television equipment or with radio or television reception within the city. Such unlawful use or maintenance of such machine, device or equipment is hereby expressly declared a nuisance. 
(Code 1972, § 14-56) 
Sec. 50-31. - Riotous or disorderly conduct-In public conveyance. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, whether a passenger or not, while in or on any public conveyance, to behave in a riotous or disorderly manner. The agent or employee in charge of such public conveyance may require such person to discontinue his riotous or disorderly conduct, and if he refuses to do so may eject him, with the aid, if necessary, of any other persons who may be called upon for the purpose. 
(Code 1972, § 14-63) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-415. 
Sec. 50-32. - Same-In public places. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to behave in a riotous or disorderly manner in any street, highway, public building, or any other public place, or cause any unnecessary disturbance therein. 
(Code 1972, § 14-64) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-415. 
Sec. 50-33. - Slander and libel of females. 
(a)  Any person who shall falsely utter and speak, or falsely write and publish, of and concerning any female of chaste character, any words derogatory of such female's character for virtue and chastity, or imputing to such female acts not virtuous and chaste, or who shall falsely utter and speak, or falsely write and publish, of and concerning another person, any words which from their usual construction and common acceptation are construed as insults and tend to violence and breach of the peace or shall use grossly insulting language to any female of good character or reputation, shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(b)  The defendant shall be entitled to prove upon trial in mitigation of the punishment, the provocation which induced the libelous or slanderous words, or any other fact or circumstance tending to disprove malice, or lessen the criminality of the offense. 
(Code 1972, § 14-65) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-417. 
Sec. 50-34. - Sleeping in public. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sleep during the day or night in the streets, or in any porch, door, or other exposed or public place. 
(Code 1972, § 14-68) 
Sec. 50-35. - Tobacco products; furnishing to minor. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter, give or furnish, or cause to be sold, bartered, given or furnished to any minor under 18 years of age cigarettes or tobacco products in any form, having good cause to believe him to be a minor under 18 years of age. 
(Code 1972, § 14-69) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-371.2. 
Sec. 50-36. - Unauthorized wearing or displaying on motor vehicles of any button, insignia or emblem of certain associations or societies or of Southern Cross of Honor. 
(a)  No person shall wear the button or insignia of any order of police, trade union or veterans' organization or display upon a motor vehicle the insignia or emblem of any automobile club, medical society, order of police, trade union or veterans' organization or use such button, insignia or emblem to obtain aid or assistance unless entitled to wear, display or use the same under the constitution, bylaws, rules or regulations of the organization concerned. 
(b)  No person shall wear any Southern Cross of Honor when not entitled to do so by the regulations under which such Crosses of Honor are given. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall be a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1972, § 14-38) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-176. 
Sec. 50-37. - Abandoned or discarded shopping carts. 
(a)  The term "shopping cart," when used in this section, means those push carts of the type or types which are commonly provided by retail stores or markets for the use of the public in transporting commodities from the store to a place outside the store. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove a shopping cart from the premises of the owner of such shopping cart without the written consent of the owner or of his agent, servant, or employee given at the time of such removal. For the purpose of this section, the premises shall include all the parking area set aside by the owner, or on behalf of the owner, for the parking of cars for the convenience of the patrons of the owner. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or abandon any shopping cart on any sidewalk, right-of-way, street or property within the city other than the property of the owner of the shopping cart. 
(d)  If a shopping cart is found on any property off the premises of the shopping cart owner, the city may retrieve the cart and remove it to a storage location. The city shall notify the owner, if known, of the cart's retrieval and storage. If not recovered from the storage area by the owner within ten days, the city may dispose of the cart. A storage fee of $10.00 per cart shall be paid by the owner for any cart retrieved from the storage location. 
(e)  If the shopping cart is not marked with the owner's name, the city shall have the right to dispose of the shopping cart. 
(Ord. No. 09-42, 6-16-09) 
Secs. 50-38-50-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WEAPONS 

Sec. 50-61. - Discharging firearms. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot any gun, pistol or other firearm within the city without the approval of the city manager or his designee. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any law enforcement officer in the performance of his official duties nor to any other person whose willful act is otherwise justifiable or excusable at law in the protection of his life or property, or is otherwise specifically authorized by law. 
(Code 1972, § 14-72) 
State Law reference- Discharging firearm in public place, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-280. 
Sec. 50-62. - Discharging gravel shooters, air guns, or similar implements; bow and arrow. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or discharge any shot, stone, gravel, bullet or any other similar thing from a gravel shooter, air gun or similar implement, or bow and arrow. Participants in the Urban Archery Season are excluded from this provision. 
(Code 1972, § 14-73; Ord. No. 04-36, § 1, 9-21-04) 
Sec. 50-63. - Carrying concealed. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to carry about his person, hidden from common observation, any pistol, dirk, Bowie knife, switchblade knife, razor, slingshot, metal knucks or any weapon of like kind; and such pistol, dirk, Bowie knife, switchblade knife, razor, slingshot, metal knucks or weapon of like kind shall, by order of the court, be forfeited to the city and may be seized by any officer as forfeited, and such as may be needed for police officers and conservators of the peace shall be devoted to that purpose, and the remainder shall be destroyed by the officer having them in charge. This section shall not apply to any police officers, sergeants, sheriffs, conservators of the peace other than notaries public, or to carriers of the United States mail in the rural districts, or to any collecting officer while discharging his official duty. No person shall be punishable under this section who has been granted permission to carry concealed weapons in accordance with state law. 
(Code 1972, § 14-74) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308. 
Sec. 50-64. - Pistol permit-Required prior to purchase. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase a pistol of any calibre or description within the city unless such person shall have obtained a written permit from the chief of police of the city authorizing such purchase. Any such pistol purchased in violation of this section shall, by order of the court, be forfeited to the city and may be seized by any officer as forfeited, and such as may be needed for police officers and conservators of the peace shall be devoted to that purpose, and the remainder shall be destroyed by the officer having them in charge. 
(Code 1972, § 14-75) 
State Law reference- Pistol permit, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-525. 
Sec. 50-65. - Same-Exhibiting to seller. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell a pistol of any calibre or description within the city to any person unless such purchaser shall first exhibit to the person selling the pistol, a written permit, executed by the chief of police of the city, authorizing the sale and purchase of a pistol within the city. 
(Code 1972, § 14-76) 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18. 
Secs. 50-66-50-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MINOR CURFEW[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Curfew for minors, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-33.4. 

Sec. 50-91. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult means any person at least 18 years of age. 
    Lawful activity means any activity which is not otherwise illegal, in which a minor acts with the knowledge and permission of a parent. 
    Minor means any person 17 years of age or under who has not been determined to be emancipated pursuant to state law. 
    Parent means any person having legal custody of a minor as a natural or adoptive parent; as a legal guardian; as a person who stands in loco parentis; or as a person to whom legal custody has been granted by court order. 
    Public place means: 
(1)  A way or place open to the use of the public for the purpose of vehicular or pedestrian travel including, but not limited to, rights-of-way; traffic lanes, curbs, and sidewalks, whether paved or unpaved; and any grass plots or grounds found within the rights-of-way; irrespective of what it is called or formally named, whether alley, avenue, court, road or otherwise. 
(2)  Shopping areas, parking lots, buildings, parks, places of amusement and similar structures or areas that are generally used by the public. 
(Code 1972, § 14-70.2) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Emancipation of minors, Code of Virginia, § 16.1-331 et seq. 
Sec. 50-92. - Purpose of article. 
    The city hereby finds that the presence of minors during late night hours in public places, unsupervised by responsible adults, allows those minors to be exposed to corrupting influences and denies them an equal opportunity to develop into responsible citizens. In order to protect those minors, and in order to further the legitimate public safety interest of the public at large, a minor curfew is found to be in the public interest. 
(Code 1972, § 14-70.1) 
Sec. 50-93. - Presence of minors in public places prohibited at specific hours; exemptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any minor to be on any street, road, avenue, alley, park or other public place, or in or on a vehicle upon or around any public place or street or any place generally opened to the public, whether or not on private property in the city between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. It shall be unlawful for any minor under 15 years of age to be at any such place between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. This section shall not apply if the minor is: 
(1)  Accompanied by the parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care, custody, or control of such minor; 
(2)  Engaged in a lawful employment or going directly to the place of such employment or returning directly to the minor's place of residence; 
(3)  In possession of written permission by the parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care, custody, or control of such minor to attend a specified engagement or performance which begins prior to midnight, and ends, either after midnight, or so close to midnight that it is impracticable for such minor to reach his residence by traveling in a prudent manner, and such minor is present at such engagement or performance or is proceeding directly to his place of residence upon the conclusion thereof; 
(4)  Attending an activity sponsored by a school or a religious or civic organization, or going directly to his place of residence therefrom; 
(5)  On a legitimate emergency errand; or 
(6)  Within 100 feet of his residence. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1972, § 14-70.3) 
Sec. 50-94. - Responsibility of adults. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a parent of a minor knowingly to permit or by inefficient control to allow the minor to be in violation of this article. The term "knowingly" includes knowledge which a parent reasonably is expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor of whom the parent has legal custody. It shall be, a fortiori, no defense that a parent was indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of such minor. 
(b)  Any parent violating this section shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1972, § 14-70.4) 
Sec. 50-95. - Enforcement of article. 
(a)  If a police officer reasonably believes that a person is in a public place in violation of this article, he shall notify the person that he is in violation and shall require his name, address and telephone number, if any, and the manner in which his parents can be contacted. The police officer shall use his best judgment in determining the age of the person, and may consider any available evidence including, but not limited to, a birth certificate or driver's license. If the police officer determines that a person is in violation of this article, he shall take the person to police headquarters, and a parent shall be notified, if possible. 
(b)  The police officer instead may deliver the minor to a parent of the minor at his home if it is reasonably convenient to do so during the exercise of his normal duties. 
(c)  When a parent has forthwith taken charge of the minor and the appropriate information has been recorded, the minor shall be released to the custody of the parent. If a parent cannot be located or fails to take charge of the minor child within a reasonable period of time, the minor may be released to some other adult who will assume, on behalf of a parent, the responsibility of supervising the minor pending the arrival of a parent. If no parent or adult can be located to take the responsibility of supervising the minor, the minor shall be turned over to the appropriate minor authorities. 
(Code 1972, § 14-70.5) 
Secs. 50-96-50-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PUBLIC SPEECH ON CITY PROPERTY 

Sec. 50-121. - Permit-Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make, or attempt to make, a public address or speech from any property owned by, or under the control of this city, by lease or otherwise, and situate within the corporate limits hereof, without first obtaining a permit from the city manager for each such intended, or attempted, public address. 
(Code 1972, § 14-50) 
Sec. 50-122. - Same-Application; contents. 
    No permit shall be issued pursuant to section 50-121 except upon written application to the city manager signed by the person proposing to make such address, or his duly authorized representative, giving: 
(1)  The name, nationality and post office address of the applicant; 
(2)  A statement that the applicant is not a member of a subversive group, party or organization, as currently compiled by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, or one that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States by force or violence; 
(3)  A statement that the applicant will make no appeal to prejudice, based upon race or religion; 
(4)  A statement that the applicant will make no statements with reference to any person, association or organization which from their usual meaning or common acceptation tend to violence or a breach of the peace; 
(5)  A statement that the applicant will not conduct himself in a disorderly manner and that he will not directly or indirectly incite, or precipitate, a riot or other disorderly conduct on the part of his audience, or any member thereof; 
(6)  A statement that he will accord to every orderly person an opportunity to hear his address without insult, intimidation or conduct on his part calculated to cause a breach of the peace; and 
(7)  The specific time and place in this city of such proposed address. 
(Code 1972, § 14-51) 
Sec. 50-123. - Same-Bond. 
    The city manager, upon finding the application in compliance with this article, shall issue such permit upon the applicant, or someone for him, posting a bond, with surety approved by the city manager, in the penalty of $500.00, payable to this city, conditioned upon the truthfulness of the statements contained in the application for such permit and upon the observance by the speaker of the conditions of the permit, the provisions of this article and the other pertinent ordinances of this city. 
(Code 1972, § 14-52) 
Sec. 50-124. - Same-Prohibited areas for speaking. 
    No permit shall be issued by the city manager for any person to make a public address from any public street, alley, highway or sidewalk within the city. 
(Code 1972, § 14-53) 
Sec. 50-125. - Same-Copies and contents. 
    Every permit issued pursuant to section 50-121 shall be made in triplicate, one copy thereof to be delivered to the applicant, one to the chief of police of this city and the other retained by the city manager for his files, to which he shall attach the application filed pursuant hereto. Each such permit shall contain the name, post office address of the applicant; the date and hour of the proposed public address; and a designation of the place within this city at which such address is proposed to be delivered. 
(Code 1972, § 14-54) 
Sec. 50-126. - Definition of prohibited action; constitutes disorderly conduct. 
    For the purpose of this article, conduct, active or passive, by words spoken or written, which tend to inflame, or embitter, degrade, or incite, or which pit race against race, sect, cult or creed against sect, cult or creed, or which tend to incite to violence or other disorderly conduct, or which tend to defamation or slander of an individual, race, sect or cult, or which advocates subversive conduct on the part of anyone, or which intends, or appears to advocate the overthrow of any government within these United States, or which advocates a program of violence, or which is of an inflammatory nature as to a political party or its adherents, or any other conduct which tends to violence and a breach of the peace, shall all, or any one of which, be construed as in violation of this Code and shall likewise constitute disorderly conduct. 
(Code 1972, § 14-55) 
Secs. 50-127-50-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - UNSAFE AREAS NEAR STREET OR SIDEWALK 

Sec. 50-151. - Prohibited generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner, tenant or lessees of any premises adjacent to any street in the city to maintain any dangerous pit, open well, embankment, dangerous wall or any like perilous thing near and adjoining any street or sidewalk. 
(Code 1972, § 14-1) 
Sec. 50-152. - Filling. 
    Every owner, operator, proprietor, superintendent or conductor of any sawmill or other manufacturing plant, or any other person who has caused to be dug, on his own land or the land of another, any well or pit for the use of such sawmill, plant or person shall fill such well or pit with earth so that the same shall not be dangerous to human beings, animals or fowl at the time of or before such mill or plant shall be removed or such well or such pit otherwise abandoned; and, any person owning land whereon any such well or pit is located shall in the same manner fill with earth any such well or pit which has been abandoned, provided such person has knowledge of the existence of such well or pit. For the purpose of this section, the word "pit" shall include an uncompleted basement or cellar left open and abandoned and constituting a hazard to the health and welfare of the community. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1972, § 14-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-316. 
Sec. 50-153. - Covers to be kept on certain wells. 
    Every person owning or occupying any land on which there is a well having a diameter greater than six inches and which is more than ten feet deep shall at all times keep the same covered in such a manner as not to be dangerous to human beings, animals or fowl. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1972, § 14-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-317, 18.2-318. 
Sec. 50-154. - Notice to abate or correct; abatement or correction by owner. 
    It shall be the duty of the city manager to serve written notice on the owner, tenant or lessee of any premises maintaining any excavation, construction or condition in violation of section 50-151 or 50-153 directing such owner, tenant or lessee to abate or correct the excavation, construction or condition referred to in the notice. Such owner, tenant or lessee, upon receipt of such notice, shall abate or correct the excavation, construction or condition in question by providing a proper fence, railing, barrier or otherwise abating or correcting such excavation, construction or condition, to the satisfaction of the city manager. 
(Code 1972, § 14-4) 
Sec. 50-155. - Failure of owner to abate or correct. 
    Upon failure to abate or correct the excavation, construction or condition referred to in a notice given pursuant to section 50-154 within ten days after service of such notice, as provided in such section, the owner, tenant or lessee in question shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. The abatement procedure provided in section 34-87 and following may be used. 
(Code 1972, § 14-5) 
Sec. 50-156. - Open drainage ditches. 
    This article shall in no way affect any open drainage ditches. 
(Code 1972, § 14-6) 
Secs. 50-157-50-185. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FRAUD AND DECEIT 

Sec. 50-186. - Defrauding hotels, motels, campgrounds, boardinghouses, restaurants, eating houses or amusement parks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, without paying therefor, and with the intent to cheat or defraud the owner or keeper to: 
(1)  Put up at a hotel, motel, campground or boardinghouse; 
(2)  Obtain food from a restaurant or other eating house; 
(3)  Gain entrance to an amusement park; or 
(4)  Without having an express agreement for credit, procure food, entertainment or accommodation from any hotel, motel, campground, boardinghouse, restaurant, eating house or amusement park. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, with intent to cheat or defraud the owner or keeper out of the pay therefor to obtain credit at a hotel, motel, campground, boardinghouse, restaurant or eating house for food, entertainment or accommodation by means of any false show of baggage or effects brought thereto. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person, with intent to cheat or defraud, to obtain credit at a hotel, motel, campground, boardinghouse, restaurant, eating house or amusement park for food, entertainment or accommodation through any misrepresentation or false statement. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person, with intent to cheat or defraud, to remove or cause to be removed any baggage or effects from a hotel, motel, campground, boardinghouse, restaurant or eating house while there is a lien existing thereon for the proper charges due from him for fare and board furnished. 
(e)  Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, if the value of service, credit or benefit procured or obtained is less than $200.00, be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1972, § 14-89) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-188. 
Sec. 50-187. - Defrauding keeper of motor vehicles or watercraft. 
    A person shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor if he: 
(1)  Stores a motor vehicle, boat or other watercraft with any person engaged in the business of conducting a garage, marina, watercraft dealership or other facility for the storage of motor vehicles, boats or other watercraft; furnishing of supplies to motor vehicles, boats or other watercraft; or alteration or repair of motor vehicles, boats or other watercraft, and obtains storage, supplies, alterations or repairs for such motor vehicle, boat or other watercraft, without having an express agreement for credit, or procures storage, supplies, alterations or repairs on account of such motor vehicle, boat or other watercraft, so stored, without paying therefor, and with the intent to cheat or defraud the owner or keeper of the garage, marina or boat repair facility; 
(2)  With such intent, obtains credit at the garage, marina, watercraft dealership or boat repair facility for such storage, supplies, alterations or repairs through any misrepresentation or false statement; or 
(3)  With such intent, removes or causes to be removed any such motor vehicle, boat or other watercraft from any such garage, marina, watercraft dealership or boat repair facility while there is a lien existing thereon for the proper charges due from him for storage, supplies, alterations or repairs furnished thereon, in accordance with the provisions of state law. 
(Code 1972, § 14-90) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-189; lien of keeper of livery stable, garage, marina, etc., Code of Virginia, § 43-32; lien of mechanic for repairs, Code of Virginia, § 43-33. 
Sec. 50-188. - Bad checks-Issuance as constituting larceny. 
(a)  Any person who, with intent to defraud, shall make or draw, utter or deliver any check, draft or order for the payment of money, in any sum under $200.00, upon any bank, banking institution, trust company or other depository, knowing, at the time of such making, drawing, uttering or delivering, that the maker or drawer has not sufficient funds in, or credit with, such bank, banking institution, trust company or other depository, for the payment of such check, draft or order, although no express representation is made in reference thereto, shall be guilty of larceny, and punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(b)  The word "credit," as used in this section, shall mean any arrangement or understanding with the bank, banking institution, trust company or other depository for the payment of such check, draft or order. 
(c)  Any person making, drawing, uttering or delivering any such check, draft or order in payment as a present consideration for goods or services for the purposes set out in this section shall be guilty as provided in this section. 
(Code 1972, § 14-91) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-181. 
Sec. 50-189. - Same-Evidence of intent and knowledge. 
    In any prosecution under section 50-188, the making or drawing or uttering or delivery of a check, draft or order, payment of which is refused by the drawee because of lack of funds or credit, shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud or of knowledge of insufficient funds in, or credit with such bank, banking institution, trust company or other depository unless such maker or drawer, or someone for him, shall have paid the holder thereof the amount due thereon, together with interest, and protest fees (if any), within five days after receiving written notice that such check, draft or order has not been paid to the holder thereof. 
(Code 1972, § 14-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-183. 
Sec. 50-190. - Same-Evidence and presumption in malicious prosecution actions. 
    In any civil action growing out of an arrest under section 50-188, no evidence of statements or representations as to the status of the check, draft, order or deposit involved, or of any collateral agreement with reference to the check, draft or order shall be admissible, unless such statements, or representations, or collateral agreement, is written upon the instrument at the time it is given by the drawer. If payment of any check, draft or order for the payment of money is refused by the bank, banking institution, trust company or other depository upon which such instrument is drawn, and the person who drew or uttered such instrument is arrested or prosecuted under the provisions of section 50-188 for failure or refusal to pay such instrument, the one who arrested or caused such person to be arrested and prosecuted, or either, shall be conclusively deemed to have acted with reasonable or probable cause in any suit for damages that may be brought by the person who drew or uttered such instrument, if the one who arrested or caused such person to be arrested and prosecuted, or either, shall have, before doing so, presented or caused such instrument to be presented to the depository on which it was drawn where it was refused, and then waited five days after notice, as provided in section 50-189, without the amount due under the provisions of such instrument being paid. 
(Code 1972, § 14-93) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-185. 
Sec. 50-191. - Slugs and counterfeit coins; use in machines. 
    Any person who shall operate, cause to be operated, or attempt to operate or cause to be operated any coin box telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machine that operates, on the coin-in-the-slot principle, whether of like kind or not, designed only to receive lawful coin of the United States of America, in connection with the use or enjoyment of telephone or telegraph service, parking privilege or any other service, or the sale of merchandise or other property, by means of a slug, or any false, counterfeit, mutilated, sweated or foreign coin, or by any means, method, trick or device whatsoever, not authorized by the owner, lessee or licensee of such coin box telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machine; or who shall obtain or receive telephone or telegraph service, parking privileges, merchandise, or any other service or property from any such coin box telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machine, designed only to receive lawful coins of the United States of America, without depositing in or surrendering to such coin box telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machine, lawful coins of the United States of America to the amount required therefor by the owner, lessee or licensee of such coin box telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machine, shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1972, § 14-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-179. 
Secs. 50-192-50-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - GAMING OR GAMBLING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Gambling, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-325 et seq. 

Sec. 50-221. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Machine, apparatus or device means a slot machine or device that is adapted, or may readily be converted into one that is adapted, for use in such a way that, as a result of the insertion of any piece of money or coin or other object, such machine or device is caused to operate or may be operated, and by reason of any element of chance or of other outcome of such operation unpredictable by him the user: 
(1)  May receive or become entitled to receive any piece of money, credit, allowance or thing of value, or any check, slug, token or memorandum, whether of value or otherwise, which may be exchanged for any money, credit, allowance or thing of value, or which may be given in trade; or 
(2)  May secure additional chances or rights to use such machine, apparatus or device, irrespective of whether it may, apart from any element of chance or unpredictable outcome of such operation, also sell, deliver or present some merchandise, indication of weight, entertainment or other thing of value. 
Such machine, apparatus or device is no less a slot machine or device within the provisions of this article if it indicates beforehand the definite result of one or more operations but not of all operations. 
(Code 1972, § 14-116) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 50-222. - Betting, wagering, playing for money-Generally. 
    Any person who shall bet, wager or play at any game for money or other thing of value shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1972, § 14-108) 
State Law reference- Illegal gambling, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-326. 
Sec. 50-223. - Same-In public place. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to bet or play at any table, bank or wheel of fortune in violation of section 50-222, or at any restaurant, race field, storehouse, tavern, inn or other public house, or in any street, highway, or other public place, or in any outhouse or other place where people resort for the purpose of gaming, to play at any game except billiards, bowls, chess, backgammon, drafts, dominoes, or a licensed game, or bet on the sides of those who play. 
(Code 1972, § 14-109) 
Sec. 50-224. - Same-Inclusions. 
    All houses and offices commonly known as public, and all gaming houses, are included within the meaning of section 50-223. Any room attached to any such public house, and commonly used for gaming, is also included, whether the same is kept closed or open. A business office after business hours, or a private residence, is not to be construed as within the meaning of a public house or place, unless such office after business hours, or private residence, is commonly used for gaming. 
(Code 1972, § 14-110) 
Sec. 50-225. - Same-Offense complete without betting. 
    In prosecutions under section 50-223 or 50-224, it shall not be necessary for the prosecution to prove that any money, or articles of value, or the representation of either, was bet at such game. 
(Code 1972, § 14-111) 
Sec. 50-226. - Keeping gaming bank, gaming tables, wheel of fortune, slot machine or pigeonhole table; seizure; disposition. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or exhibit for the purpose of gaming, any gaming table or bank of any name or description whatever or any table or bank used for gaming which has no name, any wheel of fortune or slot machine, or any pigeonhole table, whether the game or table is played with cards, dice or otherwise, or to be a partner or concerned in interest in the keeping or exhibiting of such table or bank. Any such table, bank or wheel of fortune and all the money, stakes or exhibits to allure persons to be at such table, bank or wheel may be seized by order of the court, or under warrant of a magistrate, and the monies so seized shall be forfeited to the city and the paraphernalia shall be burned; provided, however, that when any billiard or pool table or other paraphernalia, not inherently gambling paraphernalia, is so seized, the court may, in its discretion, award the same to some charitable organization upon the condition that it be used only for the purpose of recreation. 
(Code 1972, § 14-112) 
Sec. 50-227. - Occupant of premises permitting gaming tables, gaming bank or wheel of fortune. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to permit a gaming table, gaming bank or wheel of fortune, such as is mentioned in section 50-226, to be kept or exhibited on any premises that he owns, leases or occupies, or keep a place resorted to for the purpose of gaming, or a place frequented for such purposes, or reside in such place for such purposes. 
(Code 1972, § 14-113) 
State Law reference- Permitting continuance of gambling place, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-329. 
Sec. 50-228. - Slot machines, punchboards, similar devices-Keeping or exhibiting for sale or use. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Keep or exhibit for sale or use, or have an interest in keeping or exhibiting for sale or use, any punchboard or similar device of any kind or description; slot machine or similar device of any kind, or character, or other device that operates on the coin-in-the-slot principle, in the operation of which any element of chance whatever may enter, or through and from which it may be possible for one person to get any article of more value than that which any other person could and would get, or through and from which the article or thing vended is not the fair equivalent in value, to the coin required to operate such machine or device; or 
(2)  Permit any such punchboard or slot machine or similar device to be kept or exhibited for use in his place of business or in any other place in the city. 
Such punchboard, slot machine or other device shall be deemed a gaming apparatus and shall be embraced within the provisions of the state search warrant laws, insofar as such laws relate to gaming apparatus. The possession of any such punchboard, slot machine, or other device shall be prima facie evidence of the use thereof. Any slot machine or device, that operates on the coin-in-the-slot principle and which does not uniformly return to the customer in each transaction the equivalent in value and kind of merchandise unaccompanied by coins, trade checks or other items of monetary value that it returned in each preceding transaction shall be deemed to embody the element of chance within the meaning of this section, even though the machine or device is so constructed as to indicate in advance of each transaction what it will dispense upon the deposit of the next coin or slug. 
(Code 1972, § 14-114) 
State Law reference- What may be searched and seized, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-53; to whom search warrant directed, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-56; disposition of property seized, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-58. 
Sec. 50-229. - Same-Manufacture, storage, possession, sale, rental, lease, loan, operation or maintenance; reception of income. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Manufacture, own, store, keep, possess, sell, rent, lease, let on shares, lend or give away, transport or expose for sale or lease, offer to sell, rent, lease, let on shares, lend or give away, permit the operation of, or permit to be placed, maintained, used or kept in any room, space or building of any kind, public or quasipublic or private, owned, leased or occupied by him or under his management or control any slot machine or device; or 
(2)  Make or permit to be made with any person any agreement, express or implied or in any other way, with reference to any slot machine or device, pursuant to which the user thereof, as a result of any element of chance or other unpredictable outcome, may become entitled to receive any money, credit, allowance or thing of value or additional chance or right to use such machine or device, or to receive any check, slug, token or memorandum entitling the holder to receive any money, credit, allowance or thing of value, whether through such machine automatically or by delivery in any manner. 
(Code 1972, § 14-115) 
Sec. 50-230. - Lotteries-Managing, buying or selling chances. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Set up, promote or be concerned in managing or drawing a lottery or raffle for money or other thing of value; 
(2)  Knowingly permit such lottery in any house under his control; 
(3)  Knowingly permit money or other property to be raffled for in such house, or to be won in such house, by throwing or using dice, or by any other game of chance; 
(4)  Knowingly permit the sale in such house of any chance or ticket in, or share of a ticket in, a lottery, or any writing, certificate, bill, token or other device, purporting or intended to guarantee or ensure to any person, or entitle him to a prize or share of, or interest in a prize to be drawn in a lottery; or 
(5)  For himself or another person buy, sell or transfer, or have in his possession for the purpose of sale or with intent to exchange, negotiate or transfer, or aid in selling, exchanging, negotiating or transferring, a chance or ticket in or share of a ticket in a lottery, or any such writing, certificate, bill, token or device. 
However, nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the legal participation in the state lottery conducted by the commonwealth. 
(Code 1972, § 14-117) 
State Law reference- State Lottery Law, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-4000. 
Sec. 50-231. - Same-Certain acts not deemed "consideration." 
    In any prosecution under section 50-230, no consideration shall be deemed to have passed or been given because of any person's attendance upon the premises of another; his execution, mailing or delivery of an entry blank; his answering of questions, verbally or in writing; his witnessing of a demonstration or other proceeding; or any one or more thereof, where no charge is made to, paid by, or any purchase required of him in connection therewith. 
(Code 1972, § 14-118) 
Sec. 50-232. - Same-Forfeiture of money or other things of value drawn and property used; innocent owners or lienors. 
    All money and things of value drawn or proposed to be drawn by an inhabitant of this city and all money or things of value received by such person by reason of his being the owner or holder of a ticket or share of a ticket in any lottery or pretended lottery, contrary to this article, and all money, gambling paraphernalia, office equipment and all other personal property of any kind or character used in connection with the promotion, operation or conduct of any lottery or attempted lottery shall be forfeited to the city and may be seized by an officer and held to await proceedings for condemnation, provided that such forfeiture shall not extinguish the rights of any person without knowledge of the illegal use of such property who is the lawful owner or who has a lien on the property which has been perfected in the manner provided by law. The money or other personal property so forfeited shall be disposed of as provided by law. 
(Code 1972, § 14-119) 
Secs. 50-233-50-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OBSCENITY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Obscenity and related offenses, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-372 et seq. 

Sec. 50-261. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Obscene means that which, considered as a whole, has as its dominant theme or purpose an appeal to the prurient interest in sex, that is, a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, excretory functions or products thereof or sadomasochistic abuse, and which goes substantially beyond customary limits of candor in description or representation of such matters and which, taken as a whole, does not have serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
(Code 1972, § 14-170) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-372. 
Sec. 50-262. - Production, publication, sale, possession of obscene items. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to: 
(1)  Prepare any obscene item for the purposes of sale or distribution; 
(2)  Print, copy, manufacture, produce, or reproduce any obscene item for purposes of sale or distribution; 
(3)  Publish, sell, rent, lend, transport in intrastate commerce, or distribute or exhibit any obscene item, or offer to do any of these things; or 
(4)  Have in his possession with intent to sell, rent, lend, transport, or distribute any obscene item. 
Possession in public or in a public place of any obscene item shall be deemed prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the word "distribute" shall mean delivery in person, by mail, messenger or by any other means by which obscene items may pass from one person to another. 
(Code 1972, § 14-171) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-374. 
Sec. 50-263. - Obscene items enumerated. 
    Obscene items shall include: 
(1)  Any obscene book; 
(2)  Any obscene leaflet, pamphlet, magazine, booklet, picture, painting, bumper sticker, drawing, photograph, film, negative, slide, motion picture, videotape recording; or 
(3)  Any obscene figure, object, article, instrument, novelty device, or recording or transcription used or intended to be used in disseminating any obscene song, ballad, words, or sounds. 
(Code 1972, § 14-172) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-373. 
Sec. 50-264. - Obscene exhibitions and performances. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to: 
(1)  Produce, promote, prepare, present, manage, direct, carry on or participate in, any obscene exhibitions or performances, including the exhibition or performance of any obscene motion picture, play, drama, show, entertainment, exposition, tableau or scene; provided, however, that no employee of any person or legal entity operating a theatre, garden, building, structure, room or place which presents such obscene exhibition or performance shall be subject to prosecution under this section if the employee is not the manager of the theatre or an officer of such entity, and has no financial interest in such theatre other than receiving salary and wages; or 
(2)  Own, lease or manage any theatre, garden, building, structure, room or place and lease, let, lend or permit such theatre, garden, building, structure, room or place to be used for the purpose of presenting such obscene exhibition or performance or to fail to post prominently therein the name and address of a person resident in the locality who is the manager of such theatre, garden, building, structure, room or place. 
(Code 1972, § 14-173) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-375. 
Sec. 50-265. - Advertising obscene items, exhibitions or performances. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to prepare, print, publish, or circulate, or cause to be prepared, printed, published or circulated, any notice or advertisement of any obscene item proscribed in this article, or of any obscene performance or exhibition proscribed in this article, stating or indicating where such obscene item, exhibition, or performance may be purchased, obtained, seen or heard. 
(Code 1972, § 14-174) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-376. 
Sec. 50-266. - Placards, posters, banners, bills, writing or pictures. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, knowingly to expose, place, display, post, exhibit, paint, print, or mark or cause to be exposed, placed, displayed, posted, exhibited, painted, printed or marked, in or on any building, structure, billboard, wall or fence, or on any street, or in or upon any public place, any placard, poster, banner, bill, writing, or picture which is obscene, or which advertises or promotes any obscene item proscribed in this article or any obscene exhibition or performance proscribed in this article or knowingly to permit the same to be displayed on property belonging to or controlled by him. 
(Code 1972, § 14-175) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-377. 
Sec. 50-267. - Coercing acceptance of obscene articles or publications. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, as a condition to any sale, allocation, consignment or delivery for resale of any paper, magazine, book, periodical or publication, to require that the purchaser or consignee receive for resale any other article, book, or other publication which is obscene; or for any person to deny or threaten to deny any franchise or impose or threaten to impose any penalty, financial or otherwise, by reason of the failure or refusal of any person to accept such articles, books, or publications, or by reason of the return thereof. 
(Code 1972, § 14-176) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-378. 
Sec. 50-268. - Photographs, slides and motion pictures. 
    Every person who knowingly: 
(1)  Photographs himself or any other person, for purposes of preparing an obscene film, photograph, negative, slide or motion picture for purposes of sale or distribution; or 
(2)  Models, poses, acts, or otherwise assists in the preparation of any obscene film, photograph, negative, slide or motion picture for purposes of sale or distribution; 
shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1972, § 14-177) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-382. 
Sec. 50-269. - Indecent exposure. 
    Every person who intentionally makes an obscene display or exposure of his person, or the private parts thereof, in any public place, or in any place where others are present, or procures another to so expose himself, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. No person shall be deemed to be in violation of this section for breastfeeding a child in any public place or any place where others are present. 
(Code 1972, § 14-178) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-387. 
Sec. 50-270. - Employing or permitting minor to assist in offense. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to hire, employ, use or permit any minor to do or assist in doing any act or thing constituting an offense under this article. 
(Code 1972, § 14-179) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-379. 
Sec. 50-271. - Exceptions to article. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to apply to: 
(1)  The purchase, distribution, exhibition, or loan of any book, magazine, or other printed manuscript material by any library, school, or institution of higher learning, supported by public appropriation; 
(2)  The purchase, distribution, exhibition, or loan of any work of art by any museum of fine arts, school, or institution of higher learning, supported by public appropriation; or 
(3)  The exhibition or performance of any play, drama, tableau, or motion picture by any theater, museum of fine arts, school, or institution of higher learning, supported by public appropriation. 
(Code 1972, § 14-180) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-383. 
Secs. 50-272-50-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 50-301. - Lienholders unaffected. 
    The provisions of this article relating to trespass, injury or taking away shall not apply to a bona fide repossession of a vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel by the holder of a lien on such vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel, or by agents or employees of such lienholder. 
(Code 1972, § 14-191) 
Sec. 50-302. - Petit larceny. 
    Any person who: 
(1)  Commits larceny from the person of another of money or other thing of value of less than $5.00; or 
(2)  Commits simple larceny not from the person of another of goods and chattels of the value of less than $200.00, except as provided in state law, shall be deemed guilty of petit larceny, which shall be punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1972, § 14-192) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-96; grand larceny, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-95(iii). 
Sec. 50-303. - Injuring-Any property or monument. 
    If any person unlawfully destroys, defaces, damages or removes without the intent to steal any property, real or personal, not his own, or breaks down, destroys, defaces, damages or removes without the intent to steal, any monument erected for the purpose of marking the site of any engagement fought during the War Between The States, or for the purpose of designating the boundaries of any city, town, tract of land, or any tree marked for that purpose, he shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor if the value of or damage to the property or monument is less than $1,000.00. The amount of loss caused by the destruction, defacing, damage or removal of such property or monument may be established by proof of the fair market cost of repair or fair market replacement value. 
(Code 1972, § 14-193) 
Cross reference- Removal of sand or earth from street or sidewalk, § 62-8; injuring or destroying trees, § 82-34. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-137. 
Sec. 50-304. - Same-Curbs and gutters, sidewalks, streets or street markers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to injure, damage or deface any curb and gutter, sidewalk, street, or street marker. 
(Code 1972, § 14-194) 
Sec. 50-305. - Same-Tampering with fire hydrants. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper in any way with any fire hydrants. 
(Code 1972, § 14-195) 
Cross reference- Tampering with water department equipment, § 78-37. 
Sec. 50-306. - Same-Land and water vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, individually or in association with one or more others, to wilfully break, injure, tamper with or remove any part of any vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel for the purpose of injuring, defacing or destroying such vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel, or temporarily or permanently preventing its useful operation, or for any purpose against the will or without the consent of the owner of such vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel, or in any other manner willfully or maliciously interfere with or prevent the running or operation of such vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel. 
(Code 1972, §§ 14-196, 20-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-146. 
Sec. 50-307. - Receiving or concealing stolen property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to buy or receive from another person, or aid in concealing, any stolen goods or other thing, the subject of petit larceny, knowing the same to have been stolen. Such person shall be deemed guilty of larceny thereof, and may be proceeded against, although the principal offender be not convicted. 
(Code 1972, § 14-203) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-108. 
Secs. 50-308-50-335. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TRESPASS AND SIMILAR OFFENSES 

Sec. 50-336. - Trespass after having been forbidden to do so; penalties for violation of section. 
    If any person without authority of law goes upon or remains upon the lands, buildings or premises of another, or any portion or area thereof, after having been forbidden to do so, either orally or in writing, by the owner, lessee, custodian or other person lawfully in charge thereof, or after having been forbidden to do so by a sign or signs posted by such persons or by the holder of any easement or other right-of-way authorized by the instrument creating such interest to post such signs on such lands, structures, premises or portion or area thereof at a place or places where it or they may be reasonably seen, or if any person, whether he is the owner, tenant or otherwise entitled to the use of such land, building or premises, goes upon, or remains upon such land, building or premises after having been prohibited from doing so by a court of competent jurisdiction by an order or an ex parte order issued pursuant to state law, and after having been served with such order, he shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. This section shall not be construed to affect in any way designated provisions of state law on trespass. 
(Code 1972, § 14-197) 
State Law reference- Preliminary protective order, Code of Virginia, § 16.1-253; preliminary protective orders in cases of family abuse, Code of Virginia, § 16.1-253.1; disposition of children, Code of Virginia, §§ 16.1-278.2-16.1-278.6, 16.1-278.8, 16.1-278.14, 16.1-278.15; order of protection in cases of family abuse, Code of Virginia, § 16.1-279.1; similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-119; trespass provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-132-18.2-136; court may make orders pending suit for divorce, custody, visitation, etc., Code of Virginia, § 20-103. 
Sec. 50-336.1. - Designation of police to enforce trespass violations. 
    The owner of any real property in the City of Emporia may designate the city of police department as a "person lawfully in charge of his property" for the purpose of forbidding another to go on or remain upon the lands, buildings or premises of the owner as specified in the designation. Any such designation by a landowner in the city shall be in writing and remain on file with the City of Emporia Police Department. 
(Ord. No. 99-8, 8-3-99) 
Sec. 50-337. - Entering or setting in motion, vehicle, aircraft, boat, locomotive or rolling stock of railroad; exceptions. 
    Any person who shall, without the consent of the owner or person in charge of a vehicle, aircraft, boat, vessel, locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad, climb into or upon such vehicle, aircraft, boat, vessel, locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad, with intent to commit any crime, malicious mischief, or injury thereto, or who, while a vehicle, aircraft, boat, vessel, locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad is at rest and unattended, shall attempt to manipulate any of the levers and starting crank or other device, brakes or mechanism thereof or to set into motion such vehicle, aircraft, boat, vessel, locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad, with the intent to commit any crime, malicious mischief, or injury thereto, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor, except that such provision shall not apply when any such act is done in an emergency or in furtherance of public safety or by or under the direction of an officer in the regulation of traffic or performance of any other official duty. 
(Code 1972, §§ 14-198, 20-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-147. 
Sec. 50-338. - Instigating trespass by others; preventing service to persons. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit, urge, encourage, exhort, instigate or procure another or others to go upon or remain upon the lands, buildings or premises of another, or any part, portion or area thereof, knowing such other person to have been forbidden, either orally or in writing, to do so by the owner, lessee, custodian or other person lawfully in charge thereof, or knowing such other person to have been forbidden to do so by a sign posted on such lands, buildings, premises or part, portion or area thereof at a place where it may reasonably be seen; or for any person, on such lands, buildings, premises or part, portion or area thereof to prevent or seek to prevent the owner, lessee, custodian, person in charge or any of his employees from rendering service to any person not so forbidden. 
(Code 1972, § 14-199) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-120. 
Sec. 50-339. - Peeping or spying into structure occupied as dwelling. 
    If any person enters upon the property of another and secretly or furtively peeps, spies or attempts to peep or spy into or through a window, door or other aperture of any building, structure, or other enclosure of any nature occupied or intended for occupancy as a dwelling, whether or not such building, structure or enclosure is permanently situated or transportable and whether or not such occupancy is permanent or temporary, such person shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1972, § 14-200) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-130. 
Sec. 50-340. - Trespass at night upon church or school property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of some person authorized to give such consent, to go or enter upon, in the nighttime, the premises or property of any church or upon any school property for any purpose other than to attend a meeting or service held or conducted in such church or school property. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1972, § 14-201) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-128. 
Sec. 50-341. - Entering property of another for purpose of damaging it. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to enter the land, dwelling, outhouse or any other building of another for the purpose of damaging such property or any of the contents thereof or in any manner to interfere with the rights of the owner, user or the occupant thereof to use such property free from interference. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. However, if a person intentionally selects the property entered because of the race, religious conviction, color or national origin of the owner, user or occupant of the property, the penalty, upon conviction, shall include a mandatory, minimum term of confinement of at least six months, 30 days of which shall not be suspended, in whole or in part. 
(Code 1972, § 14-202) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-121. 
Secs. 50-342-50-371. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - TELEPHONE; CITIZENS BAND RADIO 

Sec. 50-372. - Use of profane, threatening or indecent language over public airways. 
    If any person shall use obscene, vulgar, profane, lewd, lascivious, or indecent language, or make any suggestion or proposal of an obscene nature, or threaten any illegal or immoral act with the intent to coerce, intimidate, or harass any person, over any telephone or citizens band radio, in this city, he shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1972, § 14-49) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-427. 
Sec. 50-373. - Duty of telephone companies; notices in directories. 
(a)  It shall be the duty, on pain of contempt of court, of each telephone company in this commonwealth to furnish immediately in response to a subpoena issued by a circuit court such information as it, its officers and employees may possess which, in the opinion of the court, may aid in the apprehension of persons suspected of violating the provisions of this article or the provisions of section 50-9. 
(b)  Every telephone directory distributed to the public which lists the calling numbers of telephones or of any telephone exchange located in this commonwealth shall contain a notice which explains the offenses made punishable under this article, such notice to be printed in type which conforms with and is comparable to other type on the same page, and to be placed in a prominent place in such directory. Any violation of this subsection shall be punishable as a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1972, § 14-49) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-431. 
Secs. 50-374-50-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - SEX OFFENSES 

Sec. 50-401. - Adultery defined; penalty. 
    Any person, being married, who voluntarily shall have sexual intercourse with any person not his or her spouse shall be guilty of adultery, punishable as a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1972, § 14-216) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-365. 
Sec. 50-402. - Fornication. 
    Any person, not being married, who voluntarily shall have sexual intercourse with any other person, shall be guilty of fornication, punishable as a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1972, § 14-217) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-344. 
Sec. 50-403. - Lewd and lascivious cohabitation. 
    If any persons, not married to each other, lewdly and lasciviously associate and cohabit together, or, whether married or not, be guilty of open and gross lewdness and lasciviousness, each of them shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. Upon a repetition of the offense, and conviction, each of them shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1972, § 14-218) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-345. 
Sec. 50-404. - Being a prostitute or prostitution. 
(a)  Any person who, for money or its equivalent, commits adultery, fornication or a crime against nature, or offers to commit adultery, fornication or a crime against nature and thereafter does any substantial act in furtherance thereof, shall be guilty of being a prostitute, or prostitution, which shall be punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person who offers money or its equivalent to another for the purpose of engaging in sexual acts as enumerated in subsection (a) of this section and thereafter does any substantial act in furtherance thereof shall be guilty of solicitation of prostitution and shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1972, § 14-219) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-346; crimes against nature, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-361. 
Sec. 50-405. - Residing in or frequenting bawdy place; "bawdy place" defined. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any bawdy place, or to reside in or at or visit, for immoral purposes, any such bawdy place. Each and every day such bawdy place shall be kept, resided in or visited, shall constitute a separate offense. In a prosecution under this section the general reputation of the place may be proved. As used in this section, "bawdy place" shall mean any place within or without any building or structure which is used or is to be used for lewdness, assignation or prostitution. 
(Code 1972, §§ 14-220, 14-221) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-347. 
Sec. 50-406. - Aiding prostitution or illicit sexual intercourse. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or any officer, employee or agent of any firm, association or corporation, with knowledge of, or good reason to believe, the immoral purpose of such visit, to take or transport or assist in taking or transporting, or offer to take or transport on foot or in any way, any person to a place, whether within or without any building or structure, used or to be used for the purpose of lewdness, assignation or prostitution within this commonwealth; or procure or assist in procuring for the purpose of illicit sexual intercourse, or any crime against nature, or to give any information or direction to any person with intent to enable such person to commit an act of prostitution. 
(Code 1972, § 14-222) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-348; crimes against nature, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-361. 
Sec. 50-407. - Using vehicles to promote prostitution or unlawful sexual intercourse. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner or chauffeur of any vehicle, with knowledge or reason to believe the same is to be used for such purpose, to use the same or to allow the same to be used for the purposes of prostitution or unlawful sexual intercourse, or to aid or promote such prostitution or unlawful sexual intercourse by the use of any such vehicle. 
(Code 1972, § 14-223) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-349. 
Sec. 50-408. - Confinement of convicted prostitutes and persons violating sections 50-405 through 50-407. 
    Every person convicted of being a prostitute and every person convicted of violating any of the provisions of sections 50-405 through 50-407 shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor; provided, however, that in any case in which a city or county farm or hospital is available for the confinement of persons so convicted, confinement may be in such farm or hospital, in the discretion of the court or judge. 
(Code 1972, § 14-224) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-350. 
Chapter 54 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; community development, ch. 22; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; subdivisions, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 78; zoning, ch. 90. 
State Law reference- Planning, subdivision of land and zoning, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-427 et seq.; local planning commission, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-427.1 et seq., 15.1-437 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 54-1-54-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 54-31. - Creation; composition; appointment and terms of members. 
(a)  There is hereby created a city planning commission, consisting of nine members, appointed by the council, all of whom shall be residents of the city, and who shall be qualified by knowledge and experience to make decisions on questions of community growth and development. At least one-half of such members shall be owners of real property. 
(b)  One member of the planning commission may be a member of the council, and one member may be a member of the administrative branch of government of the city. The term of each of these two members shall be co-extensive with the term of office to which he has been elected or appointed, unless the city council, at the first regular meeting each year, appoints others to serve as their representatives. The remaining members, called "citizen members" of the planning commission shall serve terms of four years each. 
(Code 1972, § 2-103; Ord. No. 15-33, 9-1-15) 
State Law reference- Code of Virginia, § 15.221, Creation of local planning commissions; participation in planning district commissions or joint local commissions. § 15.2-2212, Qualifications, appointment, removal, terms and compensation of members of local planning commissions. 
Sec. 54-32. - Filling vacancies. 
    Vacancies on the planning commission shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term only. 
(Code 1972, § 2-104) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-437. 
Sec. 54-33. - Compensation of members. 
    All members of the planning commission shall serve as such without compensation. 
(Code 1972, § 2-105) 
State Law reference- Compensation, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-437. 
Sec. 54-34. - Removal of members. 
    Any member of the planning commission may be removed for malfeasance in office. 
(Code 1972, § 2-106) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-437. 
Sec. 54-35. - Officers generally. 
    The planning commission shall elect its chairman and vice-chairman from among the citizen members, for a term of one year, who shall be eligible for reelection. The planning commission may create and fill such other offices as it may deem necessary. 
(Code 1972, § 2-107) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-442. 
Sec. 54-36. - Secretary. 
    The city manager or his designee shall act as secretary to the planning commission if the planning commission shall so require. 
(Code 1972, § 2-108) 
Sec. 54-37. - Appointment of employees. 
    The planning commission shall appoint such employees as it may deem necessary for its work. 
(Code 1972, § 2-109) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-442. 
Sec. 54-38. - Meetings. 
(a)  The planning commission shall hold at least one regular meeting in each year. Special meetings of the planning commission may be called by the chairman or by two members upon written request to the secretary. The secretary shall mail to all members, at least five days in advance of a special meeting, a written notice fixing the time and place of the meeting and the purpose thereof. 
(b)  Written notice of a special meeting is not required if the time of the special meeting has been fixed at a regular meeting, or if all members are present at the special meeting or file a written waiver of notice. 
(Code 1972, § 2-110) 
State Law reference- Meetings, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-439. 
Sec. 54-39. - Quorum. 
    A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum, and no action of the planning commission shall be valid unless authorized by a majority vote of those present and voting. 
(Code 1972, § 2-111) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-440. 
Sec. 54-40. - Rules for transaction of business. 
    The planning commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business. 
(Code 1972, § 2-112) 
Sec. 54-41. - Records. 
    The planning commission shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record. 
(Code 1972, § 2-113) 
Sec. 54-42. - Expenditures. 
    The expenditures of the planning commission, exclusive of gifts or grants to the planning commission, shall be within the amounts duly appropriated by the council for that purpose, and subject to all restrictions provided by law. 
(Code 1972, § 2-114) 
Sec. 54-43. - Attendance of members at planning conferences. 
    Members of the planning commission, when duly authorized by the planning commission, may attend planning conferences or meetings of planning institutes or hearings upon pending planning legislation, and may visit other communities. The planning commission may, by resolution spread upon its minutes, pay the reasonable traveling expenses incident to such attendance or visits. 
(Code 1972, § 2-115) 
Sec. 54-44. - Furnishing of information by public officials. 
    All public officials shall, upon request, furnish to the planning commission, within a reasonable time, such available information as it may require for its work. 
(Code 1972, § 2-117) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-444; local planning commission, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-427.1 et seq., 15.1-437 et seq. 
Sec. 54-45. - Powers generally. 
    To effectuate the state law, the planning commission shall: 
(1)  Exercise general supervision of, and make regulations for, the administration of its affairs; 
(2)  Prescribe rules pertaining to its investigations and hearings; 
(3)  Supervise its fiscal affairs and responsibilities, under rules and regulations as prescribed by the council; 
(4)  Keep a complete record of its proceedings; and be responsible for the custody and preservation of its papers and documents; 
(5)  Make recommendations and periodic reports to the council concerning the operation of the planning commission and the status of planning within its jurisdiction; 
(6)  Prepare, publish and distribute reports, ordinances and other material relating to its activities; 
(7)  Prepare and submit an annual budget in the manner prescribed by the council; and 
(8)  If deemed advisable, establish an advisory committee. 
(Code 1972, § 2-118) 
State Law reference- Planning, subdivision of land and zoning, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-427 et seq. 
Sec. 54-46. - Contracting with city planners and other consultants. 
    The planning commission may contract with city planners, engineers, architects and other consultants for services it may require. 
(Code 1972, § 2-119) 
Sec. 54-47. - Right of entry. 
    The planning commission or its members, officers and employees in the performance of their functions may enter upon any land at reasonable times and make examinations and surveys and place and maintain necessary monuments and marks thereon. 
(Code 1972, § 2-120) 
Sec. 54-48. - Historical landmarks, statuary and works of art. 
    The planning commission shall have the power to control, preserve and care for historical landmarks and to control the design and location of statuary and other works of art, which are or may become the property of the city, and the removal, relocation and alteration of any such works belonging to the city. 
(Code 1972, § 2-121) 
Sec. 54-49. - Design of harbors, bridges and other public structures. 
    The planning commission shall have the power to make suggestions concerning the designs of harbors, bridges, viaducts, street fixtures and other public structures and appurtenances. 
(Code 1972, § 2-122) 
Sec. 54-50. - Programs for public structures and improvements. 
    The planning commission shall, from time to time, recommend to the appropriate public officials programs for public structures and improvements and for the financing thereof. 
(Code 1972, § 2-123) 
Sec. 54-51. - Performance of functions of zoning commission; adoption and operation of zoning plan and ordinance. 
    In preparing any zoning plan, the planning commission shall perform all the functions of a zoning commission as provided by law, and the zoning plan and ordinance shall be adopted and be operative in the manner provided by law. 
(Code 1972, § 2-124) 
State Law reference- Zoning, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-486 et seq. 
Secs. 54-52-54-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COMPREHENSIVE PLAN[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Comprehensive plan, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-446.1 et seq. 

Sec. 54-66. - Purpose of division. 
    The comprehensive plan shall be made with the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the city and its environs which will, in accordance with existing and future needs, best promote public health, safety, morals, order, convenience and general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development. 
(Code 1972, § 2-137) 
Sec. 54-67. - Power to make and adopt; required details; partial adoption and publication generally; amendments. 
(a)  The planning commission shall have the power and duty to make and adopt a comprehensive plan for the physical development of the city, which, with the accompanying maps, plats, charts and descriptive matter, shall show the planning commission's recommendations for the development of the territory covered by the plan, including, among other things, the general location, character and extent of streets, viaducts, subways, bridges, waterways, waterfronts, beaches, boulevards, parkways, playgrounds, squares, parks, aviation fields and other public ways, grounds and open spaces and the general location of public buildings and other public property. It shall also show the planning commission's recommendations for the removal, relocation, widening, narrowing, vacating, abandonment, change of use or extension of existing ways, grounds, open spaces, buildings, property, utilities or terminals, as well as a zoning plan for the control of the height, area, bulk, location and use of buildings and premises. 
(b)  In the preparation of a comprehensive plan the planning commission shall make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of the existing conditions and trends of growth, and of the probable future requirements of its territory and inhabitants. The comprehensive plan shall be made with the purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the territory which will, in accordance with present and probable future needs and resources, best promote the health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare of the inhabitants. 
(c)  The comprehensive plan shall be general in nature, in that it shall designate the general or approximate location, character, and extent of each feature shown on the plan and shall indicate where existing lands or facilities are proposed to be extended, widened, removed, relocated, vacated, narrowed, abandoned, or changed in use as the case may be. 
(d)  Such plan, with the accompanying maps, plats, charts, and descriptive matter, shall show the commission's long range recommendations for the general development of the territory covered by the comprehensive plan, including the location of existing or proposed recycling centers. It may include, but need not be limited to: 
(1)  The designation of areas for various types of public and private development and use, such as different kinds of residential, business, industrial, agricultural, conservation, recreation, public service, floodplain and drainage, and other areas; 
(2)  The designation of a system of transportation facilities such as streets, roads, highways, parkways, railways, bridges, viaducts, waterways, airports, ports, terminals, and other like facilities; 
(3)  The designation of a system of community service facilities such as parks, forests, schools, playgrounds, public buildings and institutions, hospitals, community centers, waterworks, sewage disposal or waste disposal areas, and the like; 
(4)  The designation of historical areas and areas for urban renewal or other treatment; 
(5)  The designation of areas for the implementation of reasonable ground water protection measures; 
(6)  An official map, a capital improvements program, a subdivision ordinance, a zoning ordinance and zoning district maps and agricultural and forestal district maps, where applicable; and 
(7)  The designation of areas for the implementation of measures to promote the construction and maintenance of affordable housing, sufficient to meet the current and future needs of residents of all levels of income in the locality while considering the current and future needs of the planning district within which the locality is situated. 
(e)  As the work of preparing the comprehensive plan progresses, the planning commission may, from time to time, recommend, and the council approve and adopt, parts thereof. Any such part shall cover one or more major sections or divisions of the county or city or one or more functional matters. 
(f)  After the adoption of a comprehensive plan, all amendments to it shall be recommended, and approved and adopted, respectively, as required by state law. If the council desires an amendment it may direct the planning commission to prepare an amendment and submit it to public hearing within 60 days after formal written request by the council. 
(Code 1972, § 2-131) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-446.1, 15.1-452, 15.1-453; advertisement of plans, ordinances, etc., joint public hearings, written notice of certain amendments, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-431. 
Sec. 54-68. - Adoption of whole or successive parts. 
(a)  The planning commission may adopt the plan as a whole by a single resolution or may, by successive resolutions, adopt successive parts of the plan, such parts corresponding with major geographical sections or geographical or topographical divisions of the city or with functional subdivisions of the subject matter of the comprehensive plan, and may adopt any amendment or extension thereof or addition thereto. 
(b)  Prior to the recommendation of a comprehensive plan or any part thereof, the planning commission shall give notice and hold a public hearing on the plan, after notice as required by state law. After such public hearing has been held, the planning commission may approve, amend and approve, or disapprove the comprehensive plan. Upon approval of the comprehensive plan, the planning commission shall by resolution recommend the plan to the council. 
(c)  The adoption of the plan or of any such part, amendment, extension or addition shall be by resolution of the planning commission, carried by the affirmative votes of not less than a majority of the full membership of the planning commission. The resolution shall refer expressly to the maps and descriptive and other matter intended by the planning commission to form the whole or part of the comprehensive plan, and the action taken shall be recorded on the maps and plan and descriptive matter by the identifying signature of the chairman or secretary of the planning commission. An attested copy of the comprehensive plan or any adopted part of such plan shall then be certified to council and to the clerk of the court where deeds are recorded. 
(Code 1972, § 2-132) 
State Law reference- Advertisement of plans, ordinances, etc., joint public hearings, written notice of certain amendments, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-431. 
Sec. 54-69. - Legal status. 
(a)  Whenever the planning commission shall have recommended a comprehensive plan or part thereof for the city and such plan shall have been approved and adopted by the council, it shall control the general or approximate location, character and extent of each feature shown on the plan. Thereafter, unless such feature is already shown on the adopted comprehensive plan or part thereof or is deemed so under subsection (d) of this section, no street or connection to an existing street, park or other public area, public building or public structure, public utility facility or public service corporation facility other than railroad facility, whether publicly or privately owned, shall be constructed, established or authorized, unless and until the general location or approximate location, character, and extent thereof has been submitted to and approved by the planning commission as being substantially in accord with the adopted comprehensive plan or part thereof. In connection with any such determination the planning commission may, and at the direction of the council shall, hold a public hearing, after notice as required by state law. 
(b)  The planning commission shall communicate its findings to the council, indicating its approval or disapproval with written reasons therefor. The council may overrule the action of the planning commission by a vote of a majority of the membership thereof. Failure of the planning commission to act within 60 days of such submission, unless such time shall be extended by the council, shall be deemed approval. The owners or their agents may appeal the decision of the planning commission to the council within ten days after the decision of the planning commission. The appeal shall be by written petition to the council setting forth the reasons for the appeal. The appeal shall be heard and determined within 60 days from its filing. A majority vote of the council shall overrule the planning commission. 
(c)  Widening, narrowing, extension, enlargement, vacation or change of use of streets or public areas shall likewise be submitted for approval, but paving, repair, reconstruction, improvement, drainage or similar work and normal service extensions of public utilities or public service corporations shall not require approval unless involving a change in location or extent of a street or public area. 
(d)  Any public area, facility or use as set forth in subsection (a) of this section which is identified within, but not the entire subject of, a submission under either the state law for subdivision or the state law for development, or both, may be deemed a feature already shown on the adopted comprehensive plan, and, therefore, excepted from the requirement for submittal to and approval by the planning commission or the council; provided, however, that the council has by ordinance or resolution defined standards governing the construction, establishment or authorization of such public area, facility or use or has approved it through acceptance of a proffer made pursuant to state law. 
(Code 1972, § 2-133) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-456; advertisement of plans, ordinances, etc., joint public hearings, written notice of certain amendments, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-431; plat of proposed subdivision and site plans to be submitted for approval, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-475; permitted provisions in subdivision ordinances, amendments, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-491(h). 
Sec. 54-70. - Promotion of public interest and understanding. 
    The planning commission shall promote public interest in and an understanding of the comprehensive plan and, to that end, may publish and distribute copies of the comprehensive plan or of any report and may employ such other means of publicity and education as it may determine. 
(Code 1972, § 2-134) 
Sec. 54-71. - Consultation with public officials, citizens and other organizations. 
    The planning commission shall consult and advise with public officials and agencies, public utility companies, civil, educational, professional and other organizations and with citizens with relation to the protecting or carrying out of the comprehensive plan. 
(Code 1972, § 2-135) 
Sec. 54-72. - Surveys and studies. 
    In the preparation of the comprehensive plan, the planning commission shall make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of existing conditions and future growth. 
(Code 1972, § 2-136) 
Chapter 58 - SECONDHAND GOODS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18; taxation, ch. 70; zoning, ch. 90. 
State Law reference- Local regulation of automobile graveyards and junkyards, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-28; municipal regulation of pawnshops and secondhand dealers, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-866; local limitations as to number of pawnshops, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4002; permit for trading in secondhand building fixtures, Code of Virginia, §§ 59.1-117, 59.1-118; report by dealer in junk or secondhand personal property to chief of police or sheriff, Code of Virginia, § 59.1-121; sale or exchange of secondhand watches, Code of Virginia, § 59.1-131 et seq. 

Sec. 58-1. - Junk and secondhand dealers; weekly reports. 
    Every purchaser of or dealer in secondhand articles or junk shall make a report to the chief of police on blanks to be furnished by him, covering transactions of the previous week, Monday through Saturday, on or before Wednesday of each week, showing a list or description of all secondhand articles bought, or on which money or other thing of value is loaned, and a description of the person from whom received, his name, place of residence and occupation. If there be no such property received, he shall report that fact, and the word "none" shall be sufficient for that purpose. 
(Code 1972, § 14-39) 
Chapter 62 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Department of public works, § 41 et seq. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; planning, ch. 54; subdivisions, ch. 66; traffic and vehicles, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 78; vegetation, ch. 82; vehicles for hire, ch. 86. 
State Law reference- Streets, alleys, sidewalks, etc., generally, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-14(1), (9), 15.1-363 et seq., 15.1-888 et seq.; limited access streets in cities and towns, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-16; bicycle trails or paths, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-16.2; official map, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-458 et seq.; local authority over highways, Code of Virginia, § 33.1-224 et seq.; pipelines and other works in streets, alleys, etc., Code of Virginia, § 56-257 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - Drainage-From gutters of projecting eaves. 
    All buildings, the eaves of which project over the sidewalk, shall be provided with gutters so that there shall be no dripping from the eaves upon the sidewalk. All gutters, the waters from which empty upon a street or sidewalk, shall be so constructed as to discharge such water only at or below the surface of the ground. No building shall be constructed with eaves projecting over the sidewalk. 
(Code 1972, § 18-2) 
Sec. 62-2. - Same-Over footways; abatement. 
    No water from any lot, gutter or spout shall be permitted to flow across the footway of any street except in a covered drain, the cover of which shall not be above the surface of such footway. Such drain shall be of sufficient capacity to convey the water to be discharged by it, and shall be built and kept open and in good repair by the owner or occupant of the premises whence it proceeds. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11 after notice by the city manager or superintendent of public works to abate the same; provided, however, that in case of failure to comply with the order to abate within five days, the city manager or superintendent of public works may cause the construction to be made at the cost of the city, and the cost thereof, with 20 percent additional as a fine, shall be collected from the party in default in like manner as fines and assessments are collected. 
(Code 1972, § 18-3) 
Sec. 62-3. - Fruit skins, vegetables, other dangerous items. 
    No person shall throw upon the sidewalks or streets any rind, skin or peeling of any fruit, vegetable or other article liable to cause any person to slip or fall, or endanger the public health. 
(Code 1972, § 18-5) 
Sec. 62-4. - Cleanliness-Duty of abutting occupant generally. 
    It shall be the duty of all persons occupying stores or premises fronting on any street to keep the sidewalk immediately in front thereof clean and clear of rubbish, trash, wastepaper, filth and other offensive matter, and they shall not sweep the same into a driveway or street, but shall take up the same and put it in proper receptacles to be removed as other trash, wastepaper, filth and other offensive matter is removed. During dry weather, sidewalks shall be sprinkled with water before sweeping so as to prevent dust from flying into faces of pedestrians. In case of office buildings, apartment houses or other buildings occupied by three or more tenants, this duty shall be upon the owner, or the person in charge of the entire building. Where the first floor is occupied as a store or mercantile establishment, the duty of keeping the sidewalk in front thereof clean shall be and is hereby imposed upon the occupant of such store or proprietor of the mercantile business. 
(Code 1972, § 18-7) 
Sec. 62-5. - Same-Sweeping from interior onto sidewalk. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep dirt or trash from the interior of a store or premises occupied by him upon the sidewalk, but such dirt or trash shall be taken up and put in proper receptacles for removal. 
(Code 1972, § 18-8) 
Sec. 62-6. - Same-Private alley. 
    It shall be the duty of every owner of a private alley to have the same so graded as to prevent the accumulation therein of water or filth, and keep the same constantly clean and in good order. Every 24 hours that he shall so neglect or refuse to comply with the provisions of this section, after notice of the violation by the city manager, superintendent of public works or chief of police, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1972, § 18-9) 
Sec. 62-7. - Same-Throwing or depositing of glass and other injurious items; enumeration. 
(a)  No person shall throw or deposit upon any street or sidewalk any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans or any other substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle upon such street or sidewalk; nor shall any person throw or deposit, or cause or allow to be deposited, upon any street or sidewalk any soil, sand, mud, gravel or other substance so as to create a hazard or nuisance to the public. 
(b)  Any person who drops, or permits to be dropped or thrown, upon any street or sidewalk any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove the same or cause it to be removed. 
(c)  Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a street shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the street or sidewalk from such vehicle. 
(Code 1972, § 18-10) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 74. 
Sec. 62-8. - Removal of sand or earth. 
    No person shall remove sand or earth from the streets or sidewalks of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 18-12) 
Cross reference- Damaging property generally, § 50-303. 
Secs. 62-9-62-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREETS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 62-36. - Stopping travel on streets under repair. 
    The city shall have the right to stop travel on any street when the same is being repaved or improved, if deemed necessary. 
(Code 1972, § 18-6) 
Sec. 62-37. - Placement of poles of telegraph, electric or telephone companies. 
    Telegraph, electric and telephone companies, when authorized by the council to do business in the city, may place such reasonable number of poles in the streets as may be requisite for their business, but such poles shall be located and moved according to the direction and under the supervision of the city manager and superintendent of public works. No telephone, telegraph, electric or other pole shall be erected on the streets except immediately within and against the curbing of the sidewalks. Any such poles already erected outside the curbing shall be removed when so directed by the council. No such poles shall be erected until inspected and approved by the city manager or superintendent of public works. 
(Code 1972, § 18-11) 
State Law reference- Municipal franchises, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-307 et seq. 
Secs. 62-38-62-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ACCEPTANCE 

Sec. 62-56. - Minimum right-of-way and roadway widths. 
    Before any street will be accepted for maintenance and improvement, it must have an unrestricted right-of-way of 50 feet and have a roadway of not less than 30 feet graded, drained and graveled to the satisfaction of the council; provided, however, that the council may waive such requirements in previously recorded nonconforming subdivisions. 
(Code 1972, § 18-13) 
Sec. 62-57. - By ordinance or resolution. 
    The acceptance of any dedication of any street may be done only by ordinance or resolution especially adopted, according to law, for that purpose. 
(Code 1972, § 18-14) 
Sec. 62-58. - Prerequisite to improvement at public expense. 
    No street shall be deemed entitled to improvement at the public expense unless such street shall have been opened or legally recognized or accepted as such by the city, through the council. 
(Code 1972, § 18-15) 
Sec. 62-59. - Additional prerequisites. 
    No street or any extension of a street located in the city, which street is platted, designed, laid out or constructed primarily for the purpose of providing access to land abutting on such street, shall be opened, recognized or accepted by the city unless and until the following requirements as to the preparation of the street have been complied with: 
(1)  Grading, drainage, surfacing and surface treatment. Such street shall be graded, drained, surfaced and surface treated without expense to the city, and the street widths, alignment and grades, as well as the quality and quantity of materials and the quality of workmanship, shall be approved by the city. 
(2)  Width of streets. All such streets shall have a minimum width of 50 feet; provided, however, that on such streets being used as such, but which have not been accepted by the city which because of location of improvements and building on adjoining property, it is impossible to accept the street, the city may waive the 50-foot right-of-way, provided other improvements required in this section are made. 
(3)  Sanitary sewers. A sanitary sewer shall be installed in the street for the full length of the street and shall be connected with existing sewerage of the city before the street is surface treated, and the size, type, location and grade of such sewer shall be approved by the city. The cost of such installation shall be borne one-third by the city and two-thirds by the real estate developer or person offering to dedicate the street. 
(4)  Water main. A water main shall be installed in such street for the full length of the street and shall be connected with the existing water system of the city before the street is surface treated, and the size, type, location and grade of the water main shall be approved by the city. The cost of such installation shall be paid one-third by the city and two-thirds by the real estate developer or person offering to dedicate the street. 
(5)  Curb and gutter. If the person offering to dedicate such street agrees that a curb and gutter on such street will be mutually beneficial to the city and to the abutting property owners if installed, such curb and gutter may be installed; provided, however, that the city shall pay one-third of the cost of such curb and gutter and the person offering to dedicate the street shall pay two-thirds of the cost of such curb and gutter; and provided further that such curb and gutter shall be constructed according to the city's specifications, grades and alignment. 
(6)  Method of work; payment of costs. The city shall approve and let the contract for all such improvements, or do the work under its own supervision. Prior to acceptance by the city, the city manager shall prepare an estimate of the cost of the work and the person offering to dedicate the street shall deposit with the city two-thirds of the entire cost based on the estimate, together with a signed agreement that he will pay two-thirds of the cost and will deposit at any time on request by the city additional funds if the cost is more than the original estimate. The city will refund any deposit in excess of two-thirds of the cost. 
(7)  Refusal to aid in improvement. The city council may in its discretion refuse to appropriate city funds or assume the responsibility of making any contribution for the improvement of any street or development if such refusal is deemed for the best interests of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 18-16) 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 78; applications for sewer line extensions for commercial and industrial use, § 78-167. 
Sec. 62-60. - Sharing in improvements by city. 
    The city is in no way obligated to share in the cost of any improvements to water, sewer, curb, gutter, and like matters, and shall share in the cost of such improvements only when there are sufficient funds available and when there will be a direct benefit to the public as a whole. 
(Code 1972, § 18-17) 
Secs. 62-61-62-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SIDEWALKS 

Sec. 62-86. - Width. 
    No sidewalk, where space therefor is adequate, shall be less than five feet in width, including the width of the curb. 
(Code 1972, § 18-1) 
Sec. 62-87. - Snow, sleet and ice removal. 
    It shall be the duty of occupants of every house or lot which abuts upon a sidewalk or footway of concrete, stone, brick or wood, to have all snow removed from such sidewalk or footway within six hours after the snow shall have ceased falling, unless such snow shall have fallen during the night or on Sunday, in which case it shall be removed by 12:00 noon on the day following. The same requirements shall exist with respect to ice or sleet on sidewalks or footways, except that the same, when it cannot be removed without injury to the sidewalk or footway, shall be covered, within the period of time specified, with sand, ashes or some other substance which will render it safe for travel. Whenever any house or lot is unoccupied, it shall be the duty of the owner, or the agent of the owner thereof, to have the snow or ice removed from his sidewalk or footway, as required in this section of occupants. 
(Code 1972, § 18-4) 
Secs. 62-88-62-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - IMPROVEMENT ON REQUEST 

Sec. 62-116. - Authorized; required deposit. 
    Subject to section 62-117, when, on any street which has been accepted by the city and is a part of the city system, the owners of property adjoining such street request the paving of the street, the installation of curb and gutter or sidewalk, the council may in its discretion pave the street or install the curb and gutter or sidewalk, upon receipt of a written petition signed by the property owners agreeing to pay two-thirds of the cost of the installation of a curb and gutter or sidewalk. If the council approves such request, prior to the paving of the street or installation, an estimate of the cost of the work shall be made and the property owners shall deposit two-thirds of the amount of such estimate. Any deficiency between two-thirds of the actual cost and the two-thirds of the estimated cost shall be paid by the property owner, and any overpayment by the property owner shall be refunded. 
(Code 1972, § 18-18) 
Sec. 62-117. - Sufficiency of requests. 
    Paving of the street or installation of curb and gutter or sidewalk on any street which has been accepted by the city and is a part of the city system shall be made only in areas where there are sufficient requests, filed as provided in section 62-116, to award a contract, according to the discretion of the council. 
(Code 1972, § 18-19) 
Sec. 62-118. - Accomplishment of work. 
    When a street is to be paved or curb and gutter or sidewalk is to be installed pursuant to section 62-116, the city shall do the work or contract the work and shall have entire supervision and control of the project. 
(Code 1972, § 18-20) 
Sec. 62-119. - Payment of entire cost by city. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to prevent the city from the installation and payment of entire cost of curb and gutter or sidewalks, in areas where such improvements are deemed necessary for the benefit of the community. 
(Code 1972, § 18-21) 
Secs. 62-120-62-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 62-146. - Permit required. 
    No person, unless specially authorized by the council, shall take up or remove any portion of the surface of the sidewalk or street, or excavate therein without written permission of the city manager, who shall not refuse permission to any applicant except for cause. In case of refusal, the applicant may appeal to the council. 
(Code 1972, § 18-22) 
Sec. 62-147. - Deposits; acquiescence to article provisions. 
    Before a permit to remove a pavement or street surface or excavate therein is granted, the city manager may require a deposit sufficient to pay for resurfacing the street or sidewalk to be disturbed, the amount of such deposit to be determined by the city manager. Every person who shall make application shall be deemed to have assented thereby to all the provisions and terms of this article, including the right of the city to collect the actual cost of replacing the pavement, sidewalk or street surface in the manner directed in this section. 
(Code 1972, § 18-23) 
Sec. 62-148. - Duty to prosecute work without delay. 
    It shall be the duty of every person to whom a permit to remove a pavement or street surface or excavate therein shall have been granted, to institute at once and prosecute without delay the work for which such permit was obtained, and promptly, on its completion, to give written notice to the city manager. 
(Code 1972, § 18-24) 
Sec. 62-149. - Supervision of work; replacing surface. 
    No pavement, sidewalk or street surface shall be replaced, after being taken up, by any person except under the direction of the city manager. If the applicant fails to resurface the street disturbed promptly and in a manner approved by the city manager, the city manager is authorized to cause such work to be done at the expense of the applicant. 
(Code 1972, § 18-25) 
Sec. 62-150. - Guarding by lights and barriers; responsibility for damages. 
    Any person to whom a permit is granted under section 62-146 shall place guards or barriers around the work or excavation in question and shall protect it by warning lights at night, and shall be responsible for damages to persons or property caused by such work or excavations until taken in charge by the city manager. Any person failing to place such guards, barriers or lights as required by this section shall, in addition, be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1972, § 18-26) 
Sec. 62-151. - Work done by city forces. 
    The provisions of section 62-150 shall not apply to work done by city forces under the supervision of the city manager, but the city manager may prescribe regulations for work done on city streets by city forces. 
(Code 1972, § 18-27) 
Secs. 62-152-62-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OBSTRUCTIONS 

Sec. 62-176. - General prohibition. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct the sidewalks or streets of the city. This shall not be construed to prevent merchants from displaying their goods in front of their stores in a reasonable manner. 
(Code 1972, § 18-43) 
Sec. 62-177. - Awnings, signs, or other fixtures; blocking street or sidewalk; height. 
    No awning, sign or other fixture shall be erected or constructed in such a way as to impede or obstruct the streets or sidewalks. In no case shall any awning, overhanging sign or fixture be allowed or constructed less than seven feet over the sidewalks or less than 20 feet above the streets. 
(Code 1972, § 18-44) 
Sec. 62-178. - Building operation; lighting; restoration; shed over sidewalk. 
    The permit to erect any building or structure shall carry with it the privilege of obstructing the adjacent sidewalk and a portion of the street for a reasonable time, if necessary, with the material for building, but this privilege shall not carry with it the right to obstruct the sidewalk and portion of street any longer than the obstruction is absolutely necessary, and no more thereof than necessary, and at no time shall more than one-fourth of the street and one-half of the sidewalk be obstructed. It shall be the duty of the owner to place on such obstructions every night one or more lights as necessity demands as a warning to the people. The owner of the building shall be required to place the sidewalk and street in the same condition, upon completion of work, as they were at the beginning of the work, subject to approval of the superintendent of public works. For the protection of any person passing, a shed or platform shall be erected over the sidewalk, which shed or platform shall be at least eight feet high and as wide as the pavement or sidewalk and as long as the building or structure which is being constructed, and shall not cover more than one-fourth of the street. 
(Code 1972, § 18-45) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14. 
Sec. 62-179. - Porches. 
    No person shall construct or erect any porch over the sidewalks or streets of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 18-46) 
Sec. 62-180. - Wood, coal and other fuels. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place, cut or saw wood on the sidewalks or streets of the city, or to permit wood, coal or other fuel to remain on any street longer than six hours. 
(Code 1972, § 18-47) 
Sec. 62-181. - Chicken coops. 
    No person shall coop chickens or build any chicken coop on the sidewalks or streets of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 18-48) 
Sec. 62-182. - Gates and doors opening on street. 
    Every gate or door built or constructed in any fence or wall standing on the line of any street, except doors to public buildings which are required to be hung so as to open outward, shall be hung so as to open inward. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall subject the offender to punishment as provided in section 1-11 after notice by the city manager or superintendent of public works to abate the same. 
(Code 1972, § 18-49) 
Sec. 62-183. - Entrances over sidewalks or drainage ditches. 
    Whenever, in order to provide for an entrance to any property, it is necessary to cross a sidewalk or drainage ditch, it shall be the duty of the owner of the property at his own expense to provide an entrance approved by the city manager or superintendent of public works. For the crossing of any drainage ditch, the owner shall provide a pipe or conduit of such size and length as may be specified by the city manager or superintendent of public works, such pipe or conduit to be placed or installed by the city. For the crossing of any sidewalk or curb which has been previously constructed, the owner shall remove and replace so much of the sidewalk or curb as may be necessary to provide a suitable entrance, subject to the supervision and inspection of the city manager, and no such entrance shall be constructed until a written permit has been obtained from the city manager or superintendent of public works. 
(Code 1972, § 18-50) 
Sec. 62-184. - Repairing, manufacturing or testing vehicles or machinery. 
    The manufacturing, repairing or testing of vehicles or machinery, including the engines or other parts of motor-driven vehicles, on the sidewalks or in the streets shall be unlawful; provided, however, that this section shall not be construed to apply to emergency repairs which are necessary before the vehicle in question can be moved. 
(Code 1972, § 18-51) 
Sec. 62-185. - Obstructing view at corners. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to construct or place any fence or other structure, or any bushes, plants or other things which obstruct the view, on a corner lot within 15 feet of the intersection of any two curblines at a height of more than three feet above the level of the adjacent street pavement. 
(b)  If any fence, structure, bushes, plants or other things which obstruct the view are suspended over such area described in subsection (a) of this section then such fence, structure, bush, plant or other thing shall not be located less than 12 feet above the level of the adjacent street pavement. 
(c)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which any such obstruction to the view is permitted to remain after notice from the police department, or any official of the city, to remove the same. 
(Code 1972, § 18-52) 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 74. 
Chapter 66 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18; community development, ch. 22; planning, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 78; vegetation, ch. 82; zoning, ch. 90. 
State Law reference- Land subdivision and development, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-465 et seq.; Virginia Public Records Act, Code of Virginia, § 42.1-76 et seq.; Subdivided Land Sales Act of 1978, Code of Virginia, § 55-336 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 66-1. - Definitions; rules of construction. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Agent means the representative of the city council who has been appointed to serve as the agent of the council in approving the subdivision plats. 
    Alley means a minor street used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties abutting on another street. 
    Arterial street or major highway means a general term denoting a highway primarily for through traffic, carrying heavy loads and large volume of traffic, usually on a continuous route. 
    Building line means the distance which a building is from the front lot line or front boundary line. 
    Collector street means a street which primarily carries traffic from local street to arterial streets, including the principal entrance and circulation routes within residential subdivisions. 
    Commission means the planning commission of the city. 
    Cul-de-sac means a local street of relatively short length with one end open to traffic and the other end terminating in a vehicular turnaround. 
    Developer means any individual, subdivider, firm, association, or any other legal entity commencing proceedings under this chapter to effect a subdivision of land hereunder for himself or for another. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations. 
    Dwelling unit means space, within a building, comprising living, dining, sleeping rooms, storage closets, as well as space and equipment for cooking, bathing, and toilet facilities, all used by only one family and its household employees. 
    Easement means a grant by a property owner of the use of land for a specific purpose or purposes. 
    Engineer means an engineer licensed by the commonwealth. 
    Local street means a street primarily for providing access to residential, commercial, or other abutting property. 
    Lot means a numbered and recorded portion of a subdivision intended for transfer of ownership or for building development for a single building and its accessory building. 
    Lot, corner means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection; the shortest side fronting upon a street shall be considered the front of the lot, and the longest side fronting upon a street shall be considered the side of the lot. 
    Lot, depth of means the mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
    Lot, double frontage means an interior lot having frontage on two streets. 
    Lot, interior means a lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot, width of means the mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines. 
    Mobile home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is eight body feet or more in width and is 32 body feet or more in length and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. 
    Plat means and includes the terms: map, plan, plot, replat, or replot; a map or plan of a tract or parcel of land which is to be, or which has been subdivided. When used as a verb, the word "plat" is synonymous with the word "subdivide." 
    Property means any tract, lot, parcel or several of the same collected together for the purpose of subdividing. 
    Right-of-way means a strip of land taken or dedicated for use as a public way. 
    Service drive means a public right-of-way parallel to and contiguous to a major highway, primarily designed to promote traffic safety by eliminating promiscuous ingress and egress to the major highway, providing safe and orderly points of access to the major highway. 
    Street means a public thoroughfare providing the principal means of access to adjacent property. 
    Subdivider means any individual, subdivider, firm, association, or any other legal entity commencing proceedings under this chapter to effect a subdivision of land under this chapter for himself or for another. 
    Subdivision means any division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, parcels or tracts or other divisions of land, for the purpose, either immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or building development, including all changes in street or lot lines, and includes any resubdivision; provided, however, that this definition of a subdivision shall not include a bona fide division or partition of agricultural land into lots or parcels of five acres or more and not involving a new street, nor division of land which might be ordered or approved by the court. 
    Subdivision, minor means any subdivision which fronts on an existing improved street, not involving any new street or the extension of an existing improved street or public facility and not adversely affecting the development of the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property. 
    Surveyor means a certified land surveyor as licensed by the commonwealth. 
(b)  Rules of construction. The word "lot" includes the word "parcel"; the word "approve" shall be considered to be followed by the words "or disapproved"; any reference to this chapter includes all ordinances amending or supplementing this chapter; and all distances and areas refer to measurement in a horizontal plane. 
(Code 1972, § 19-3) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Definitions, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-430. 
Sec. 66-2. - Purpose of chapter. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of state law there are hereby adopted regulations to establish certain subdivision standards and procedures for the city to guide and facilitate the orderly beneficial growth of the city and to promote public health, safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity, and general welfare. More specifically, the purposes of these standards and procedures, which are applicable to all subdivisions of land within the city, are to provide a guide for the changes that occur when lands and acreage become more urban in character as a result of development for residential, commercial, or industrial purposes; to provide assurances that the purchasers of property are buying a commodity suitable for development and use; and to make possible the provisions of public services in a safe, adequate, and efficient manner. 
(Code 1972, § 19-1) 
State Law reference- Land subdivision and development, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-465 et seq. 
Sec. 66-3. - Interpretation and application of chapter. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall supplement any and all laws of the commonwealth, ordinances of the city, or any and all rules and regulations promulgated by authority of such law or ordinance relating to the purpose and scope of this chapter. Whenever the requirements of this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, or resolutions, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall govern. 
(Code 1972, § 19-2) 
Sec. 66-4. - Administration of chapter. 
(a)  The city manager, or his designee, is hereby appointed by the council as its agent and is hereby delegated to administer this chapter. In so acting, an approval or disapproval by the agent shall constitute approval or disapproval as though it were given by the council. 
(b)  The agent shall perform his duties as regards subdivisions and subdividing in accordance with this chapter and state law and call for opinions or decisions, either verbal or written, from other departments or agencies in considering details of any submitted plat. This authority by the agent shall have particular reference to the city planning commission, the city engineer, the building official, and the public health officer. 
(c)  In addition to the regulations contained in this chapter, the agent may, from time to time, establish any reasonable additional administrative procedures deemed necessary for the proper administration of this chapter with the approval of the council. 
(Code 1972, § 19-4; Ord. No. 99-5, 6-1-99) 
State Law reference- Land subdivision and development, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-465 et seq. 
Sec. 66-5. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
    Any owner or proprietor of any tract of land who subdivides the tract of land and who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor for each lot or parcel of land so subdivided, transferred or sold. Each day after the first, during which the violation shall continue, shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Code 1972, § 19-74) 
Sec. 66-6. - Preapplication meeting. 
(a)  Before filing an application for approval of a subdivision plat, the subdivider shall confer with the agent and agencies of the city as he deems advisable concerning the general proposal. Such action shall not require formal application, fees, or filing of a plat, and is not to be construed as application for approval of a plat in computing time limitations in relation thereto. 
(b)  The purpose of this meeting is to discuss early and informally the purpose and effect of this chapter and the criteria and standards contained therein; and to familiarize the developer with chapter 34, article IV, chapter 90, the comprehensive plan, the thoroughfare plan, the parks and open space plan, and the flood control, drainage, sewer, and water systems for the city. The subdivider shall, at the preapplication meeting, submit a sketch plan, legibly drawn at a suitable scale, containing the following information: 
(1)  The proposed subdivision in relation to existing community facilities, thoroughfares, and other transportation modes, shopping centers, manufacturing establishments, residential developments and existing natural and manmade features, such as soil types, vegetation, contours, and utilities in the neighboring area. 
(2)  The layout and acreage of streets, lots, and any nonresidential sites such as commercial, manufacturing, school or recreational uses within the proposed subdivision. 
(3)  The location of utilities in the proposed subdivision, if available, or the locations of the nearest sources for water and public facilities for the disposal of sewage and stormwater. 
(4)  The scale and title of the subdivision, a north arrow, and the date. 
(5)  The 100-year flood elevation data. 
(6)  Name, address, and phone number of the owners and the developer. 
(Code 1972, § 19-5) 
Sec. 66-7. - Determinations of minor subdivisions. 
    The agent, at the preapplication meeting, may determine the proposed subdivision plat to be a minor subdivision. Such a determination shall exempt the subdivider from the requirements of filing a preliminary plat or the preliminary supplementary information as provided hereafter. The subdivider shall, however, make application and fulfill all requirements to obtain approval of the proposed subdivision in final plat form. The subdivider of a minor subdivision may be exempt from the installation of any required physical improvements set out in this chapter when such improvements do not exist or serve 50 percent of the property in the same block and abutting the same street as the proposed minor subdivision. 
(Code 1972, § 19-6) 
Sec. 66-8. - Fees. 
    At the time a preliminary plats isare presented, a fee of $50.00 per plat review for a minor subdivision $100.00 for a proposal containing five or more lots shall be paid. In addition, a fee of $25.00 per lot for subdivision proposals containing less than five lots or a fee of $40.00 per lot for subdivision proposals with five or more lots inclusive of original parcel shall be paid at the time of submission for the examination and approval of final subdivision plats. At the time of installation of improvements, permit and inspection fees shall be as generally provided for permits and inspection fees shall be as generally provided for permits and inspections as specified in other ordinances or resolutions of the city. Such fees shall be payable to the treasurer of the city and shall not be prorated or refunded. 
(Code 1972, § 19-71; Ord. No. 05-25, § 1, 6-21-05; Ord. No. 09-31, 6-16-09) 
Sec. 66-9. - Appeals. 
    Where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative officer in the administration or enforcement of this chapter, the owner or subdivider or agent may appeal to the board of zoning appeals within 30 days from date of decision. 
(Code 1972, § 19-72; Ord. No. 10-47, 11-16-10) 
Sec. 66-10. - Variances. 
    Where a subdivider can show that a provision of this chapter would cause an unnecessary hardship if strictly adhered to, and where, because of topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site, in the opinion of the board of zoning appeals, a departure may be made without destroying the intent of such provision, the board of zoning appeals may authorize a variance. Any variance thus authorized is required to be entered in writing in the minutes of the board of zoning appeals and the reason for which the departure was justified set forth. 
(Code 1972, § 19-73; Ord. No. 10-47, 11-16-10) 
State Law reference- Variations in regulations, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-466(B). 
Sec. 66-11. - Amendments. 
    This chapter may be amended in whole or in part by the city council upon the recommendation of the planning commission, provided that any such amendment shall either originate with or be submitted to the agent for recommendation; and further provided that no such amendment shall be adopted without a public hearing having been held. 
(Code 1972, § 19-77; Ord. No. 10-47, 11-16-10) 
State Law reference- Amendments, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-472. 
Secs. 66-12-66-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLATS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Submission of plat for approval, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-475. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 66-41-66-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PRELIMINARY PLAT 

Sec. 66-56. - Application for approval. 
(a)  The subdivider, after the preapplication stage, shall submit to the agent an application in writing for approval of the preliminary plat and three copies of the preliminary plat, together with all required supplementary information specified in this article. 
(b)  The preliminary plat, accompanied by the proper filing fee, as provided by this division, shall be considered officially filed on the day it is received in the office of the agent and shall be so dated. 
(Code 1972, § 19-11) 
Sec. 66-57. - Form and content. 
    The preliminary plat shall be drawn to a scale of not less than 100 feet to the inch and shall be one or more sheets not exceeding 24 by 36 inches in size. The plat and the supplementary information shall be prepared by an engineer or surveyor duly authorized by the commonwealth to prepare such plan and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Proposed name of the subdivision. 
(2)  Names, addresses, and phone numbers of the owner, subdivider, and registered engineer and surveyor who prepared the plat, and appropriate registration numbers and seals. 
(3)  Date of survey. 
(4)  Scale of the plat and north point. 
(5)  Boundaries of the subdivision and its acreage. 
(6)  Names of adjacent subdivisions, owners of adjoining parcels of unsubdivided land, and the location of their boundary lines. 
(7)  Locations, widths, and names of all existing platted or proposed streets, railroad rights-of-way, easements, parks, permanent buildings, and corporation lines; location of wooded areas and other significant topographic and natural features within and adjacent to the plat for a minimum distance of 200 feet. 
(8)  Zoning classification of the tract and adjoining properties and a description of proposed zoning changes, if any. 
(9)  Existing sewers, water lines, culverts, and other underground structures, and power transmission poles and lines, within and adjacent to the tract. 
(10)  Location, names, and widths of proposed streets and easements. 
(11)  Building setback lines with dimensions. 
(12)  Proposed method of water supply and sewage disposal, location and dimensions of all proposed utility and sewer lines, showing their connections with the existing system. 
(13)  Layout, numbers, and approximate dimensions of each lot. 
(14)  All parcels of land to be dedicated for public use. 
(15)  A vicinity map. 
(16)  The 100-year flood elevation data. 
(Code 1972, § 19-12) 
Sec. 66-58. - Supplementary information. 
    The following information shall be supplied when required by the agent: 
(1)  Statement of proposed use of lots, giving type and number of dwelling units and type of business or industry. 
(2)  Topographic map at a suitable scale and properly correlated to the United States Geological Survey datum. The map shall indicate existing contours at an interval of not greater than two feet if the slope of the ground is 15 percent or less; and not greater than five feet where the slope is more than 15 percent. 
(3)  Profile of each street with tentative grades. 
(4)  Provision for collecting and discharging surface drainage and preliminary designs for any bridges or culverts. 
(5)  Location and approximate dimension of all existing buildings. 
(6)  Proposed methods to be utilized in minimizing potential erosion and sediment, both during construction and upon completion of the subdivision. Such plan and control methodology shall be developed in accordance with chapter 34, article IV. Where duplication of required information exists between this section and others of this chapter, such information need only be supplied once. 
(7)  For commercial and industrial development, the location, dimensions, and approximate grade of proposed parking and loading areas, alleys, pedestrian walks, streets, and the points of vehicular ingress and egress to the development. 
(8)  Description of proposed covenants and restrictions. 
(Code 1972, § 19-13) 
Sec. 66-59. - Approval. 
(a)  The agent shall forward copies of the preliminary subdivision plat and related data to such officials and agencies as may be necessary for the purpose of study and recommendation. After receipt of reports from such officials and agencies and his review as to compliance of the plat with the design standards in this chapter, the agent shall within 60 days from the original filing date approve or disapprove the preliminary subdivision plat or approve them with modification, noting thereon any changes that will be required. If a plat is disapproved, the reasons for such disapproval shall be stated in writing. One copy shall be returned to the owner or proprietor of the subdivision or his representative with the date of the approval or disapproval noted thereon. Approval of the preliminary plat shall be conditional upon compliance with all other applicable statutes, ordinances of the city, and laws of the commonwealth and applicable federal government agencies. 
(b)  The approval of the preliminary plat shall be effective for a maximum period of six months from the date of such approval and shall guarantee that the terms under which the approval was granted will not be affected by changes to this chapter. 
(Code 1972, § 19-14; Ord. No. 99-5, 6-1-99) 
Secs. 66-60-66-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FINAL PLAT 

Sec. 66-76. - Application. 
    A subdivider who has received approval of the preliminary plat of a proposed subdivision shall, not later than six months after the date of receiving such approval, file with the office of the agent an application for approval of the final plat of such proposed subdivision; otherwise, the preliminary plat shall be considered void unless an extension is requested in writing by the subdivider and granted in writing by the agent. 
(Code 1972, § 19-21) 
Sec. 66-77. - Form and content. 
(a)  The final plat shall be legibly drawn in waterproof black ink on tracing cloth or other material of equal permanence. It shall be drawn at a scale not less than 100 feet to the inch, and shall be one or more sheets 24 by 36 inches in size. If more than one sheet is needed, each sheet shall be numbered and the relation of one sheet to another clearly shown. 
(b)  The final plat shall have incorporated all changes in the preliminary plat required by the agent. Otherwise it shall conform to the preliminary plat, and it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to record and develop at the time. The final plat and the supplementary information shall be prepared by an engineer or surveyor duly authorized by the commonwealth to prepare such plan, and in addition to the preliminary plat requirements specified in this chapter, the final plat shall contain the following: 
(1)  A vicinity map at a scale of not less than 2,000 feet to the inch shall be shown on, or accompany, the final plat. This map shall show all existing subdivisions, roads, and tract lines and the nearest existing thoroughfare. 
(2)  Sufficient data to readily determine the location, bearing and length of every street line, lot line, block line and boundary line and to reproduce the same on the ground from permanent monuments. Linear dimensions shall be in feet and decimals to the closest 1.01 of a foot; angular measurements shall be expressed by bearings or angles. All dimensions, both linear and angular, shall be determined by an accurate control survey which must close and balance within a limit of one foot in 5,000 feet. 
(3)  The radii, central angles, tangent distances, tangent bearings, and arc lengths of all curves. The curve data shall be expressed by a curve table lettered on the face of the plat, each curve being tabulated and numbered to correspond with the respective numbered curves shown throughout the plat. 
(4)  Lots numbered in numerical order. In tracts containing more than one block, the blocks shall be lettered in alphabetical order. In case there is a resubdivision of lots in any block, such resubdivision shall be numbered numerically beginning with the number following the highest lot number in the block. 
(5)  The location and description of permanent reference monuments. 
(6)  All bearings, referred to the true meridian where geodetic control has been completed. Where the magnetic meridian is used, the declination shall be stated. 
(7)  The names of all streets and the name of the subdivision, location by section, range, and jurisdiction, the north point, scale and date. 
(8)  The final subdivision plat shall also contain a statement to the effect that the subdivision (insert a correct description of the land subdivider) as appears on the plat is with the free consent and in accordance with the desire of the owners or proprietors of the land subdivided and the trustees in any deed of trust, mortgage or other instrumentality imposing a lien upon such land, if any, which shall be signed by such owners, proprietors and trustees, and shall be duly acknowledged before some officer authorized to take acknowledgement of deeds. 
(9)  If a zoning change is involved, certification from the agent shall be required indicating that the change has been approved and is in effect. 
(10)  Certification shall be required showing that all required improvements have been either installed or approved by the proper officials or agencies, and that a bond or other surety has been furnished assuring installation and initial maintenance of the required improvements. 
(Code 1972, § 19-22) 
Sec. 66-78. - Approval; disapproval. 
(a)  Prior to the granting of approval of the final plat, the subdivider shall have installed the minimum required physical improvements in accordance with this chapter, or shall have furnished a surety bond or certified check for the amount of the estimated construction cost of the ultimate installation and the initial maintenance of the improvements. Before the surety bond is accepted, it shall be approved by the proper administrative officials. The term of the surety bond shall extend six months beyond the completion date of the project. 
(b)  The agent shall act on the final plat within 60 days after it has been officially submitted for approval by either approving or disapproving such plat in writing, and giving with the latter specific reasons therefor. Specific reasons for disapproval may be contained in a separate document or may be written on the plat itself. The reasons for disapproval shall identify deficiencies in the plat which cause the disapproval by reference to specific duly adopted ordinances, regulations, or policies and shall generally identify such modifications or corrections as will permit approval of the plat. 
(c)  If the plat is disapproved, the grounds for disapproval shall be stated in the records of the agent, and a copy of such record shall be forwarded to the subdivider. The agent shall not disapprove the final plat if the developer has done everything that he was required to do and has proceeded in accordance with the conditions and standards specified in the approved preliminary plat. If disapproved, the subdivider shall make the necessary corrections and resubmit the final plat within 30 days to the agent for its final approval. 
(d)  If the planning commission or other agent fails to approve or disapprove the plat within 60 days after it has been officially submitted for approval the subdivider, after ten days' written notice to the commission, or agent, may petition the circuit court of the county or city in which the land involved, or the major part thereof, is located, to decide whether the plat should or should not be approved. The court shall hear the matter and make and enter such order with respect thereto as it deems proper, which may include directing approval of the plat. 
(e)  If the planning commission or other agent disapproves a plat and the subdivider contends that such disapproval was not properly based on the ordinance applicable thereto, or was arbitrary or capricious, he may appeal to the circuit court having jurisdiction of such land, and the court shall hear and determine the case as soon as may be, provided that his appeal is filed with the circuit court within 60 days of the written disapproval by such planning commission or other agent. 
(Code 1972, § 19-24) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-475. 
Sec. 66-79. - Recordation. 
(a)  Within 60 days after the final subdivision plat has been approved, executed and acknowledged as provided in this article, it shall be recorded by the subdivider, in the office of the clerk of the circuit court. 
(b)  No final plat of a subdivision shall be recorded unless and until it shall have been submitted to and approved by the agent. No clerk of a court shall file or record a plat of a subdivision until such plat has been approved by the agent. 
(Code 1972, § 19-25) 
Secs. 66-80-66-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 66-106. - Purpose of article. 
    The following principles of land subdivision shall be considered desirable minimum requirements in preparing preliminary and final subdivision plats and shall not be varied except in specific cases. These design controls shall help ensure convenient and safe streets, creation of usable lots, provision of space for public utilities, and reservation of land for recreational uses. The planning of attractive and functional neighborhoods shall be promoted, minimizing the undesirable features of unplanned, haphazard growth. 
(Code 1972, § 19-31) 
Sec. 66-107. - Suitability of land. 
    If the agent finds that land proposed to be subdivided is unsuitable for subdivision development due to flooding, bad drainage, topography, inadequate utilities, and other such conditions which may endanger health, life or property; and, if from investigations conducted by the public agencies concerned, it is determined that in the best interest of the public, the land should not be developed for the purpose proposed, the agent shall not approve the land for subdivision unless adequate methods are advanced by the subdivider for solving the problems that will be created by the development of the land. 
(Code 1972, § 19-32) 
Sec. 66-108. - Conformity to comprehensive plans and zoning. 
    Proposed subdivision plats shall conform to the officially adopted city comprehensive plan, or one or more parts thereof. Whenever a tract to be subdivided embraces a part of any major highway system on such comprehensive plan or part, division or section thereof, such part of any highway or street shall be platted by the subdivider in the location and of the width indicated on such plan or part thereof. In addition, no final plat of land within the area in which an existing zoning ordinance is in effect shall be approved unless it conforms with such ordinance. 
(Code 1972, § 19-33) 
Sec. 66-109. - Conformity to thoroughfare plan. 
    The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, construction, and location of all streets shall conform to the major thoroughfare plan of the city, or subsequent amendments thereto, and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, topographical conditions, and public convenience and safety; and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. The street pattern shall discourage through traffic in the interior of a subdivision. The subdivider shall provide within the boundaries of the subdivision plat, the necessary right-of-way for the widening, continuance, or alignment of such streets in conformity with the major thoroughfare plan. 
(Code 1972, § 19-34) 
Sec. 66-110. - Conformity to floodplain regulations. 
(a)  The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, construction and location of all building sites, lots, streets, drainage, sewer, water lines, and other facilities, public or private, shall conform to the floodplain design standards in this section or any floodplain regulations, laws, or ordinances established by local, state, or federal authorities and subsequent amendments thereto. 
(b)  Where not prohibited by this or any other laws or ordinances, land located in any designated floodplain district may be platted for development with the provision that the developer construct all buildings and structures to preclude flood damage in accordance with this and any other laws and ordinances regulating such development. 
(c)  When a subdivider does not intent to develop the plat himself or to construct all the buildings or structures and the agent determines additional controls are required to ensure safe development, he may require the subdivider to impose appropriate deed restrictions on the land. Such deed restrictions shall be inserted in every deed and noted on every recorded plat. 
(d)  If the agent determines that only a part of a proposed plat can be safely developed, it shall limit development to that part and shall require that development proceed consistent with this determination. 
(Code 1972, § 19-35) 
Cross reference- Floodplain zoning regulations, § 90-181 et seq. 
Sec. 66-111. - Streets, alleys, cul-de-sacs and sidewalks. 
    The following design standards shall govern the designs of streets, alleys, cul-de-sacs and sidewalks: 
(1)  Streets. Street design standards are as follows: 
a.  No street shall have a right-of-way width of less than 50 feet. As far as practicable, all proposed streets shall be continuous and made to connect existing streets without offset. 
b.  Major streets shall, insofar as possible, conform to the contours to avoid grades in excess of three percent, unless because of special conditions, the agent permits otherwise. Other streets and alleys shall avoid grades in excess of ten percent. No street shall have a minimum grade of less than 0.5 percent. 
c.  Whenever a proposed street intersects another existing or proposed street so as to form an angle less than 90 degrees, the angle shall be rounded by a curve of sufficient radius to permit easy turning movements of vehicles. 
d.  Curb radius at street intersections shall not be less than ten feet. Concentric curves on the property line may be required by the agent. 
e.  Streets serving business developments and accessory parking areas shall be planned to connect with collector or arterial streets so as not to generate traffic on local streets. The intersections of driveways from parking areas with arterial or collector streets shall be located so as to cause the least possible interference with traffic movement on the streets, and shall be located not less than 100 feet from the intersection of an arterial or collector street with any other street, and shall be spaced not less than 200 feet from each other. The agent may require marginal access streets to provide maximum safety and convenience. 
f.  Streets for industrial subdivisions shall be planned to serve industrial areas exclusively and shall connect with collector or arterial streets so that no industrial traffic will be directed into any local streets. The intersections of service streets from parking areas with arterial or collector streets shall not be less than 100 feet from the intersection of the arterial or collector street with any other street. Streets shall be planned to be extended to the boundaries of any adjoining land planned for industry, except for severe physical conditions or if the agent finds such extension is not in accord with the approved plan of the area. 
g.  Permanent dead-end streets shall not be permitted. Temporary dead-end streets shall be permitted only as part of a continuing street plan, and only if there is a temporary turnaround satisfactory to the agent in design. 
h.  Dedication of half-streets, those with a portion of the required right-of-way in the proposed subdivision and with the required minimum balance anticipated to be provided by the adjoining owner, shall not be permitted. 
i.  Street names shall be subject to approval by the agent and conform with the city's specifications on signs. No name shall be used which duplicates or is likely to be confused with the name of an existing street. 
(2)  Alleys. Alleys with a minimum width of 24 feet shall be provided at the rear of all lots designated for business or industrial use. Alleys, when provided in the rear of residential lots, shall not be less than 20 feet wide and may be required by the agent when the lot is less than 75 feet wide. 
(3)  Cul-de-sacs. Cul-de-sacs and courts, where permitted, shall not exceed 400 feet in length and shall not be less than 50 feet wide. They shall terminate in a circular right-of-way with a minimum radius of 50 feet. 
(4)  Sidewalks. Public sidewalks may be required on one or both sides of the street by the agent in all residential and commercial subdivisions. Public sidewalks may be required for industrial lots by the agent. 
(Code 1972, § 19-36) 
Sec. 66-112. - Lots. 
    The following design standards shall govern the design of lots: 
(1)  Size and special provisions. Lot size and special provisions are as follows: 
a.  All lots shall conform to or exceed the requirements of this chapter and the zoning district requirements for the district in which they are located and the use for which they are intended. 
b.  Residential lots shall not have an average minimum width of less than 60 feet at the street frontage, and an average depth of not less than 100 feet, and contain a minimum area of 6,000 square feet; provided, however, that where the lot area regulations of the zoning ordinance require a larger lot area, then the requirements of such zoning ordinance shall govern. 
c.  Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width to provide 25 feet of side yard along the side street. 
d.  Each lot shall front on a public street and shall not extend through to another street. 
e.  All side lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines and radial to curved street lines. 
f.  Double frontage and reversed frontage residential lots shall in general be avoided except where essential to provide residential separation from arterial streets or to overcome other disadvantages of orientation or topography. 
g.  Easements ten feet wide, five feet on each side of the rear or side lot lines, shall be provided for utilities and drainage. 
h.  The setback or building line shall conform with the requirements of chapter 90, for the district in which the subdivision is located. Where no such setback or building line requirements exist, a minimum setback of 25 feet shall be required in all cases. 
i.  No block of lots shall exceed 1,000 feet in length unless permitted by the agent and the block width shall accommodate two tiers of lots, except where unusual topography or other exceptional physical circumstances exist. 
j.  For cases in which it is not feasible or possible to provide a water or sewer connection or both, the lot size and the installation of a water system and/or method of sewage disposal shall be approved by the public health officer or his authorized representative. 
(Code 1972, § 19-37; Ord. No. 10-2, 1-19-10) 
Sec. 66-113. - Land for public purposes. 
(a)  The agent shall require, by dedication or reservation, subdividers of residential developments to set aside land or its monetary equivalent for parks, playgrounds, open spaces, libraries, municipal facilities or other public use installations and for the protection of access to such facilities or land, subject to the dedication and reservation requirements of this section. 
(b)  The agent shall require subdividers of residential developments to set aside land or its monetary equivalent, subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Dedication. The agent shall require subdividers of residential developments to dedicate at least five percent of the area of the subdivision for parks, playgrounds and open spaces, exclusive of street, drainage and other dedications required for development, without reimbursement by the council. Where land is required in excess of this amount, the reimbursement by the council shall be based on a proportionate share of the cost of raw land; cost of improvements, including interest on investment; development costs; plus not more than ten percent profit on the total of such costs. When in the opinion of the agent there is not a good or workable site within the subdivision, the subdividers shall be required to post an amount of money equal to five percent of the developed sale price of the entire subdivision for the purchase by the city of park, playground, or open space for the use of the residents of the area in which the subdivision is located. 
(2)  Reservation. Where a school or other public use facility is shown on an officially adopted element of the comprehensive plan of the city to be located in whole or in part in a proposed subdivision, reservation of the area shown, shall be required by the agent. The subdivider shall not be required to hold the land longer than 24 months following the recording of the plat for such purchase. If the land is not purchased within the 24 months, it may be sold as lots for the same purpose for which the subdivision was platted. To facilitate such possible eventual sale of reserved land as separate lots, the subdivider shall show on his final plat, by dotted lines and dotted numbers, the sizes and dimensions of lots to be created within the boundaries of any such reserved land, and may sell such lots, after the expiration date of the reservation, by lot number, without filing an amended plat. 
(c)  The planning commission of the city shall determine if lands so reserved or dedicated are suitable for the purpose or purposes for which they are being reserved or dedicated. 
(Code 1972, § 19-38) 
Secs. 66-114-66-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PHYSICAL IMPROVEMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 66-141-66-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROCEDURES 

Sec. 66-161. - Guarantee. 
    As provided in this chapter, prior to approval of the final plat, all improvements required in this article shall be constructed prior to the granting of the final plat approval by the agent; or the subdivider shall furnish the agent with a surety or certified check for the amount of the estimated construction cost for the ultimate installation and initial maintenance of the improvements. 
(Code 1972, § 19-46) 
Sec. 66-162. - Plans and specifications. 
(a)  The plans and specifications for all the required physical improvements to be installed in a subdivision shall be prepared by a surveyor or engineer duly authorized by the commonwealth to prepare such plans and specifications. 
(b)  Three copies of such plans and specifications shall be submitted to the agent for local review, approval, inspection and recording, plus one copy for return to the subdivider or his agent, bearing certification of approval by the appropriate officials, if approved, or if disapproved, indicating the reasons for such disapproval. 
(c)  Improvements for which such plans and specifications are required include all required improvements and any water, sewer, electric light or power works, pipes, wires, fixtures or systems, or any telephone or community antenna television systems or the like, in, on or under any streets, alleys or easements within the subdivision, and all other general improvements to be provided by the subdivider or his agent, including preparation of land by grading, clearing, filling, or drainage. 
(d)  To the extent that specifications have been established by the city or other public agency having jurisdiction concerning a particular type of improvement, they may be included by reference and need not be restated in relation to a particular plan. 
(Code 1972, § 19-47) 
Sec. 66-163. - Off-site extensions. 
    If streets or utilities are not available at the boundary of a proposed subdivision, and if the agent finds the extensions across undeveloped areas would not be warranted as a special assessment to the intervening properties or as a city expense until some future time, the subdivider may be required, prior to approval of the final plat, to obtain necessary easements or rights-of-way and construct and pay for such extensions. Such improvements shall be available for connections by subdividers of adjoining land. 
(Code 1972, § 19-48) 
Sec. 66-164. - Sizing and extension of improvements. 
(a)  The utilities, pavements, and other land improvements required for the proposed subdivision shall be designed not only to serve the needs of the proposed subdivision, but also nearby land which is an integral part of the neighborhood service or drainage area as determined by the agent. 
(b)  The subdivider shall extend the necessary improvements either over existing, proposed or required dedicated rights-of-way or perpetual easements to the boundary of the proposed subdivision to serve adjoining unsubdivided land as determined by the agent. 
(c)  The subdivider shall be required to pay for only that part of the construction costs for the streets, trunk sewers, or water lines to serve the proposed subdivision and as extended to serve adjoining unsubdivided land as determined by the agent. The city shall pay the difference between the cost of required improvements for the proposed subdivision and improvements required to serve the surrounding areas as specified by the agent. 
(Code 1972, § 19-49) 
Sec. 66-165. - Periodic and final inspections. 
(a)  Periodic inspections during the installation of the physical improvements shall be made by the agent or his authorized representative to ensure conformity with the approved plans and specifications. 
(b)  The subdivider shall notify the agent when each phase of the installation is completed and ready for inspection. 
(c)  Upon completion of all the physical improvements, the subdivider shall request, in writing, a final inspection by the agent as required under this chapter. 
(Code 1972, § 19-50) 
Sec. 66-166. - Certificate of approval. 
    Upon completion of installation of the required improvements, the agent shall issue certificates of approval to the subdivider or his authorized representative. Such certificates shall operate as evidence for the release of any agreement or bond which has been furnished for the guarantee of satisfactory installation of such improvements or parts thereof. 
(Code 1972, § 19-51) 
Sec. 66-167. - Performance bond in lieu of installation. 
    Where installations as required in this article have not been made, in whole or in part, the city may accept for dedication for public use any right-of-way located within the subdivision which has constructed therein, or proposed to be constructed therein according to plans and specifications filed and approved, any street, curb, gutter, sidewalk, drainage or sewer system or other improvement, financed or to be financed other than by city funds, only if the owner or developer furnishes to the city a certified check in the amount of the estimated costs of construction or a bond with subdivision agreement attached, with surety satisfactory to the city attorney, in an amount sufficient for and conditioned upon the construction of such facilities, or a contractor's bond, with like surety in like amount and so conditioned. 
(Code 1972, § 19-52) 
Sec. 66-168. - As-built construction drawings. 
    As-built construction drawings for all improvements shall be provided on an approved durable tracing medium prior to posting of defect bond, or at the time of posting of such bond. 
(Code 1972, § 19-53) 
Sec. 66-169. - Defect bond. 
    The owner or developer shall at the time any improvement is proposed to be accepted for dedication, maintenance, or operation by the city, provide the city with a certified check in the amount of five percent of the total construction cost of the improvement or a bond with surety satisfactory to the city attorney in an amount sufficient for coverage costs of remedy of defects appearing in such improvements within two years. 
(Code 1972, § 19-54) 
Sec. 66-170. - Release of bonds. 
(a)  Performance bonds or other sureties established in accordance with the provisions of this article shall be released when the agent certifies that the requirements set forth therein have been met. On application by the owner or developer, portions of such bonds or other sureties may be released in proportion to the cost of the requirements certified by the agent or the affected official as having been met. 
(b)  Defect bonds or other sureties established in accordance with the provisions of this article shall be released at the end of two years from the date of city acceptance of responsibility. Such release shall be in full if no defects have been found to exist, or if defects found to exist have been corrected by the owner or developer. If defects found to exist have been corrected by action of the city, the costs of such action shall be deducted from the defect bond. If defects found to exist within the two-year period have not been corrected after proper notice by the end of such period, the agent shall make an estimate of cost of correction and such cost shall be deducted from the defect bond, and any balance remaining as a result of lesser actual than estimated cost shall be paid to the owner or developer. 
(Code 1972, § 19-55) 
Sec. 66-171. - Acceptance of required improvements or proposed dedications. 
    The installation of improvements or the offer of dedications in subdivisions created after the effective date of Ordinance No. 110-78 under the terms of this chapter shall, in no case, bind the city to accept such improvements or offers to dedicate. Upon certification of completion of required improvements as set forth in this section, the agent is authorized to accept on behalf of the city such dedications and/or improvements as the city may then be prepared to accept and maintain. No city permit shall be issued and no city services extended to any lot within such subdivision until the requirements of this article or other ordinances or lawful regulations of the city have been met in full. 
(Code 1972, § 19-56) 
Secs. 66-172-66-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ENUMERATION AND SPECIFICATIONS OF IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 66-191. - Specifications generally. 
    All construction required by this article shall comply with specifications of the city, where defined, and the department of transportation of the commonwealth where not defined by city specifications. In any case, the most rigid requirement of either the city or the commonwealth shall apply whenever they may be in conflict. 
(Code 1972, § 19-61) 
Sec. 66-192. - Permanent monuments. 
    Permanent monuments shall be accurately set and established at the intersections of all outside boundary lines of the subdivision; at the intersections of those boundary lines with all street lines; at the beginning and end of all curves; at points on curves where the radius or direction changes; and at such other points as are necessary to establish definitely all lines of the plat, including all lot corners. Such permanent monuments shall be stone or concrete at least 24 inches long and six inches square with a brass bolt or plate set in the top. Such monuments shall be set not less than three nor more than nine inches below the finished grade of the ground. 
(Code 1972, § 19-62) 
Sec. 66-193. - Streets, alleys, and cul-de-sacs. 
(a)  All streets shall be graded and shaped to their full width to the cross section and grade approved by the agent with required slopes lying outside the right-of-way. Alleys shall be similarly prepared to their full width of 24 feet. Cul-de-sacs shall meet the same specifications as streets and shall be provided with a 100-foot diameter turnaround at the end. 
(b)  Collector, commercial, and industrial streets shall have a 171/2-foot paved surface on each side of the centerline. Curb and gutter and sidewalks shall be required by the agent. 
(c)  Local streets shall have on each side of the centerline a 15-foot paved surface. Sidewalks and curb and gutter may be required by the agent. Said width requirement may be waived by the agent or city council provided the street meets the pavement width and right-of-way requirements of the then-current edition of the subdivision street requirement manual for secondary roads of the department of transportation. 
(d)  All streets, alleys, and cul-de-sacs shall have a compacted six-inch stone base and the surface shall be treated in accordance with applicable specifications of the city. 
(e)  Street name signs and other safety regulations shall be erected and located in accordance with the specifications of the agent. 
(f)  The subdivider shall install streetlights in accordance with standards and specifications of the agent in every subdivision. Such lights shall be located at each entrance to the subdivision and in each street intersection with the subdivision, and in such other locations as are found by the agent to require such lighting in the interests of safety and security for persons, property or traffic. All new streetlights shall be installed with all associated wiring underground. 
(g)  Trees shall be provided by the subdivider in all subdivisions where curbs, gutters, and sidewalks are required in accordance with standards and specifications of the agent. The trees shall be species which are resistant to damage and disease and which do not cause interference with underground utilities, street lighting, or visibility at street intersections. Existing trees shall be retained in new subdivisions wherever possible. 
(Code 1972, § 19-63; Ord. No. 01-21, 10-2-01; Ord. No. 09-19, 6-2-09) 
Sec. 66-194. - Drainage. 
    A drainage system shall be provided for by means of culverts under roadways, side, lead and outlet ditches and other structures that are necessary to provide adequate drainage of both natural water and stormwater for all streets within the subdivision and adjoining properties. The agent shall have the authority to determine what shall be adequate with respect to storm sewer facilities within a subdivision. All storm drainage shall be designed and installed in accordance with the city's specifications. 
(Code 1972, § 19-64) 
Sec. 66-195. - Water supply. 
(a)  Every subdivision shall be connected to the public water supply system, and the subdivision water distribution system shall be adequate for the type of development proposed and so related to existing or potential surrounding development as to form a logical part of a coordinated system minimizing potential water supply problems for the general areas. 
(b)  The subdivision shall be provided with a complete water distribution system, including a connection for each lot and appropriately spaced fire hydrants. 
(c)  Where public water supply is not available, the subdivider shall supply acceptable private water systems which shall be constructed to facilitate later connection with the public system. Privately provided general and individual water supply systems shall be permitted only when approved by the state health department and the agent. 
(d)  All provided water supply systems shall be planned and constructed to meet the specifications of the city, as approved by the agent. Before construction is commenced, plans and specifications shall be reviewed and approved by the agent. All construction shall be in accordance with approved plans. 
(Code 1972, § 19-65) 
Sec. 66-196. - Sanitary sewerage. 
(a)  Every subdivision shall be connected to the public sanitary sewer system and the subdivision sanitary sewage collection system shall be adequate for the type of development proposed and so related to existing or potential surrounding development as to form a logical part of a coordinated system minimizing potential sanitary sewerage problems for the general area. 
(b)  Public sanitary sewers shall be installed to adequately serve all lots, including lateral connections to the public system. Combinations of sanitary sewers and storm sewers shall be prohibited. 
(c)  Where a public sanitary sewer system is not reasonably accessible, the subdivider shall provide a central treatment plant for a group or an individual disposal system for each lot within the subdivision. Privately provided general and individual sewage systems shall be permitted only when approved by the state health department and the agent, and shall be constructed to facilitate later connection with the public system. 
(d)  Individual sewer systems shall be permitted only when approved by the state health department, upon findings that the type of system proposed will be effective in the area in which it is proposed to be used, and will not create health hazards on the lot, on adjacent property, or in the form of unlawful pollution of water. The state health department may prohibit certain types of systems in areas to which they are not adapted, may require the use of other systems, may specify increases in lot sizes above those generally required if necessary to make such systems effective, and may specify the manner in which such systems are to be located or designed to meet the needs of particular sites or areas. 
(e)  All sewer systems, other than individual, shall be planned and constructed to meet the specifications of the city as approved by the agent. Before construction is commenced, plans and specifications shall be reviewed and approved by the agent. All construction shall be in accordance with approved plans. 
(Code 1972, § 19-66) 
Sec. 66-197. - Installation of utilities. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, transmissions, distribution, and customer service utility facilities carrying or used in connection with electric power, streetlights, telephone, telegraph, cable television, or petroleum, shall be placed below the surface of the ground. Exceptions are as follows: 
(1)  Equipment such as electric distribution transformers, switchgear, meter pedestals, telephone pedestals, meters, service connections and the like normally installed above the ground in accordance with accepted utility practices for underground distribution. 
(2)  Temporary overhead facilities required for construction purposes. 
(3)  High tension transmission lines of 50,000 volts or more. 
(b)  All installations shall be in accordance with applicable codes and the specifications of the office of public works, and shall be in accordance with charges as approved by the state corporation commission. 
(c)  All new or replacement water supply systems and sanitary sewage systems, together with attendant facilities proposed to be located in the floodplain as defined and designated in chapter 90 shall be designed and constructed so as to minimize or eliminate flood damage, infiltration or inflow of floodwater into the system, and discharges or overflows from the systems into floodwaters. 
(d)  All new or replacement gas or electrical distribution systems, together with attendant facilities of the floodplain as defined and designated in chapter 90 shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to minimize or eliminate flood damages. 
(Code 1972, § 19-67) 
Chapter 70 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Power of city to levy taxes, § 3; finances, art. IV; treasurer and commissioner of the revenue, § 51 et seq. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; amusements and entertainments, ch. 6; animals, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; secondhand goods, ch. 58; vehicles for hire, ch. 86. 
State Law reference- Amount of municipal taxes and assessments to be collected, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-841; priority of taxes in distribution of assets of person or corporation, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-6 et seq.; Setoff Debt Collection Act, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-520 et seq.; local sales and use taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-605 et seq.; city bank franchise tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1208; local taxes generally, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3000 et seq.; enforcement, collection, refunds, remedies and review of local taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3900 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 70-1. - Notice prior to increase; hearing. 
    Before any tax levy shall be increased in the city, such proposed increase shall be published in a newspaper having general circulation in the city at least 15 days before the increased levy is made; and the citizens of the city shall be given an opportunity to appear before and be heard by the council on the subject of such increase. 
(Code 1972, § 8-15) 
Sec. 70-2. - Refunds of taxes erroneously paid. 
(a)  The commissioner of the revenue for the city is hereby authorized to refund any local taxes erroneously paid up to and including $300.00. If the commissioner of the revenue is satisfied that taxes have been erroneously assessed by him, the commissioner of the revenue shall certify to the tax collecting officer the amount erroneously assessed. If the taxes have not been paid, the applicant for the refund shall be exonerated from payment of so much thereof as is erroneous, and if such taxes have been paid, the tax collecting officer or his successor in office shall refund to the applicant the amount erroneously paid, together with any penalties and interest paid thereon. 
(b)  When the commissioner of the revenue who made the erroneous assessment has been succeeded by another person, such person shall have the same authority as the commissioner of the revenue making the original erroneous assessment, provided the commissioner of the revenue makes diligent investigation to determine that the original assessment was erroneously made and certifies thereto to the local tax collecting officer and to the council. 
(c)  No refund shall be made in any case when application therefor was made more than three years after the last day of the tax year for which such taxes were assessed. 
(Code 1972, § 8-21; Ord. No. 98-3, 3-17-98) 
Sec. 70-3. - Sales tax. 
    There is hereby levied and imposed, in addition to all other taxes and fees of every kind now imposed, a general retail sales tax at the rate of one percent to provide revenue for the general fund. The rate of the tax shall be added to the rate of the state retail sales tax imposed by state law and shall be subject to all the provisions of state law, and all amendments thereof, and the rules and regulations published with respect thereto. The applicable brackets of prices shall be as prescribed in state law for the combined tax. No dealer's discount under state law shall be allowed on the tax levied by this section. 
(Code 1972, § 8-22) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-605; Virginia Retail Sales and Use Tax Act, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-600 et seq.; imposition of sales tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-603; imposition of use tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-604; discount, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-622; bracket system for combined state and local tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-628. 
Sec. 70-4. - Recordation tax on certain legal instruments; amount; collection. 
(a)  There is hereby levied and imposed in addition to all other taxes and fees of every kind now imposed, on the first recordation of each taxable instrument in the city a city recordation tax in an amount equal to one-third of the amount of state recordation tax collectible for the state under the provisions of state law; provided, however, that except in a case in which the state recordation tax is $0.50 specifically, where a deed or other instrument conveys, covers or relates to property located in the city and also to property located in another city or county, or in other cities and counties, and such deed or instrument is first recorded in the City of Emporia, the tax imposed under the authority of this section by the city shall be computed only with respect to the property located in this city. 
(b)  The clerk of the county circuit court shall collect such city tax and pay the tax into the treasury of the city. The clerk shall be entitled to compensation for such services in an amount equal to five percent of the amount so collected and paid over. 
(Code 1972, § 8-23) 
State Law reference- State recordation tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-800 et seq.; local recordation tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3800 et seq. 
Sec. 70-5. - Tax on the probate of wills or grants of administration; amount; collection. 
(a)  There is hereby levied and imposed, in addition to all other taxes and fees of every kind now imposed, a tax on the probate of every will or grant of administration for each decedent residing within the corporate limits of the city or having estate within the city at the time of his death in an amount equal to one-third of the amount of the state tax for such probate of a will or grant of administration imposed by state law. 
(b)  The clerk of the county circuit court shall collect such city tax and pay the tax into the treasury of the city. The clerk shall be entitled to compensation for such services in an amount equal to five percent of the amount so collected and paid over. 
(Code 1972, § 8-24) 
State Law reference- Rate of state tax on wills and administration, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1712; local tax on wills and administrations, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3805 et seq. 
Secs. 70-6-70-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROPERTY TAXES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 70-31. - Annual tax levy on property segregated. 
    The annual tax levy shall be upon such property as is segregated for local taxation and in such amount as the council shall deem necessary to pay the debts and the interest thereon and to defray the expenses of the city in such manner as the council shall deem expedient. 
(Code 1972, § 8-13) 
Sec. 70-32. - List of property improperly on books; list of uncollectible taxes other than on real estate; list of delinquent real estate generally. 
    On or before July 1 of each year, the city treasurer shall classify all persons against whom he holds tickets for taxes or assessments which cannot be collected by him by levy, distress or garnishment, or other means in his power, in three alphabetical lists as follows: 
(1)  A list of the property on the commissioner of the revenue's books, both real and personal, improperly placed thereon, or not ascertainable, with the amount of taxes charged on such property. 
(2)  A list of such of the taxes against persons, other than on real estate, as he is unable to collect, and the amount. 
(3)  A list of real estate which is delinquent for the nonpayment of taxes thereon, describing accurately the land or lot and the owner thereof, and the amount of the tax. 
These lists shall be verified by the oath of the treasurer, and copies thereof posted at the front door of the courthouse and copies filed with the council. 
(Code 1972, § 8-16) 
Sec. 70-33. - Distraint or levy for delinquent property taxes. 
    The chief of police and city treasurer shall have the same power and authority to distrain or levy for delinquent property taxes as is vested in the treasurer of a county under the state law. 
(Code 1972, § 8-20) 
Secs. 70-34-70-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERSONAL PROPERTY 

Sec. 70-51. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 00-08, adopted Aug. 22, 2000, repealed § 70-51, which contained provisions relative to a special classification for certain motor vehicles owned by members of a volunteer rescue squad or volunteer fire department, and which derived from Code 1972, § 8-13.1 and Ord. No. 98-14, adopted Oct. 20, 1998. 
Sec. 70-52. - Exemption of certain personal property from taxation. 
(a)  All household goods and personal effects are hereby exempt from taxation. For the purpose of this section, household goods and personal effects are hereby defined and classified as follows: 
(1)  Bicycles; 
(2)  Household and kitchen furniture, including gold and silver plates, plated ware, watches and clocks, sewing machines, refrigerators, automatic refrigerating machinery of any type, vacuum cleaners and all other household machinery, books, firearms and weapons of all kinds; 
(3)  Pianos, organs, and all other musical instruments; phonographs, record players, and records to be used therewith; and radio and television instruments and equipment; 
(4)  Oil paintings, pictures, statuary, curios, articles of virtu and works of art; 
(5)  Diamonds, cameos or other precious stones and all precious metals used as ornaments or jewelry; 
(6)  Sporting and photographic equipment; 
(7)  Clothing and objects of apparel; and 
(8)  All other tangible personal property used by an individual or a family or household incident to maintaining an abode. 
The classifications set forth in this section shall apply only to such property owned and used by an individual or by a family or household incident to maintaining an abode. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any provision set forth in subsection (a) of this section, household appliances in residential rental property used by an individual or by a family or household incident to maintaining an abode shall be deemed to be fixtures and shall be assessed as part of the real property in which they are located. For purposes of this subsection, the term "household appliances" shall mean all major appliances customarily used in a residential home and which are the property of the owner of the real estate, including, without limitation, refrigerators, stoves, ranges, microwave ovens, dishwashers, trash compactors, clothes dryers, garbage disposals and air conditioning units. 
(Code 1972, § 8-14) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3504. 
Sec. 70-53. - Personal property taxes-Time of assessments. 
    All assessments for taxes for the city on personal property, machinery and tools shall be made as of the first day of January of each year. A tax will be assessed and levied annually on any motor vehicle, trailer and boat, as tangible personal property, based on a previous personal property tax return filed by the owner or owners of such property, as provided in this section and section 70-53.1. For those whose name and address has not changed since a previous filing and whose personal property has had no change in status or situs, the assessment and taxation of property will be based on a personal property tax return previously filed with the city. 
(Ord. No. 333-96, 3-9-96; Ord. No. 97-10, 12-2-97) 
Sec. 70-53.1. - Same-Filing of return required. 
    Any owner of a motor vehicle, trailer or boat shall file a new personal property tax return within 30 days after the occurrence of any of the following events: 
(1)  A change in the name of address of the person or persons owning taxable personal property; 
(2)  A change in the situs of personal property; 
(3)  Any other change affecting the assessment or levy of the personal property tax on motor vehicles, trailers or boats for which a tax return has been filed previously; or 
(4)  Any change in which a person acquiring one or more motor vehicles, trailers or boats and for which no personal property tax return has been filed. 
(Ord. No. 333-96, 3-9-96; Ord. No. 97-10, 12-2-97) 
Cross reference- Taxpayers to file returns, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3518. 
Sec. 70-53.2. - Same-Penalty and interest for late filing of return. 
    Any person failing to file a return required by section 70-53.1 on or before the date prescribed shall incur a penalty thereon of ten percent of the tax found to be due or the sum of $10.00, whichever is the greater. Such penalty shall be added to the amount due from the taxpayer on the day after the return is due. 
(Ord. No. 333-96, 3-9-96; Ord. No. 97-10, 12-2-97) 
Sec. 70-53.3. - Same-Assessment upon failure to file return. 
    If any taxpayer liable to file a return pursuant to section 70-53.1 neglects or refuses to file such return within the time prescribed, the commissioner of the revenue shall, from the best information obtainable, enter the fair market value of such property and assess the same as if it had been reported on the required return and add the penalty required by section. 
(Ord. No. 333-96, 3-9-96; Ord. No. 97-10, 12-2-97) 
Sec. 70-53.4. - Same-Proration of certain personal property taxes. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 70-53 above, for the calendar year beginning January 1, 1997, and ending on December 31, 1997, and for each and every calendar year thereafter, each and every motor vehicle, trailer boat which acquires a situs in the city after the tax day of January 1 of each year shall be taxed for the balance of the tax year. Such tax shall be prorated on a monthly basis, and for the purpose of proration, a period of more than one-half of a month shall be counted as a full month and a period of one-half or less than one-half of a month shall not be counted. 
(b)  When any person after the tax day acquires a motor vehicle, trailer or boat with a situs in the city, a tax shall be assessed on the motor vehicle, trailer or boat as provided above in subsection (a) for that portion of the tax year during which the new owner owns the motor vehicle, trailer or boat and it has a situs in the city. 
(c)  When any person after the tax day or situs day sells or otherwise transfers ownership or title to a motor vehicle, trailer or boat having a situs in the city, the tax thereon shall be relieved on a monthly prorated basis as provided above, and the appropriate prorated amount of any tax already paid shall be refunded or credited, at the option of the taxpayer, against the tax due on any motor vehicle, trailer or boat owned by the taxpayer during the same tax year by the city treasurer, except that no refund shall be made if the motor vehicle, trailer or boat acquires a situs in the commonwealth in a nonprorating locality. 
(d)  Any refund made or credit given under subsection (c) above shall be made or given within 30 days of the date such tax is relieved. No refund of less than $5.00 shall be issued to a taxpayer unless specifically requested by the taxpayer. 
(e)  Any person who moves from a nonprorating locality in the commonwealth to the city in single tax year shall be entitled to a property tax credit in the city if the person was liable for personal property taxes on a motor vehicle and has paid those taxes to such nonprorating locality. 
(f)  Any person who moves from a nonprorating locality in the commonwealth to the city in a single tax year shall be entitled to a property tax credit in the city if the person replaces the original motor vehicle upon which taxes are due to such nonprorating locality for the same tax year. The city shall provide a credit against the total tax due on the replacement vehicle in an amount equal to the tax paid to such nonprorating locality for the period of time commencing with the disposition of the original vehicle and continuing through the close of the tax year in which the person incurred tax liability to such nonprorating locality for the original vehicle. 
(g)  Any person who owns a motor vehicle, trailer or boat which acquires a situs in the city after the tax day of January 1 of any year and before December 16 of that year shall file a return thereof with the commissioner of the revenue on or before the later of March 1 of that year or 30 days after such property acquires a situs in the city. 
(Ord. No. 333-96, 3-9-96; Ord. No. 97-10, 12-2-97) 
Sec. 70-53.5. - Same-When due and payable. 
(a)  The personal property tax shall be due and payable on or before July 1 of each year for property assessed on January 1 of any year. 
(b)  All personal property taxes assessed for a portion of the tax year pursuant to section 70-53.4 shall be due and payable on or before 30 days after the date of such tax bill. 
(Ord. No. 333-96, 3-9-96; Ord. No. 97-10, 12-2-97) 
Sec. 70-53.6. - Same-Penalty and interest for late payment. 
(a)  In the event any tax on personal property is not paid on or before the time the same is due and payable as set forth in section 70-53.5, there shall be added thereto a penalty of ten percent of the amount of such unpaid tax or $10.00, whichever is greater, provided that the penalty shall in no case exceed the amount of the tax assessable. 
(b)  Interest at the rate of ten percent per annum shall be charged on the first day following the date taxes are due through the first year of delinquency, and interest at the maximum rate allowable and established pursuant to section 6621 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended, shall be charged for the second and each subsequent year of delinquency and shall be collected upon the principal and penalties of all such taxes and levies then remaining unpaid, which penalty and interest shall be collected and accounted for. 
(Ord. No. 333-96, 3-9-96; Ord. No. 97-10, 12-2-97) 
Sec. 70-54. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. Nos. 333-96, adopted March 19, 1996, and 97-10, adopted Dec. 2, 1997, repealed § 70-54, which pertained to penalties and interest for nonpayment of personal property tax, and which derived from Code 1972, § 8-18.1. 
Sec. 70-55. - Payment of administrative costs. 
    Any person failing to pay personal property taxes or levies within 30 days of the date due shall incur a fee to cover the administrative costs associated with the collection of delinquent taxes. Such fee shall be in addition to all penalties and interest and shall be $20.00 for taxes collected subsequent to the filing of a warrant or other appropriate legal document but prior to judgment and $25.00 for taxes collected subsequent to judgment. 
(Ord. No. 333-96, 3-9-96; Ord. No. 97-10, 12-2-97) 
Cross reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3958. 
Sec. 70-56. - Levies of under $5.00. 
    If any taxpayer owns tangible personal property of such small value that the tax levies thereon for the year result in a tax of less than $5.00, such tax may be collected as provided by law or such property may be omitted from the personal property book and no assessment made thereon. 
(Ord. No. 337-97, 3-4-96) 
Cross reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3005. 
Secs. 70-57-70-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - REAL ESTATE 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 70-76. - Recordation of list of delinquent real estate taxes; sale of real property. 
    A copy of delinquent real property taxes, as provided by section 70-32(3), shall be submitted by the city treasurer to the clerk of the circuit court of the county for recordation not later than August 1 of the year following the December in which the real property taxes first became due. This list shall include all real property on which the taxes are delinquent to that date. On the second Monday in each December, all lands upon which real property taxes have remained unpaid for two years, shall be sold in accordance to the existing law governing same. The treasurer shall be responsible for continuing this action annually as provided by law. 
(Code 1972, § 8-17) 
Sec. 70-77. - Penalties and interest for nonpayment of real estate taxes. 
(a)  Any person failing to pay any real estate taxes or levies on or before December 5 of the year in which the same are levied or assessed shall incur a penalty thereon of ten percent, which shall be added to the amount of taxes or levies due from such taxpayer or the sum of $10.00, whichever shall be the greater, which, when collected by the treasurer, shall be accounted for in his settlement; provided, however, that the penalty provided for in this section for failure to pay such taxes shall not exceed the amount of the tax past due. 
(b)  Interest at the rate of ten percent per annum shall be charged from the first day following the date taxes are due through the first year of delinquency, and interest at the maximum rate allowable and established pursuant to section 6621 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended, shall be charged for the second and each subsequent year of delinquency, and shall be collected upon the principal and penalties of all such taxes and levies then remaining unpaid, which penalty and interest shall be collected and accounted for. 
(Code 1972, § 8-19) 
State Law reference- Penalties and interest, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916. 
Sec. 70-78. - Payment of administrative costs. 
    Any person failing to pay real estate taxes or levies on or before December 5 of the year in which the same are levied or assessed shall incur a fee to cover the administrative costs associated with the collection of delinquent taxes. Such fee shall be in addition to all penalties and interest, and shall be $20.00 for taxes collected subsequent to the filing of a warrant or other appropriate legal document but prior to judgment, and $25.00 for taxes collected subsequent to judgment. 
(Code 1972, § 8-19.1) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3958. 
Sec. 70-79. - [Authorization to sell real estate that are tax delinquent.] 
    Pursuant to the authority granted in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3965.1, the city treasurer is authorized to institute proceedings to sell in accordance with law any real estate when any taxes on such real estate are delinquent on December 31 following the first anniversary of the date on which such taxes have become due, provided proper notice is given in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3965(A). 
(Ord. No. 17-14, 7-18-17) 
Secs. 70-80-70-95. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Assessment Procedure 

Sec. 70-96. - Assessor-Appointment. 
    Every general assessment and reassessment of real estate in the city shall be made by a professional assessor appointed by the council and certified as qualified by the department of taxation of the commonwealth. Such assessor shall be designated on or after July 1 in the year immediately preceding the year in which the general reassessment of real estate is required to be made. 
(Code 1972, § 8-35.1) 
State Law reference- Department of taxation, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-200 et seq.; appointment of assessor, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3275. 
Sec. 70-97. - Same-Duties. 
    The assessor for the city shall conduct a general reassessment of the real estate in the city every two years, and, in addition, shall assess or reassess from time to time real estate in the city as may be necessary and as provided by general law. It shall be the duty of the assessor to assess all new buildings and structures and to increase or decrease the assessment of all real estate heretofore assessed as it appears wise so to do, to the end that all such property shall be as uniformly assessed as reasonably possible. The assessor shall appraise and assess at its fair market value, all real estate in the city not exempted from taxation by the state constitution and not assessable for taxation by the state corporation commission. 
(Code 1972, § 8-35.2) 
State Law reference- General reassessment, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3250. 
Sec. 70-98. - Same-Compensation; clerical assistants. 
    The council shall fix the compensation of the assessor and shall provide necessary clerical and other assistants to allow the assessor to carry out the duties of such assessor. 
(Code 1972, § 8-35.3) 
Sec. 70-99. - Partial exemption from taxation for certain rehabilitated commercial, industrial or residential real estate. 
(a)  A partial exemption from real estate taxes is provided for qualifying real estate which has been substantially rehabilitated for commercial, industrial, or residential use in accordance with this section. For the purposes of this section, real estate shall be deemed to have been substantially rehabilitated when a commercial, industrial or residential structure on such real estate, which is no less than 25 years of age, has been so improved as to increase the assessed value of the structure by no less than 50 percent, but without increasing the total square footage of such structure by more than 25 percent. 
(b)  As a requisite for qualifying for partial tax exemption for rehabilitation of a commercial, industrial or residential structure, the owner of such structure shall, at the time he applies for a building permit to rehabilitate such structure, file with the commissioner of the revenue or city assessor an application to qualify such structure as a rehabilitated commercial, industrial, or residential structure. The application to qualify for the tax exemption shall be on a form approved by the commissioner of the revenue or the city assessor. Such application shall be filed prior to the commencement of the rehabilitation. 
(c)  After the rehabilitation has been completed, the owner shall submit a written request to the commissioner of the revenue for the city assessor to inspect the structure to determine if it then qualifies for the rehabilitated property exemption. Such inspection and determination shall be made by the commissioner of the revenue or the city assessor within 60 days after such written request is submitted. If the property qualifies for such exemption then the tax exemption shall become effective beginning January 1 of the next calendar year and shall run with the real estate for a period no longer than five years; provided, however, that the owner may, at the owner's option, in lieu of the five-year exemption, if the property qualifies for such exemption, request the tax exemption be prorated for the year of completion, and such exemption shall run with the real estate for the remaining portion of the year in which the work is completed and for the four calendar years immediately following the year of completion. 
(d)  The exemption provided in this section shall be an amount equal to the increase in assessed value resulting from the rehabilitation of the structure as determined by the commissioner of the revenue or city assessor, and this amount only shall be applicable to any subsequent assessment or reassessment. The owner of property qualifying for partial exemption from real estate taxes because of rehabilitation of a structure shall be issued a credit memorandum by the city treasurer for each year of the five-year period of exemption from real estate taxes. An increase in assessment occurring after the first year of such rehabilitation exemption shall not qualify for an increase in such exemption. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as to permit the commissioner of the revenue to list upon the land book any reduced value due to the exemption described in this section. 
(f)  No property shall be eligible for such exemption unless the appropriate building permits have been acquired and the commissioner of the revenue or the city assessor has verified that the rehabilitation indicated on the application has been completed. 
(g)  Where rehabilitation is achieved through demolition and replacement of an existing structure, the exemption provided in this section shall not apply when any structure demolished is a registered Virginia landmark or is determined by the department of historic resources to contribute to the significance of a registered historic landmark. 
(h)  The city council shall assess a fee of $50.00 for residential properties, and $75.00 for commercial, industrial, and/or apartment properties of six units or more for processing an application requesting the exemption provided by this section. No property shall be eligible for such exemption unless the appropriate building permits have been acquired and the commissioner of the revenue or assessing officer has verified that the rehabilitation, renovation or replacement indicated on the application has been completed. 
(Code 1972, § 8-35.2.1; Ord. No. 05-08, § 1, 4-19-05) 
State Law reference- Partial exemption for certain rehabilitated, renovated or replacement residential structures, § 58.1-3220; partial exemption for certain rehabilitated, renovated or replacement commercial or industrial structures, § 58.1-3221. 
Sec. 70-100. - Assessment of new buildings substantially completed; extension of time for paying assessment. 
    All new buildings substantially completed or fit for use and occupancy prior to November 1 of the year of completion shall be assessed when so completed or fit for use and occupancy, and the commissioner of the revenue shall enter in the books the fair market value of such building. No partial assessment as provided in this division shall become effective until information as to the date and amount of such assessment is recorded in the office of the city treasurer and made available for public inspection. The total tax on any such new building for that year shall be the sum of the tax upon the assessment of the completed building, computed according to the ratio which the portion of the year such building is substantially completed or fit for use and occupancy bears to the entire year, and the tax upon the assessment of such new building as it existed on January 1 of that assessment year, computed according to the ratio which the portion of the year such building was not substantially complete or fit for use and occupancy bears to the entire year. With respect to any assessment made under this section after September 1 of any year, the penalty for nonpayment by December 5 shall be extended to February 5 of the succeeding year. 
(Code 1972, § 8-35.2.2) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3292. 
Sec. 70-101. - Furnishing commissioner of the revenue information on new structures. 
    The assessor appointed by the council shall, by December of each year, supply the city commissioner of the revenue with the physical characteristics of each new building or improvement added and, in addition, shall supply the commissioner of the revenue with the floor area or volume of all new structures. 
(Code 1972, § 8-35.4) 
Sec. 70-102. - Assessment completion date. 
    Each year's assessment or reassessment shall be completed on or before December 31 of each calendar year except for reassessment required in the ordinary performance of real estate responsibilities conferred by law under the city commissioner of the revenue. 
(Code 1972, § 8-35.5) 
State Law reference- Completion of reassessment, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3257. 
Sec. 70-103. - Extending time for assessments. 
(a)  The time for completion of assessments or reassessments shall be extended in the manner provided by the city commissioner of the revenue annually and assessed with taxes thereon as the same appears of record on the land books as of January 1 of the year so assessed. 
(b)  The circuit court in the city may for good cause, extend the time for completing a reassessment and complying with state law for a period not exceeding three months from December 31 of the year of such reassessment. 
(Code 1972, § 8-35.6) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3257; reassessment record, original filed in clerk's office, disposition of copies and recapitulation sheets, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3300. 
Sec. 70-104. - Notice of change in assessment. 
(a)  Whenever there is a reassessment of real estate, or any change in the assessed value of any real estate, notice shall be given by mail directly to its property owner, as shown by the land books of the city, whose assessment has been changed. Such notice shall be sent by postpaid mail at least 15 days prior to the date of a hearing to protest such change to the address of the property owner as shown on such land books. 
(b)  Every notice shall, among other matters, show the amount and the new appraised value of land, the new appraised value of improvements, the new assessed value of each if different from the appraised value, and the assessment ratio employed by the city. It shall further set out the time and place at which persons may appear before the officer making such reassessment or change and present objections thereto. 
(c)  Any person other than the owner who receives such reassessment notice, shall transmit the notice to such owner, at his last known address, immediately on receipt thereof, and shall be liable to such owner in any action at law for liquidated damages in the amount of $25.00, in the event of a failure to so transmit the notice. Mailing such notice to the last known address of the property owner shall be deemed to satisfy the requirements of this section. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, if the address of the taxpayer as shown on the tax record is in care of a lender, the lender shall, upon request, furnish the city a list of such property owners, together with their current addresses as they appear on the books of the lender, or the parties may, by agreement, permit the lender to forward such notice as to the property owner, with the cost of postage to be paid by the city. 
(Code 1972, § 8-35.7) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3330. 
Sec. 70-105. - Abatement of levies on buildings razed, destroyed or damaged by fortuitous happenings. 
    There shall be an abatement of levies on buildings which are razed or destroyed or damaged by a fortuitous happening beyond the control of the owner. No such abatement, however, shall be allowed if the destruction or damage to such building shall decrease the value thereof by less than $500.00. Also, no such abatement shall be allowed if such destruction or damage shall be repaired during the same calendar year in which it occurred. The tax on such razed, destroyed or damaged building is computed according to the ratio which the portion of the year the building was fit for use, occupancy and enjoyment bears to the entire year. Application for such abatement shall be made to the commissioner of the revenue by or on behalf of the owner of the building within six months of the date on which the building was razed, destroyed or damaged. 
(Code 1972, § 8-36) 
State Law reference- Value reduced when building damaged or destroyed, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3293. 
Secs. 70-106-70-125. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Board of Equalization[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Boards of equalization, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3370 et seq. 

Sec. 70-126. - Established; number of members; terms; compensation. 
    There shall be established for the city a board of equalization consisting of three freeholders of the city who shall be appointed by the county circuit court and shall serve for staggered terms of three years. The council shall set the salary of each member of the board. 
(Code 1972, § 8-35.8) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3373. 
Sec. 70-127. - Organization and assistants. 
    The board shall select from one of its members a member who will be designated as chairman and a member to serve as secretary, and may employ the necessary clerical and other assistants and call in advisors and fix their compensation, subject to the approval of the city council, to be paid out of the local treasury. 
(Code 1972, § 8-35.9) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3376. 
Sec. 70-128. - Duties. 
    The board shall sit at and for such times as may be necessary to discharge the duties imposed and to exercise the powers conferred by the laws of the commonwealth. Public notice shall be given at least ten days before each meeting by publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the city and by posting the notice at the courthouse and at each voting precinct. Such posting shall be done by the sheriff or his deputy. Such notice shall inform the public that the board shall sit at the place and on the days named therein for the purpose of equalizing real estate assessments in the city and for the purpose of hearing complaints of inequalities wherein the property owners allege a lack of uniformity in assessment, or errors in acreage in such real estate assessments. 
(Code 1972, § 8-35.10) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3378. 
Sec. 70-129. - Sittings; notices. 
    Freeholders desiring a review of their assessments, or their designated agents, shall file for review an application with the board for relief which application shall be filed no later than 30 days after the termination of the date set by the assessing officer to hear objections to the assessment. Freeholders desiring review of such assessments as set forth in this section shall file for review on forms provided for that purpose available in the office of the commissioner of the revenue for the city. 
(Code 1972, § 8-35.11) 
State Law reference- Application for equalization, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3380. 
Sec. 70-130. - Hearing complaints and equalizing assessments. 
    The board shall hear and give consideration to such complaints and equalize such assessments and shall, moreover, be charged with the special duty of increasing as well as decreasing assessments, if the specific complaint be made or not, if in its judgment, the same be necessary to equalize and accomplish the end that the burden of taxation shall rest equally upon all citizens of the city. The commissioner of the revenue of the city shall, when requested, attend the meetings of the board, without additional compensation, and shall call the attention of the board to such inequalities in the real estate assessments in his city as may be known to him. The board may go upon and inspect any real estate subject to equalization by it. 
(Code 1972, § 8-35.12) 
Sec. 70-131. - Increase or decrease; notice required before increase. 
    The board shall hear and determine any and all such applications and, by order, may increase, decrease or affirm the assessment of which complaint is made; and by order, it may increase or decrease the assessment, upon its own motion. No assessment shall be increased until after the owner of the property has been notified given ten days' notice and given an opportunity to show cause against such increase, unless such owner has already been heard. 
(Code 1972, § 8-35.13) 
State Law reference- Action of board, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3381. 
Sec. 70-132. - Minutes and copies of orders. 
    The board shall keep minutes of its meetings and enter therein all orders made and transmit 
promptly copies of such orders as relate to the increase or decrease of assessments to the taxpayer and the commissioner of the revenue. 
(Code 1972, § 8-35.14) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3384. 
Sec. 70-133. - Commissioner of the revenue to make changes ordered; when order exonerates taxpayer. 
    The commissioner of the revenue shall make on his land book the changes so ordered by the board and, if such changes affect the land books for the then current year and such land book has been then completed, the commissioner of the revenue may for that year make a supplemental assessment in case of an increase in valuation. In case of a decrease in valuation, the order of the board shall entitle the taxpayer to an exoneration from so much of the assessment as exceeds the proper amount, if the taxes have not been paid by him and, in case the taxes have been paid, to a refund of so much thereof as is erroneous. 
(Code 1972, § 8-35.15) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3385. 
Secs. 70-134-70-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BANK FRANCHISE TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Virginia Bank Franchise Tax Act, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1200 et seq. 

Sec. 70-151. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bank is defined as provided in state law. 
    Net capital means a bank's net capital computed pursuant to state law. 
(Code 1972, § 8-21.1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Definitions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1201; computation of net capital, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1205. 
Sec. 70-152. - Imposition of city bank franchise tax. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of state law, there is hereby imposed upon each bank located within the boundaries of this city a tax on net capital equalling 80 per centum of the state rate of franchise tax set forth in state law. 
(b)  If any bank located within the boundaries of this city is not the principal office but is a branch extension or affiliate of the principal office, the tax upon such branch shall be apportioned as provided by state law. 
(Code 1972, § 8-21.2) 
State Law reference- Virginia Bank Franchise Tax Act, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1200 et seq.; rate of tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1204; apportionment of tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1211. 
Sec. 70-153. - Filing of return and payment of tax. 
(a)  On or after January 1 of each year, but not later than March 1 of any such year, all banks whose principal offices are located within this city shall prepare and file with the commissioner of the revenue (or comparable local assessing officer) a return as provided by state law which shall set forth the tax on net capital computed pursuant to state law. The commissioner of the revenue (or comparable assessing officer) shall certify a copy of the bank's return and schedules and shall forthwith transmit such certified copy to the state department of taxation. 
(b)  If a bank also has offices located outside the boundaries of this city, in addition to the filing requirements set forth in subsection (a) of this section, any bank conducting such business shall file with the commissioner of the revenue or appropriate assessing officer of this city a copy of the real estate deduction schedule, apportionment and other items which are required by state law. 
(c)  Each bank, on or before June 1 of each year, shall pay into the treasurer's office (or other appropriate official) of this city all taxes imposed pursuant to section 70-152. 
(Code 1972, § 8-21.3) 
State Law reference- Virginia Bank Franchise Tax Act, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1200 et seq.; filing of return and payment of tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1207; branch banks, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1211; record of deposits through branches required, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1212. 
Sec. 70-154. - Penalty upon bank for failure to comply with article. 
    Any bank which fails to file a return or pay the tax required by this article or fails to comply with any other provision of this article shall be subject to a penalty of five percent of the tax due. If the commissioner of the revenue is satisfied that such failure is due to providential or other good cause, such return and payment of tax shall be accepted exclusive of such penalty, but with interest determined in accordance with state law. 
(Code 1972, § 8-21.5) 
State Law reference- Rate of interest, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-15; penalty, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1216. 
Secs. 70-155-70-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TAX ON PURCHASES OF UTILITY SERVICES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 03-29, § 1, adopted June 17, 2003, amended Art. IV, §§ 70-181 through 70-188, in its entirety, and provided material for a new Art. IV, §§ 70-181 through 70-188, to read as herein set out. Former §§ 70-181 through 70-188 pertained to similar material and derived from Code 1972, §§ 8-58-8-65, and Ord. No. 00-01, adopted 10-3-2000. 
Charter reference- Tax on public utility services, § 3. 
State Law reference- Consumer utility taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3812 et seq. 

Sec. 70-181. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commercial or industrial service means any utility service furnished the owner or tenant of property used for commercial or industrial purposes, including the owner of master metered apartment buildings who pays for such utility service for such property. 
    Consumer means every person who, individually or through agents, employees, officers, representatives or permitees, makes a taxable purchase of utility services in this jurisdiction. 
    Kilowatt hours (kWh) delivered means 1,000 watts of electricity delivered in a one-hour period by an electric provider to an actual consumer, except that in the case of eligible customer-generators (sometimes called co-generators) as defined in Code of Virginia § 56-594, it means kWh supplied from the electric grid to such customer-generators, minus the kWh generated and fed back to the electric grid by such customer-generators. 
    Local telephone service means any services subject to federal taxation as local telephone service and those services provided via switched local exchange access. 
    Person means any individual, corporation, company or other entity. 
    Residential consumer means the owner or tenant of property used primarily for residential purposes, including but not limited to, apartment houses and other multiple-family dwellings. 
    Residential service means any utility service furnished the owner or tenant of private residential property or tenant of any apartment who pays for such utility service in or for such property. 
    Seller means every person, whether a public service corporation of this city or not, who sells or furnishes a utility service. 
    Service provider means the person who delivers electricity to a consumer. 
    Used primarily relates to the larger portion of the use for which electric utility service is furnished. 
    Utility services means local telephone service, electric service, water service and sewer service, furnished in the corporate limits of this city. 
(Ord. No. 03-29, § 1, 6-17-03) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 70-182. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any purchaser failing, refusing or neglecting to pay the tax hereby imposed or levied and any officer, agent or employee of any service provider or seller violating the provisions of this article and any officer, agent or employee of any seller violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor, as provided in section 1-11. Such conviction shall no relieve any person from the payment, collection and remittance of the tax as provided in this article. Each failure, refusal, neglect or violation and each days continuance thereof shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 03-29, § 1, 6-17-03) 
Sec. 70-183. - Local telephone service, water and sewer service; imposition and amount; procedure as to payment. 
(a)  Imposition and amount of tax on local telephone service, water service and sewer service: 
    There is imposed and levied by the city upon each consumer of local telephone service a tax in the amount of 20 percent of the monthly gross charge, as defined by Code of Virginia § 58.1-38 12, and upon each consumer of water service and sewer service a tax in the amount of 20 percent of the monthly charge, exclusive of any federal tax hereof, made by the seller against the consumer with respect to each of the aforementioned utility services, which tax, in every case, shall be collected by the seller from the consumer and shall be paid by the consumer to the seller for the use of the city at the time the purchase price or such charge shall become due and payable under the agreement between the consumer and the seller; provided, however, that in respect of each of these aforementioned services, in case any monthly bill submitted by any seller for residential service shall exceed $15.00, there shall be no tax computed on so much of such bill as shall exceed $15.00; and in case any monthly bill submitted by any seller for commercial or industrial service shall exceed $180.00, there shall be no tax computed on so much of such bill as shall exceed $180.00. Bills shall be considered monthly bills if submitted 12 times annually for a period of approximately one month. In case bills are submitted by a seller for two months' service, then the tax shall be computed as if the figure of $15.00 specified in this section were $30.00, and the figure $180.00 specified in this section were $360.00. 
(b)  Duty of seller generally: 
    It shall be the duty of every seller in acting as the tax collecting medium or agency for the city to collect from the consumer for the use of the city the tax hereby imposed and levied at the time of collecting the purchase price charged therefor. The taxes collected during each calendar month shall be reported and paid by each seller to the city treasurer on or before the last day of the second calendar month thereafter, together with the name and address of any consumer who has refused to pay his tax. 
(Ord. No. 03-29, § 1, 6-17-03) 
Sec. 70-184. - Electric utilities; imposition and amount; procedure as to payment. 
(a)  Electric utility consumer tax: In accordance with Code of Virginia § 58.1-3814, effective January 1, 2001, there is hereby imposed and levied a monthly tax on each purchase of electricity delivered to consumers by a service provided, classified as determined by such provider, as follows: 
(1)  Residential consumers: Such tax shall be $1.40 plus the rate of $0.015086 on each kWh delivered monthly to residential consumers by a service provider, not to exceed $3.00 monthly. 
(2)  Nonresidential consumers: Such tax on nonresidential consumers shall be at the rates per month for the classes of nonresidential consumers as set forth below: 
a.  Commercial consumers - such tax shall be $2.29 plus the rate of $0.014085 on each kWh delivered monthly to commercial consumers not to exceed $36.00 monthly. 
b.  Industrial consumers - such tax shall be $2.29 plus the rate of $0.014085 on each kWh delivered monthly to industrial consumers, not to exceed $36.00 monthly. 
(3)  The conversion of tax pursuant to this section to monthly kWh delivered shall not be effective before the first meter reading after December 31, 2000, prior to which time the tax previously imposed by this jurisdiction shall be in effect. 
(b)  Exemptions: The following consumers of electricity are exempt from the tax imposed by this section: 
(1)  Any public safety agency as defined in Code of Virginia § 58.1-3813. 
(2)  Any church or religious body entitled to exemption pursuant to Code of Virginia Title 58.1, Chapter 36, Article 4, § 58.1-3650 et seq. 
(3)  The United States of America, the Commonwealth and the political subdivisions thereof, including this jurisdiction. 
(c)  Billing, collection and remittance of tax. The service provider shall bill the electricity consumer tax to all users who are subject to the tax and to whom it delivers electricity and shall remit the same to this jurisdiction on a monthly basis. Such taxes shall be paid by the service provider to this jurisdiction in accordance with Code of Virginia § 58.1-3814, paragraphs F. and G., and Code of Virginia §58.1-2901. If any consumer receives and pays for electricity but refuses to pay the tax imposed by this section, the service provider shall notify this jurisdiction of the name and address of such consumer. If any consumer fails to pay a bill issued by a service provider, including the tax imposed by this section, the service provider must follow its normal collection procedures and upon collection of the bill or any part thereof must apportion the net amount collected between the charge for electric service and the tax and remit the tax portion to this jurisdiction. 
    Any tax paid by the consumer to the service provider shall be deemed to be held in trust by such provider until remitted to this jurisdiction. 
(d)  Computation of bills not on monthly basis. Bills shall be considered as monthly bills for the purposes of this section if submitted 12 times per year of a approximately one month each. Accordingly, the tax for a bimonthly bill (approximately 60 days) shall be determined as follows: (i) the kWh will be divided by two; (ii) a monthly tax will be calculated using the rates set forth above; (iii) the tax determined by (ii) shall be multiplied by two; (iv) the tax in (iii) may not exceed twice the monthly "maximum tax." 
(Ord. No. 03-29, § 1, 6-17-03) 
Sec. 70-185. - Exemptions-Governmental agencies. 
    The United States of America, this state and the political subdivisions, boards, commissions and authorities thereof are exempted from the payment of the tax imposed and levied by this article with respect to the purchase of utility services directly, used and billed to such governmental agencies. 
(Ord. No. 03-29, § 1, 6-17-03) 
Sec. 70-186. - Same-Local calls from coin-operated telephones. 
    The tax hereby imposed and levied on consumers with respect to local telephone service shall apply to all charges made for local telephone service except local calls or messages which are paid for by inserting coins in coin-operated telephones. 
(Ord. No. 03-29, § 1, 6-17-03) 
Sec. 70-187. - Duty of treasurer. 
    The city treasurer shall be charged with the power and duty of collecting the taxes levied and imposed under this article and shall cause the same to be paid into the treasury of the city. 
(Ord. No. 03-29, § 1, 6-17-03) 
Sec. 70-188. - Records to be kept by seller; inspection of records. 
    Each seller shall keep complete records showing all purchases in the city, which records shall show the price charged against each consumer with respect to each purchase, the date thereof and the date of payment thereof and the amount of tax imposed under this article; such records shall be kept open for inspection by the duly authorized agents of the city at reasonable times, and the duly authorized agents of the city shall have the right, power and authority to make such transcripts thereof during such times as they may desire. 
(Ord. No. 03-29, § 1, 6-17-03) 
Secs. 70-189-70-215. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TAX ON PURCHASED MEALS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2000-07, adopted June 20, 2000, amended Ch. 70, Art. V in its entirety to read as herein set out. Prior to this revision, Art. V pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from Code 1972, §§ 8-71-8-81. 
State Law reference- Excise tax on meals, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3840. 

Sec. 70-216. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have, for the purposes of this article, the following respective meanings except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cater: The furnishing of food, beverages, or both on the premises of another, for compensation. 
    Collector: The commissioner of revenue or designee. 
    Commissioner: The commissioner of revenue and any duly designated deputies, assistants, inspector or other employees. 
    Food: All food, beverages or both, including alcoholic beverages, purchased in or from a food establishment, whether prepared in such food establishment or not, and whether consumed on the premises or not, and without regard to the manner, time or place of service. 
    Food establishment: Any place in or from which food or food products are prepared, packaged, sold or distributed in the city, including, but not limited to, any restaurant, dining room, grill, coffee shop, cafeteria, cafe, snack bar, lunch counter, convenience store, movie theater, delicatessen, confectionery, bakery, eating house, eatery, drugstore, ice cream/yogurt shops, lunch wagon or truck, pushcart or other mobile facility from which food is sold, public or private club, resort, bar, lounge, or similar establishment, public or private, and shall include private property outside of and contiguous to a building or structure operated as a food establishment at which food or food products are sold for immediate consumption. 
    Meal: Any prepared food or drink offered or held out for sale by a food establishment for the purpose of being consumed by any person to satisfy the appetite and is ready for immediate consumption. All such food and beverage, unless otherwise specifically exempted or excluded herein shall be included, whether intended to be consumed on the seller's premises or elsewhere, whether designated as breakfast, lunch, snack, dinner, supper or by some other name, and without regard to the manner, time or place of service. 
(Ord. No. 00-07, 6-20-00) 
Sec. 70-217. - Penalty for violation of article. 
(a)  Any person willfully failing or refusing to file a return as required under this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor except that any person failing to file such a return shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor or if the amount of tax lawfully assessed in connection with the return is $1,000.00 or less. Any person violating or failing to comply with any other provision of this article shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (a) above, any corporate or partnership officer, as defined in Code of Virginia § 58.1-3906, or any other person required to collect, account for, or pay over the meals tax imposed under this article, who willfully fails to collect or truthfully account for or pay over such tax, or who willfully evades or attempts to evade such tax or payment thereof, shall, in addition to any other penalties imposed by law, be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(c)  Each violation of or failure to comply with this article shall constitute a separate offense. Conviction of any such violation shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection or remittance of the tax as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 00-07, 6-20-00) 
Sec. 70-218. - Levy. 
    There is hereby imposed and levied by the city on each person a tax at the rate of seven and one-half percent on the amount paid for meals purchased from any food establishment, whether prepared in such food establishment or not, and whether consumed on the premises or not. 
(Ord. No. 00-07, 6-20-00; Ord. No. 06-20, 6-20-06; Ord. No. 09-43, 6-16-09; Ord. No. 15-16, 6-16-15) 
Sec. 70-219. - Collection; when payable; report of collection and remittance of tax. 
    It shall be the duty of every seller, in acting as the tax collection medium or agency for the city, to collect from the purchaser, for the use of the city, the tax hereby imposed and levied at the time of collecting the purchase price charged for the meal, and the taxes collected during each calendar month shall be reported to the commissioner of the revenue and remitted to the treasurer by each seller at the rate of five percent of the gross sales of the seller on or before the last day of the following calendar month. The taxes collected by a seller shall be deemed to be held in trust by such seller until they have been remitted to the treasurer. However, no blind person operating a vending stand or other business enterprise under the jurisdiction of the Department of the Visually Handicapped and located on property acquired and used by the United States for any military or naval purpose shall be required to collect or remit such taxes. 
(Ord. No. 00-07, 6-20-00) 
Sec. 70-220. - Penalty and interest for non-remittance. 
    If any person shall fail or refuse to remit the taxes collected, or fail or refuse to submit tile reports as required by this article, there shall be added to such taxes a penalty in the amount of five percentum if the failure is not more than one month, with an additional five percentum for each additional month, or fraction thereof, during which the failure continues, not to exceed 25 percentum in the aggregate; provided, however, that in no case shall the penalty be less than $10.00, and such minimum penalty shall apply whether or not any tax is due for the period for which such return was required, and interest thereon at the rate of ten percent per annum, which shall be computed upon the taxes and penalty from the date such taxes were due and payable. 
(Ord. No. 00-07, 6-20-2000) 
Sec. 70-221. - Report of taxes collected; remittance; preservation of records. 
    It shall be the duty of every person required by this article to pay to the city the taxes imposed by this article to make a report thereof setting forth such information as the commissioner may prescribe and require, including all purchases taxable under this article, the amount charged the purchaser for each such purchase, the date thereof, the taxes collected thereon and the amount of tax required to be collected by this article. Such records shall be kept and preserved for a period of five (5) years. The commissioner or his duly authorized agents shall have the power to examine such records at reasonable times and without unreasonable interference with the business of such person, for the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this article, and to make transcripts of all or any parts thereof. As soon as the commissioner shall procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax due and payable by any person who has failed or refused to collect such tax and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such person such tax and penalty and interest as are provided for in this article and shall notify such person by registered mail, sent to his last known address, of the amount of such tax, penalty and interest, and the total amount shall be payable within ten days from the date of such notice. 
(Ord. No. 00-07, 6-20-2000) 
Sec. 70-222. - Going out of business; tax due immediately. 
    Whenever any person required to collect, report and remit the tax imposed and Levied by this article shall go out of business, dispose of his business or otherwise cease to operate, all of such taxes collected shall thereupon be reported and remitted immediately. 
(Ord. No. 00-07, 6-20-2000) 
Sec. 70-223. - Limitation on advertising. 
    A person operating a restaurant shall not advertise in any manner, directly or indirectly, that he will absorb or pay all or any part of the tax. 
(Ord. No. 00-07, 6-20-2000) 
Sec. 70-224. - City treasurer to collect tax. 
    The treasurer shall have the power and the duty of collecting the taxes imposed and levied under this article and shall cause the same to be paid into the general treasury of the city. 
(Ord. No. 00-07, 6-20-2000) 
Sec. 70-225. - Exemptions; limits on application. 
(a)  The tax imposed under this article shall not be levied on factory-prepackaged candy, gum, nuts and other items of essentially the same nature served for on- or off-premises consumption. 
(b)  The tax imposed under this article shall not be levied on the following items when served exclusively for off-premises consumption: 
(1)  Donuts, ice cream, crackers, nabs, chips, cookies and factory-prepackaged items of essentially the same nature; 
(2)  Food sold in bulk. For the purposes of this provision, a "bulk sale" shall mean the sale of any item that would exceed the normal, customary and usual portion sold for on premises consumption (e.g., a whole cake, a gallon of ice cream); a bulk sale shall not include any food or beverage that is catered or delivered by a food establishment for off-premises consumption; 
(3)  Alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages sold in factory sealed containers; 
(4)  Any food or food product purchased with food coupons issued by the United States Department of Agriculture under the Food Stamp Program or drafts issued through the Virginia Special Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infants, and Children; 
(5)  Any food or food product purchased for home consumption as defined in the Federal Food Stamp Act of 1977, 7 U.S.C. § 2012, as amended, except hot food or hot food products ready for immediate consumption. For the purposes of administering the tax levied hereunder, the following items whether or not purchased for immediate consumption are excluded from the definition of food item the Federal Food Stamp Act: sandwiches, salad bar items sold from a salad bar, pre-packaged single-serving salads consisting primarily of an assortment of vegetables, and non-factory sealed beverages. This subsection shall not affect provisions set forth in subparagraphs (d)(3), (4) and (5) herein below. 
(c)  A grocery store, supermarket or convenience store shall not be subject to the tax except for any portion or section therein designated as a delicatessen or designated for the sale of prepared food and beverages. 
(d)  The tax imposed hereunder shall not be levied on the following; purchases of food and beverages: 
(1)  Food and beverages furnished by food establishments to employees as part of their compensation when no charge is made to the employee. 
(2)  Food and beverages sold by day care centers, public or private elementary or secondary schools or food sold by any college or university to its students or employees. 
(3)  Food and beverages for use or consumption and which are paid for directly by the commonwealth, any political subdivision of the commonwealth or the United States. 
(4)  Food and beverages furnished by a hospital, medical clinic, convalescent home, nursing home, home for the aged, infirm, handicapped, battered women, narcotic addicts or alcoholics, or other extended care facility to patients or residents thereof and the spouses and children of such persons. 
(5)  Food and beverages furnished by a public or private non-profit charitable organization or establishment or a private establishment that contracts with the appropriate agency of the commonwealth to offer meals at concession prices to elderly, infirm, blind, handicapped or needy persons in their homes or at central locations. 
(6)  Food and beverages sold on an occasional basis, (not exceeding three times per calendar year), by a non-profit educational, charitable or benevolent organization, church, or religious body as a fund-raising, activity, the gross proceeds of which are to be used by such organization exclusively for non-profit educational, charitable, benevolent or religious purposes. 
(7)  Food and beverages sold through vending machines. 
(Ord. No. 00-07, 6-20-2000) 
Sec. 70-226. - Gratuities and service charges. 
    When a purchaser provides a gratuity for an employee of a seller, and the amount of the gratuity is wholly in the discretion of the purchaser, the gratuity is not subject to the tax imposed by this article, whether paid in cash to the employee or added to the bill and charged to the purchaser's account, provided in the latter case, the full amount of the gratuity is turned over to the employee by the seller. 
(Ord. No. 00-07, 6-20-2000) 
Secs. 70-228-70-255. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TRANSIENT LODGING ROOM RENTAL TAX[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Excise tax on transient room rentals, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3840. 

Sec. 70-256. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Lodging facility means any public or private hotel, inn, apartment hotel, hostelry, tourist home or house, motel, roominghouse, travel campground or other lodging place within the city offering lodging to any transient for compensation and which can lodge four or more persons at any one time. As used in this article, "travel campground" means, but is not limited to, "recreational vehicle park" as defined in City Code section 90-1. 
    Lodging means any space or room furnished any transient. 
    Room rental means the amount of the charge imposed for the occupancy of any room or space occupied at a lodging facility. 
    Transient means any person who, for a period of not more than 365 consecutive days, either at his own expense or at the expense of another obtains lodging in any lodging facility. 
(Code 1972, § 8-86; Ord. No. 14-22, 11-18-14) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 70-257. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-11, and each violation or failure to comply shall constitute a separate offense. The punishment provided for in this section shall be in addition to any other remedy for the collection of taxes provided for by law. 
(Code 1972, § 8-96) 
Sec. 70-258. - Levy and rate. 
    In addition to any other tax imposed by law, there is hereby imposed and levied on each and every transient a tax equivalent to eleven percent of the total amount paid for room rental by or for any such transient to any lodging facility. 
(Code 1972, § 8-87; Ord. No. 05-19, 6-21-05; Ord. No. 06-19, 6-20-06; Ord. No. 06-50, 6-19-07; Ord. No. 06-51, 6-19-07; Ord. No. 09-37, 6-16-09; Ord. No. 14-22, 11-18-14; Ord. No. 15-15, 6-16-15) 
Sec. 70-259. - Exceptions. 
    No tax shall be payable under this article in any of the following instances: 
(1)  On room rental paid by any federal, state or city official or employee when on official business, and the government concerned either pays the rental or reimburses the employee or official. 
(2)  On room rental paid to any hospital, medical clinic, convalescent home or home for aged people. 
(3)  On room rental paid by any person enrolled in and attending full time a school, college or university within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 8-88) 
Sec. 70-260. - Collection. 
    Every person receiving any payment for room rental with respect to which a tax is levied under this article shall collect the amount of tax hereby imposed from the transient on whom the same is levied or from the person paying for such room rental at the time payment for such room rental is made. The taxes required to be collected under this article shall be deemed to be held in trust by the person required to collect the same until remitted as required in this article. 
(Code 1972, § 8-89) 
Sec. 70-261. - Reports and remittance. 
    The person collecting any such tax shall make out a report upon such forms and setting forth such information as the commissioner of the revenue may prescribe and require, showing the amount of room rental charges collected and the tax required to be collected and shall sign and deliver the same to the treasurer with a remittance of such tax. Such reports and remittances shall be made on or before the last day of each month covering the amount of tax collected during the preceding month. Any person operating a lodging facility regularly throughout the year may, upon written application to and with the written consent of the commissioner of the revenue, make reports and remittances on a quarterly basis in lieu of the monthly basis provided in this section. Such quarterly reports and remittances shall be made on October 31, January 31, April 30 and July 31 in each year and shall cover the amounts collected during the three months immediately preceding the months in which reports and remittances are required. If the remittance is by check or money order, the same shall be payable to the city. 
(Code 1972, § 8-90; Ord. No. 14-22, 11-18-14) 
Sec. 70-262. - Penalty and interest for nonpayment. 
    If any person shall fail or refuse to remit the tax required to be collected and paid under this article, or fail or refuse to submit the reports required by this article within the time and in the amount specified in this article, there shall be added to such tax a penalty of five per centum if the failure is for not more than one month, with an additional five per centum for each additional month, or fraction thereof, during which the failure continues, not to exceed 25 percentum in the aggregate; provided, however, that in no case shall the penalty be less than $10.00, and such minimum penalty shall apply whether or not any tax is due for the period for which such return was required. In addition, there shall be added to such unpaid tax interest thereon at the rate of ten percent per annum, which shall be computed upon the tax and penalty from the date such tax was due and payable. 
(Code 1972, § 8-91) 
Sec. 70-263. - Failure to collect, report or remit tax; action by the commissioner of the revenue. 
    If any person shall fail or refuse to collect, in whole or in part, or properly to report or remit such tax within the time required by this article, the commissioner of the revenue shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the commissioner of the revenue has procured such facts and information he shall make his estimate of the tax due and proceed to determine and assess against such person such estimated tax due, together with the penalties and interest provided for by this article. He shall notify such person by registered mail sent to his last known address of the total amount of such tax, interest and penalties and the total amount thereof shall be payable within ten days from the date of such notice; provided, however, that before any determination and assessment is made by the commissioner of the revenue that any person is liable for any tax, penalty and interest under this section, he shall give such person notice and an opportunity to be heard concerning such possible determination and assessment. 
(Code 1972, § 8-92) 
Sec. 70-264. - Records. 
    It shall be the duty of every person liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this article to keep and preserve for a period of three years such suitable records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for collection of and payment to the city, which records the commissioner of the revenue and the city treasurer shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. 
(Code 1972, § 8-93) 
Sec. 70-265. - Cessation of business. 
    Whenever any person required to collect and pay to the city a tax under this article shall cease to operate or otherwise dispose of his business, any tax payable under this article to the city shall become immediately due and payable and such person shall immediately make a report and pay the tax due. 
(Code 1972, § 8-94) 
Sec. 70-266. - Powers and duties of commissioner of the revenue. 
    It shall be the duty of the commissioner of the revenue to ascertain the name of every person operating a lodging facility in the city liable for the collection of the tax levied by this article. The commissioner of the revenue shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this article for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the tax levied in this article. 
(Code 1972, § 8-95; Ord. No. 14-22, 11-18-14) 
Secs. 70-267-70-295. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - LOCAL TAX FOR ENHANCED EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SERVICE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Local tax for enhanced emergency telephone service, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3813. 

Sec. 70-296. - Levy and rate. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed and levied by the city upon each and every purchase of telephone service, a special tax in the amount of $2.00 per month. 
(b)  Prior to the imposition of this tax, the city council has found that an E-911 emergency telephone service system as defined in state law will be installed in the city and that the telephone company serving the city has central office equipment which will permit such system to be established. 
(c)  This special tax is in addition to any other tax imposed by the city upon consumers of telephone services, and shall not be in lieu of, or abatement of, any such other tax. 
(Code 1972, § 8-100; Ord. No. 01-16, 6-26-01) 
State Law reference- Definitions pertaining to local tax for enhanced emergency telephone service, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3813. 
Sec. 70-297. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - LOCAL EMPORIA ENTERPRISE ZONE[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 13-08, § 1, adopted June 18, 2013, amended Art. VIII to read as herein set out. Former Art. VIII, §§ 70-298-70-308, pertained to urban enterprise zone, and derived from Ord. No. 00-12, adopted Dec. 5, 2000; Ord. No. 05-06, § 1, adopted Apr. 19, 2005. 

Sec. 70-298. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to stimulate business and industrial growth and redevelopment and to improve housing conditions within the area designated as the Local Emporia Enterprise Zone by means of tax incentives, fee exemption, and other initiatives established to promote such growth. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 1, 6-18-13) 
Sec. 70-299. - Boundaries established. 
    The boundaries of the Local Emporia Enterprise Zone shall be the entire corporate limits of the city, excluding the enterprise zone area designated by the Governor of the Commonwealth of Virginia pursuant to the Enterprise Zone Grant Act as set forth in Title 59.1, Chapter 49 of Virginia State Code. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 1, 6-18-13) 
State Law reference- Enterprise zone designation, § 59.1-542. 
Sec. 70-300. - Commercial building permit fee waiver. 
    Businesses located within the Local Emporia Enterprise Zone investing 50 percent or greater of the current assessed property value and making a minimum investment of $50,000.00 toward commercial rehabilitation will be eligible for a 100 percent waiver of building permit fees. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 1, 6-18-13) 
Sec. 70-301. - Commercial real estate tax incentive. 
    Commercial real estate tax incentives shall be as set forth in section 70-99. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 1, 6-18-13) 
Sec. 70-302. - Commercial personal property tax incentive. 
    New or expanding businesses located within the Local Emporia Enterprise Zone making a minimum of $2,000,000.00 in capital investment on the property or creating a minimum of 50 new permanent FTE (full time equivalent) jobs. The city council shall appropriate business development incentive funds to the city industrial development authority (IDA) equal to 50 percent of the applicable net increase in the business personal property tax for a five-year period subject to annual appropriation from the time of project completion on a case by case basis. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 1, 6-18-13) 
Sec. 70-303. - Commercial business license tax incentive. 
    New or expanding businesses located within the Local Emporia Enterprise Zone making a minimum of $2,000,000.00 in capital investment of the property or creating a minimum of 50 new permanent FTE (full time equivalent) jobs. The city council shall appropriate business development incentive funds to the city industrial development authority (IDA) equal to 50 percent of the applicable net increase in the business, profession, and occupation license tax as defined in chapter 18 of this Code for a five-year period subject to annual appropriation from the time of project completion on a case by case basis. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 1, 6-18-13) 
Sec. 70-304. - Industrial real estate tax incentive. 
    Industrial real estate tax incentives shall be as set forth in section 70-99. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 1, 6-18-13) 
Sec. 70-305. - Industrial machinery and tools tax incentive. 
    Industries located within the Local Emporia Enterprise Zone investing $2,000,000.00 or greater toward machinery improvements or upgrades taking place during development or expansion or creating a minimum of 25 new permanent FTE (full time equivalent) jobs. The city council shall appropriate business development incentive funds to the city industrial development authority (IDA) equal to 50 percent of the net increase in machinery and tools tax for a ten-year period subject to annual appropriation from time to time of project completion on a case by case basis. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 1, 6-18-13) 
Sec. 70-306. - Residential building permit fee waiver. 
    Residential property owners located within the Local Emporia Enterprise Zone investing 50 percent or greater of the current assessed value of their property toward rehabilitation will be eligible for a 100 percent waiver of building permit fees. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 1, 6-18-13) 
Sec. 70-307. - Residential real estate tax incentive. 
    Residential real estate tax incentives shall be as set forth in section 70-99. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 1, 6-18-13) 
Sec. 70-308. - Rules and regulations. 
    Other rules and regulations prescribing procedures effectuating the purpose of this chapter shall be promulgated by the city manager and approved by city council. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 1, 6-18-13) 
State Law reference- Adoption of local enterprise zone development taxation program, § 58.1-3245.8; partial exemption for certain rehabilitated, renovated or replacement or residential structures, § 58.1-3220; partial exemption for certain rehabilitated, renovated or replacement commercial or industrial structures, § 58.1-3221. 
ARTICLE IX. - CITY OF EMPORIA AND GREENSVILLE COUNTY JOINT ENTERPRISE ZONE 

Sec. 70-309. - Statement of purpose. 
    The Virginia Enterprise Zone Grant Act, Section 59.1-538 et seq. of the Code of Virginia, authorizes the Governor of the Commonwealth of Virginia to designate enterprise zones. It is the purpose of the Virginia Enterprise Zone Grant Act, and of this [article], to stimulate business and industrial growth within the area designated as the City of Emporia and Greensville County Joint Enterprise Zone. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 1, 6-18-13) 
Sec. 70-310. - Boundaries. 
    The boundaries of the city's portion of the joint enterprise zone are as set forth on the map entitled "City of Emporia Enterprise Zone," which is on file in the city manager's office, the area of which has been declared an enterprise zone by the Governor of the Commonwealth of Virginia in accordance with the Enterprise Zone Grant Act. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 1, 6-18-13) 
Sec. 70-311. - Local enterprise zone incentives. 
(a)  Façade Improvement Grant. The Emporia Redevelopment and Housing Authority (ERHA) shall provide grants not to exceed $5,000.00 per property, per fiscal year to property owners or tenants who renovate existing building façades, including, but not limited to, signage, awnings, landscaping, parking lots, and preparation of architectural and construction plans to be utilized in making eligible façade improvements. A 100 percent match is required from the applicant. Governmental entities are excluded from participating. Grants shall be made based on the availability of grant funds and on a first come, first served basis. Eligible properties may only receive one grant per fiscal year. Grants shall be made through the ERHA only after the applicant provides proper documentation, the applicant is current on all taxes and fees owed to the city, all applicable zoning and building permits have been issued, and all work has been completed. Eligibility is limited to commercial and industrial entities when applying for grant funds related to signage, awnings, and other related improvements. 
(b)  Business Incubation Grant. The Emporia Industrial Development Authority (IDA) shall provide rental assistance grants to new businesses not to exceed $5,000.00 per business for the first full year of operation within the enterprise zone. Grants shall not exceed 20 percent of the rental rate paid by the tenant. Grants shall be made based on the availability of grant funds and on a first come, first served basis. Eligibility is limited to commercial and industrial entities. Grants will be made through the IDA only after the applicant provides proper documentation and is current on all taxes and fees owed to the city. 
(c)  Business, Professional, and Occupational License (BPOL) Grant. The Emporia Industrial Development Authority (IDA) shall provide grants to new businesses based on the net increase in BPOL tax paid for the five years of eligibility according to the following schedule: 
(1)  Year 1 = Grant equivalent to 50 percent of the increase in BPOL tax paid. 
(2)  Year 2 = Grant equivalent to 50 percent of the increase in BPOL tax paid. 
(3)  Year 3 = Grant equivalent to 50 percent of the increase in BPOL tax paid. 
(4)  Year 4 = Grant equivalent to 50 percent of the increase in BPOL tax paid. 
(5)  Year 5 = Grant equivalent to 50 percent of the increase in BPOL tax paid. 
Grants will be made through the IDA only after the applicant provides proper documentation and is current on all taxes and fees owed to the city. 
(d)  Machinery and Tools (M&T) Investment Grant. The Emporia Industrial Development Authority (IDA) shall provide grants to new or expanding businesses based on the net increase in M&T tax paid for the first ten years of eligibility according to the following schedule: 
(1)  Year 1 = Grant equivalent to 50 percent of the increase in M&T tax paid. 
(2)  Year 2 = Grant equivalent to 50 percent of the increase in M&T tax paid. 
(3)  Year 3 = Grant equivalent to 50 percent of the increase in M&T tax paid. 
(4)  Year 4 = Grant equivalent to 50 percent of the increase in M&T tax paid. 
(5)  Year 5 = Grant equivalent to 50 percent of the increase in M&T tax paid. 
(6)  Year 6 = Grant equivalent to 50 percent of the increase in M&T tax paid. 
(7)  Year 7 = Grant equivalent to 50 percent of the increase in M&T tax paid. 
(8)  Year 8 = Grant equivalent to 50 percent of the increase in M&T tax paid. 
(9)  Year 9 = Grant equivalent to 50 percent of the increase in M&T tax paid. 
(10)  Year 10 = Grant equivalent to 50 percent of the increase in M&T tax paid. 
Grants will be made through the IDA only after the applicant provides proper documentation and is current on all taxes and fees owed to the city. 
(e)  Business Personal Property (BPP) Investment Grant. The Emporia Industrial Development Authority (IDA) shall provide grants to new or expanding businesses based on the net increase in BPP tax paid for the first five years of eligibility according to the following schedule: 
(1)  Year 1 = Grant equivalent to 50 percent of the increase in BPP tax paid. 
(2)  Year 2 = Grant equivalent to 50 percent of the increase in BPP tax paid. 
(3)  Year 3 = Grant equivalent to 50 percent of the increase in BPP tax paid. 
(4)  Year 4 = Grant equivalent to 50 percent of the increase in BPP tax paid. 
(5)  Year 5 = Grant equivalent to 50 percent of the increase in BPP tax paid. 
Grants will be made through the IDA only after the applicant provides proper documentation and is current on all taxes and fees owed to the city. 
(f)  Real estate tax abatement. The City of Emporia shall provide a 100 percent exemption from real estate taxes for commercial, industrial, or mixed-use properties that are substantially rehabilitated, renovated, or replaced. The exemption shall be equal to the increase in assessed value resulting from the rehabilitation, renovation, or replacement of the structure. The total square footage of the structure may not increase by more than 25 percent to be eligible for the abatement. The applicant process shall be the same as outlined in section 70-99 of the City Code. The application fee shall be waived. 
(g)  Water and sewer tap fee waiver. The City of Emporia shall provide a 100 percent waiver of water sewer tap fees to those applicants incurring such fees. Waivers will be granted only after the applicant provides proper documentation and is current on all taxes and fees owed to the city. Eligibility is limited to commercial, industrial, and mixed-use properties/applicants. 
(h)  Permit fee waiver. The City of Emporia shall provide a 100 percent waiver of building, zoning, and other development related permit fees to those applicants incurring such fees. Waivers will be granted only after the applicant provides proper documentation and is current on all taxes and fees owed to the city. Eligibility is limited to commercial, industrial, and mixed-use properties/applicants. 
(i)  Enterprise zone loan pool. The City of Emporia shall request local bank participation in a loan pool. Local banks shall be requested to provide low interest loans for a variety of purposes. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 1, 6-18-13) 
Sec. 70-312. - Application. 
    Any entity wishing to receive local enterprise zone incentives shall make application to the enterprise zone administrator on forms provided by the administrator. The administrator shall require the entity to provide documentation establishing that it has met the requirements for receiving the applicable incentives. Failure to provide requested information or follow application procedures shall result in a denial of the application for local incentives. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 1, 6-18-13) 
Sec. 70-313. - Administrator. 
    The enterprise zone administrator shall be the city manager or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 1, 6-18-13) 
Sec. 70-314. - Administrative rules and regulations. 
    The city manager, enterprise zone administrator, Emporia Redevelopment and Housing Authority, and Industrial Development Authority are authorized to develop administrative rules and regulations deemed necessary to administer the local enterprise zone incentives. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 1, 6-18-13) 
Secs. 70-315, 70-316. - Reserved. 
Chapter 74 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Vehicle license, § 3. 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 10; fire prevention and protection, ch. 38; law enforcement, ch. 46; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; removing glass, etc., after wreck, § 62-7; obstructing view at corners, § 62-185; vehicles for hire, ch. 86. 
State Law reference- Inoperable motor vehicles, etc., on residential or commercial property in certain localities, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-11.03; limited access streets, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-16; municipal regulation of traffic, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-891; identification of handicapped parking spaces by abovegrade signage, Code of Virginia, § 36-99.11; local vehicle license, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-752 et seq.; abandoned vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1200 et seq.; removal of vehicles involved in accidents, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1212; removal or immobilization of motor vehicles against which there are outstanding parking violations, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1216; parking regulations in cities, towns and certain counties, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220; general powers of local governments as to motor vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1300 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 74-1. - Adoption of state law. 
    Pursuant to the authority of state law, as amended, all of the provisions and requirements of the laws of the state contained in Code of Virginia, tit. 46.2, including all future amendments to such title except those provisions and requirements the violation of which constitutes a felony, and except those provisions and requirements which by their very nature can have no application to or within the city, are hereby adopted and incorporated in this chapter by reference and made applicable within the city. References to "highways of the state" contained in such provisions and requirements hereby adopted shall be deemed to refer to the streets, highways and other public ways within the city. Such provisions and requirements are hereby adopted, mutatis mutandis, and made a part of this chapter as fully as though set forth at length in this section, and it shall be unlawful for any person, within the city, to violate or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any provision of Code of Virginia, tit. 46.2, which is adopted by this section; provided, however, that in no event shall the penalty imposed for the violation of any provision or requirement hereby adopted exceed the penalty imposed for a similar offense under Code of Virginia, tit. 46.2. 
(Code 1972, § 20-2; Ord. No. 01-19, 6-26-01) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1313. 
Sec. 74-2. - Powers of chief of police. 
(a)  The chief of police may designate intersections at which vehicles shall come to a full stop or yield the right-of-way and may cause to be erected appropriate signs or markers at such intersections so that an ordinarily observant person will be aware of the existence of such regulation. 
(b)  The chief of police may classify vehicles with reference to parking and may designate the time, place and manner such vehicles may be allowed to park on the streets and highways, and may make and enforce such additional regulations as parking conditions may require. When any parking regulation is established, pursuant to this subsection, the chief of police shall cause to be erected appropriate signs or markers so that an ordinarily observant person, who may be affected by such regulation, will be aware of such regulation. When any regulation is made pursuant to this section and when appropriate signs or markers have been erected as required by this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to violate any such regulation. 
(Code 1972, § 20-3) 
Sec. 74-3. - Authority of fire department officials to direct traffic. 
    Officers of the fire department may direct or assist the police in directing traffic at or in the immediate vicinity of a fire and, while so acting, shall have all the authority of police officers. 
(Code 1972, § 20-4) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 38. 
Sec. 74-4. - Washing, greasing or polishing vehicle on street or sidewalk. 
    No person shall, for compensation, wash, polish or grease a vehicle upon a street or sidewalk, nor shall the owner of a vehicle permit it to be washed, polished or greased, for compensation, upon a street or sidewalk. 
(Code 1972, § 20-6) 
Sec. 74-5. - Driving through funeral or other processions; manner of driving in funeral processions. 
(a)  No operator of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles, persons or animals comprising a funeral, parade, or other authorized procession, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. This subsection shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles. 
(b)  Each driver in a funeral procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as is practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practicable and safe. 
(Code 1972, §§ 20-7, 20-112) 
Sec. 74-6. - Identification of vehicles in funeral processions; right-of-way. 
(a)  All motor vehicles participating in a funeral procession, when proceeding to any place of burial, shall display illuminated headlamps thereon and such other identification as the chief of police may prescribe. 
(b)  All motor vehicles so designated, when traveling under police or sheriff's escort, shall have the right-of-way over all other vehicles, except fire apparatus, ambulances and police vehicles at any street or highway intersection within the city and may proceed through a stop street or signalized intersection with proper caution and safety. 
(Code 1972, § 20-8) 
State Law reference- Right-of-way for funeral processions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-828. 
Sec. 74-7. - Boarding or alighting from moving vehicles. 
    No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. 
(Code 1972, § 20-9) 
Sec. 74-8. - Unlawful riding. 
    No person shall ride on any vehicle or upon any portion of such vehicle not designed or intended for the use of passengers. This section shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. 
(Code 1972, § 20-10) 
Sec. 74-9. - Noise in the operation of motor vehicles. 
(a)  No vehicle shall be loaded with materials likely to create loud noises by striking together, without using every reasonable effort to deaden the noise. 
(b)  The use in, upon or attached to any motor vehicle operating on any street of the city of any radio, phonograph, musical instrument, bell, whistle, loudspeaker, amplifier or device of any kind whatsoever whereby sound therefrom is cast upon any street to promote or advertise the sale of goods, wares or merchandise, or for the purpose of advertising auction sales, sporting events or other businesses or things advertised thereby, is prohibited. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to motor vehicles driven in a duly authorized parade. The use of a loudspeaker on a motor vehicle for making auction sales in streets directly in front of the property then being sold, and entirely outside of the business districts of the city, shall not be construed as a violation of this subsection when such use is limited strictly to the selling at auction of such property. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person in operating a motor vehicle or motorcycle within the city to create in the operation thereof any loud or disturbing noise. 
(d)  In operating a motorcycle or other motor vehicle, the following acts, among others, are declared to create loud or disturbing noises in violation of this section, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  The use of a motorcycle or other motor vehicle so out of repair as to cause loud grating, grinding, rattling or any of such noises, or any other loud noise. 
(2)  The practice of unnecessarily racing the motor of a motorcycle or motor vehicle while standing or moving, thereby causing noise from such motor. 
(3)  The practice of unnecessarily retarding the spark to the motor of a motorcycle or other motor vehicle and thereby causing unnecessary, loud and explosive noise from the motor. 
(4)  In starting a motorcycle or other motor vehicle from a standing position, the practice of gaining speed unnecessarily and quickly, thereby causing loud noise from the motor and the screeching of tires, or either of such noises. 
(5)  The practice of coming to an unreasonably quick stop with a motorcycle or other motor vehicle and thereby causing unnecessary grinding of brakes and screeching of tires, or either of such noises. 
(Code 1972, § 20-11) 
Cross reference- Permit for vehicle with sound amplifying equipment, § 34-56 et seq. 
Sec. 74-10. - Throwing or depositing glass and other injurious substances upon streets or highways. 
    No person shall throw or deposit or cause to be deposited upon any street or highway any glass bottle, glass, nail, tack, wire, can or any other substance likely to injure any person or animal, or damage any vehicle upon such street or highway, nor shall any person throw or deposit or cause to be deposited upon any street or highway any soil, sand, mud, gravel or other substances so as to create a hazard to the traveling public. Any person who drops, or permits to be dropped or thrown, upon any street or highway any destructive, hazardous or injurious material shall immediately remove the material or cause it to be removed. Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a street or highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the street or highway from such vehicle. 
(Code 1972, § 20-12) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-324. 
Sec. 74-11. - Tailgates on vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for the operator of any truck, trailer or other vehicle equipped with a tailgate to lower or open the tailgate thereon, or to suffer or permit such tailgate to be lowered or opened, except during the time the vehicle is being loaded or unloaded, and except during the time the load on the vehicle necessitates a lowered or opened tailgate as a support for the load. It shall be the duty of the operator of any such vehicle to see that the tailgate on such vehicle is kept closed or raised, except during the times specified in this section. 
(Code 1972, § 20-13) 
Sec. 74-12. - Riding bicycle without using handlebars. 
    No person shall ride a bicycle upon any street without having his hands upon the handlebars. 
(Code 1972, § 20-14) 
State Law reference- Carrying articles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-906. 
Sec. 74-13. - Commercial vehicle routes; certain streets closed to commercial vehicles except receiving loads or making deliveries. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. To restrict commercial vehicles from traveling or passing through the city on certain streets as designated by ordinance of the council in order to reduce or prevent congestion,hazardous traffic conditions, and protect both public and private property within the boundaries of the city. Operators of commercial vehicles shall be restricted to the exclusive use of street adopted by ordinance of councilin traveling or passing through the city, except for the purpose of receiving loads or making deliveries. 
(b)  Commercial vehicle defined. Any motor vehicle used to transport property which either: (i) is designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the load and weight of the vehicle attached thereto (such commercial vehicle is commonly referred to as a "tractor truck"); or (ii) is of any size and is used in the transportation of hazardous materials. Every such motor vehicle shall be considered a commercial motor vehicle whether or not it is used in a commercial or profit-making activity. 
(c)  Restricted streets. Interstate Highway 95 and U.S. Highway 58 bypass are hereby designated as the streets or roads upon which such vehicles may travel. 
(d)  Exempted from this ordinance are loaded log or chip trucks traveling on Main Street in the city. 
(Code 1972, § 20-15; Ord. No. 05-05, § 1, 4-6-05; Ord. No. 14-05, § 1, 4-1-14; Ord. No. 15-39, § 1, 12-15-15; Ord. No. 16-30, § 1, 11-15-16) 
Sec. 74-14. - One-way streets-Establishment; driving on. 
    The following streets are established and designated as one-way streets and, except as provided in section 74-15, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive or move on such streets in a direction other than as set forth in this section: Baker Street, from its intersection with Budd Street to its intersection with Halifax Street, for traffic traveling in an eastward direction. This section shall become effective as to any such one-way street when signs have been provided therefor as set out in section 74-15. 
(Code 1972, § 20-16) 
Sec. 74-15. - Same-Erection of signs; powers of chief of police to vary; special permits. 
(a)  The chief of police is authorized and directed to provide signs on the one-way streets designated in section 74-14 as will apprise an ordinarily observant person of such one-way streets. 
(b)  When it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the chief of police that the strict enforcement of section 74-14 will cause an unreasonable hardship on some particular person relative to the loading or unloading of trucks or other vehicles on such one-way streets, then in such event the chief of police is authorized to issue a special permit to such person permitting a variance from the provisions of section 74-14. Any such special permit shall be in writing and shall specify the nature of such variance and the place and period of time when such variance shall be permitted. Such permit shall only be issued when it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the chief of police that the granting of such permit will alleviate a clearly demonstratable hardship as distinguished from a special privilege or convenience to the person who seeks such permit. 
(Code 1972, § 20-17) 
Sec. 74-16. - Maximum and minimum speed limits. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle upon a street in the city at such speed as unnecessarily to block, hinder or retard the orderly and safe use of the street or so as to cause congestion on the street. 
(b)  The maximum speed limit for any motor vehicle operated on the streets of the city shall be 25 miles per hour, unless a different speed limit is otherwise posted, in which case the posted speed limit shall be applicable. 
(Code 1972, § 20-18) 
Sec. 74-17. - Temporary reduction in speed when persons are working or when street is under construction. 
    The city manager may reduce, for a temporary period not to exceed 60 days, without a traffic engineering investigation provided for and required in state law, the speed limit on any portion of any street of the city on which persons are working or where the street is under construction or repair. 
(Code 1972, § 20-19) 
Sec. 74-18. - Backing. 
    The operator of a vehicle in the city shall not back such vehicle unless such movement can be made with safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(Code 1972, § 20-20) 
Sec. 74-19. - Blocking intersection. 
    No operator of a vehicle shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space beyond such intersection or crosswalk in the direction in which such vehicle is proceeding to accommodate the vehicle without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. 
(Code 1972, § 20-21) 
Sec. 74-20. - Display of state license plates required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or for the owner or person in control thereof to knowingly permit the operation of, upon a street or highway of the city, any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer without having displayed thereon the license plates assigned thereto by the state department of motor vehicles for the current registration year, whenever such license plate or plates are required by the Code of Virginia. 
(Code 1972, § 20-22) 
Sec. 74-21. - State inspection sticker required. 
    Except as otherwise expressly provided by state law, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause or permit the operation of a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer upon the streets or highways of this city unless there is properly displayed thereon a valid state inspection sticker showing that such vehicle, trailer or semitrailer has been inspected and approved under the provisions of the Code of Virginia. 
(Code 1972, § 20-23) 
State Law reference- Safety inspections, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1157 et seq.; emissions inspections, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1176 et seq. 
Sec. 74-22. - Temporary removal and disposition of vehicles involved in accidents. 
    Whenever a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer involved in an accident is found upon the highways or streets in the city and is so located as to impede the orderly flow of traffic, the police may at no cost to the owner or operator remove such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer from the highways or streets to some point in the vicinity where such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer will not impede the flow of traffic. 
(Code 1972, § 20-28) 
Sec. 74-23. - Pedestrians soliciting employment or business. 
    No person shall stand in the vehicular travelled portion of any street or roadway for the purpose of soliciting employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle. 
(Code 1972, § 20-29) 
Sec. 74-24. - Penalty for violation of chapter; compliance with chapter. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse, fail or neglect to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or any regulation promulgated pursuant thereto, and any such violation shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Every person convicted of a misdemeanor for a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto, for which no other penalty is provided shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1972, § 20-30) 
Sec. 74-25. - Operation of golf carts and utility vehicles on designated streets. 
Definitions: 
    Golf cart means a self-propelled vehicle that is designed to transport persons playing golf and their equipment on a golf course. 
    Utility vehicle means a motor vehicle that is (I) designed for off-road use, (ii) powered by an engine of no more than 25 horsepower, and (iii) used for general maintenance, security, agricultural, or horticultural purposes. 
    Utility vehicle does not include all-terrain vehicles as defined by the Code of Virginia § 46.2-100, riding lawn mowers, or any other vehicle whose definition is included in the Code of Virginia § 46.2-100. 
    The city manager, upon petition of a resident or residents of a particular street or streets, may designate that specific street or streets within the city limits to be used for travel by golf carts and utility vehicles, after consideration of speed, volume, character of motor vehicle traffic using such street, and a recommendation of the chief of police. No public highway shall be designated for use by golf carts and utility vehicles if such golf cart and utility vehicle operations will impede the safe and efficient flow of motor vehicle traffic. 
(a)  All designated streets shall be marked at each entrance with appropriate signs as determined by the chief of police and posted by the director of public works. Less signs maybe used when several streets share entries, as long as all entries are signed, and all of the included streets are designated; 
(b)  A golf cart or utility vehicle may be operated only on designated public highways where the posted speed limit is 25 miles per hour or less; 
(c)  No person shall operate any golf cart or utility vehicle on any public highway unless he has in his possession a valid driver's license; 
(d)  Every golf cart or utility vehicle, whenever operated on a public highway, shall display a slow-moving vehicle emblem in conformity with Code of Virginia § 46.2-1081; and 
(e)  Golf carts and utility vehicles shall be operated upon the public highways only between sunrise and sunset, unless equipped with such lights as are required in Article 3 ([Code of Virginia], § 46.2-1010). 
    This section is adopted to address the interest of public safety. Golf carts are not designed or manufactured to be used on the public streets, and the City of Emporia in no way advocates or endorses their operation on public streets or roads. The City of Emporia, by regulating such operation is merely trying to address obvious safety issues, and adoption of this article is not to be relied upon as a determination that operation on public streets is safe or advisable if done in accordance with this article. All persons who operate or ride upon golf carts on public streets or roads do so at their own risk and peril, and must be observant of, and attentive to the safety of themselves and others, including their passengers, other motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians. The City of Emporia has no liability under any theory of liability and the City of Emporia assumes no liability, for permitting golf carts to be operated on designated public streets. 
(Ord. No. 08-22, 9-2-08) 
Secs. 74-26-74-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LOCAL VEHICLE LICENSE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18. 
State Law reference- Local vehicle taxes and license fees, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-752 et seq. 

Sec. 74-51. - City license fee. 
(a)  Required. Every owner or operator of a motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer, which said motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer is registered in the city for any portion of the year between January 1 and December 31, shall pay a local license fee required herein upon said motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer. The city treasurer shall mail the taxpayer a bill for the said fee. The license fee shall be listed as a separate item on each year's annual personal property tax bill, which shall be due and payable on or before July 1 of each year. The requirements of this section shall only apply to those motor vehicles, trailers, or semitrailers which are normally garaged, stored, or parked in the city. If it cannot be determined where the aforesaid personal property is normally garaged, stored or parked, the situs for said license shall be considered the domicile of its owner. 
(b)  Fees. The license fees shall be as follows: 
(1)  Privately owned passenger cars, and trucks at or below 7,500 pounds GVW, $25.00 per year. 
(2)  Trucks and other motor-driven vehicles in excess of 7,500 pounds GVW, $25.00 per year. 
(3)  Trailers or semitrailers not designed for the transportation of passengers with a gross weight of less than 6,500 pounds, $10.00 per year. 
(4)  Trailers or semitrailers not designed for the transportation of passengers with a gross weight of 6,500 pounds or more, $20.00 per year. 
(5)  Certain trailers. One- or two-wheel trailer of a cradle, flatbed or open pickup type which has a body width not greater than the width of the motor vehicle to which it is attached at any time of operation, which is pulled or towed by a passenger car or station wagon, or a pickup or panel truck having an actual gross vehicle weight not exceeding 5,000 pounds, and which is used for carrying property not exceeding 1,500 pounds at any one time, and for all trailers designed exclusively to transport boats shall be $6.50 per year. 
(6)  Motorcycles, $15.00 per year. 
(c)  Late fee. If any license fee imposed by this article is not paid by the due date indicated on the tax bill of any license year, there shall be added to such license fee a delinquent charge of $10.00 to be paid along with the license fee as part thereof. 
(d)  Proration and refunds of license fee. There shall be no proration of license fees for vehicles acquired after January 1 of each year. All vehicles registered in the city between January 1 and December 31 shall be charged the applicable full license fee amount. Nor shall there be any refund or proration of the license fee upon the sale of that vehicle or upon the removal of the owner from the city. 
(e)  Transfer. There shall be no transfer of the license fee from the vehicle for which it was paid to any other vehicle of a different type or owned by a person other than the person to whom the license fee was paid. Individuals may, however, transfer the paid license fees from a sold like vehicle to a newly acquired like vehicle. For the purposes of this article, privately owned passenger cars and trucks 7,500 pounds GVW and below shall be considered like vehicles. 
(Code 1972, § 20-24; Ord. No. 328-95, 9-26-95; Ord. No. 98-1, 1-20-98; Ord. of 11-21-06) 
Sec. 74-51.1. - Special exemption for certain motor vehicles owned by members of a volunteer rescue squad or volunteer fire department. 
    Notwithstanding any provision in this Code to the contrary, one motor vehicle which is owned and regularly used by each volunteer rescue squad member or volunteer fire department member to respond to calls shall be specifically exempt from having to pay a local license fee. In order to qualify for such special exemption, the following requirements shall be met: The volunteer seeking special exemption as set forth in this section shall furnish the commissioner of the revenue with a certification by the chief or head of the volunteer organization, that the volunteer is a member of the volunteer rescue squad or volunteer fire department who regularly responds to calls or regularly performs other duties for the rescue squad or fire department and the motor vehicle for which special exemption is sought is regularly used for such purposes. 
(Ord. No. 98-13, 10-20-98; Ord. of 11-21-06) 
Sec. 74-52. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted Nov. 21, 2006, deleted § 74-52 in its entirety. Former § 74-52 pertained to motor vehicles; failure to display license, decal or tag; voluntary payment of fine for violation; penalty for violation of section and derived from Code 1972, § 20-24; and Ord. No. 98-1, adopted Jan. 20, 1998. 
Sec. 74-53. - License tax on owners of motor vehicles which do not display current license plates. 
    There shall be imposed a license tax in the amount of $100.00, annually, upon the owner of motor vehicles which do not display current license plates and which are not exempted from the requirements of displaying such license plates under the provisions of state law, or are in a public dump, or in an automobile graveyard as defined in state law, or in the possession of a licenses junk dealer or licensed motor vehicle dealer. There shall be exempt from any such tax any vehicles which are stored on private property for a period not in excess of 60 days for the purpose of removing parts for the repair of another vehicle. Nothing in this section shall be applicable to any vehicle being held or stored by or at the discretion of any governmental authority, to any vehicle owned by a member of the armed forces on active duty or to any vehicle stored within a structure. 
(Code 1972, § 20-24.1; Ord. of 11-21-06) 
State Law reference- "Automobile graveyard" defined, Code of Virginia, § 33.1-348; persons exempted from requirements of displaying license plates, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-650-46.2-653, 46.2-663-46.2-683, 46.2-723 and 46.2-750. 
Secs. 74-54-74-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DRIVING WHILE INTOXICATED OR UNDER INFLUENCE 

Sec. 74-81. - Adoption of state law. 
    Pursuant to the authority of state law, as amended, all of the provisions and requirements and the laws of the state contained in Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266 et seq., including all future amendments to such statute, except those provisions and requirements the violation of which constitutes a felony, if any, and except those provisions and requirements which by their very nature can have no application to or within the city, are hereby adopted and incorporated in this chapter by reference and made applicable within the city. Such provisions and requirements are hereby adopted, mutatis mutandis, and made a part of this chapter as fully as though set forth at length in this section, and it shall be unlawful for any person, within the city, to violate or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any provision of Code of Virginia, §18.2-266 et seq., which is adopted by this section; provided, however, that in no event shall the penalty imposed for the violation of any provision or requirement hereby adopted exceed the penalty imposed for a similar offense under Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266 et seq. 
(Code 1972, § 20-43; Ord. No. 01-19, 6-26-01) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1313. 
Secs. 74-82-74-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PARKING[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Trespassing vehicles, parking and towing, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1216. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 74-111. - Prohibited in specified places. 
(a)  No person shall park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk. 
(2)  In front of a public or private driveway. 
(3)  Within an intersection. 
(4)  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant. 
(5)  On a crosswalk. 
(6)  Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection; provided, however, that where there is no crosswalk at an intersection, no person shall so park a vehicle within 20 feet from the intersection of curblines or, if none, then within 15 feet of the intersection of property lines. 
(7)  Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway. 
(8)  Within 15 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of the entrance when properly signposted. 
(9)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such parking would obstruct traffic. 
(10)  On the roadway side of any vehicle parked at the edge or curb of a street. 
(11)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a street or highway or within a tunnel. 
(12)  Upon parking lots open to the public designed to accommodate 50 or more vehicles, when such places are properly designated by appropriate signs and when such designation has resulted from either of the following circumstances: 
a.  When the owner of such parking lot applies to the city manager for the designation of a fire lane and such designation is granted by the city manager after the city manager has determined that the safety factors involved require such designation and only after the city manager's decision has been concurred in by the fire marshal and the police chief. The expense of the painting and marking of such designated fire lane shall be borne by the owner. 
b.  When the city, through the city manager, on its own initiative deems that a fire lane should be designated and after the city manager has determined the safety factors involved require such designation, and his decision has been concurred in by the fire marshal and the police chief, such designation may be required by the city. All painting and signs necessary to such designation shall be paid for and be the expense of the city. Upon such designation under this subsection by the city manager as set out in this subsection, the owner of such parking lot shall be given 30 days' notice of the area to be designated before such designation shall be enforced. 
(13)  At any place where official signs prohibit parking. 
(14)  In a parking space reserved for the handicapped on public property or at privately owned parking areas unless such vehicle is transporting a handicapped person and bears or displays a valid special license plate, decal or parking permit lawfully issued to or for use by the handicapped person. 
(b)  No person other than a police officer shall move a vehicle into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful, or start or cause to be started the motor of any motor vehicle, or shift, change or move the levers, brake, starting device, gears or other mechanism of a parked motor vehicle to a position other than that in which it was left by the owner or driver thereof, or attempt to do so. 
(Code 1972, § 20-63; Ord. No. 00-05, 5-2-2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-146, 46.2-1239. 
Sec. 74-112. - Parking vehicle without state license on street or highway. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle having no current state license on any street or highway in the city. 
(Code 1972, § 20-64) 
Sec. 74-113. - Angle parking. 
    Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this chapter, the chief of police may, when in his discretion the public interest so requires, provide for angle parking on any street or portion of a street; provided, however, that such streets are marked so as to apprise an ordinarily observant person of such regulation. 
(Code 1972, § 20-65) 
Sec. 74-114. - Backing up to curbs. 
    No vehicle shall be backed up to a curb, except during the time actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise therefrom. 
(Code 1972, § 20-66) 
Sec. 74-115. - Manner of using loading zones. 
    Where a loading and unloading zone has been set apart by the chief of police in accordance with applicable provisions of this chapter, the following regulations shall apply with respect to the use of such areas: 
(1)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time, other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials, in any place marked as a curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. All delivery vehicles other than regular delivery trucks using such loading zones shall be identified by the owner's or company's name in letters three inches high on both sides of the vehicle. 
(2)  The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily in a space marked as a curb loading zone for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading passengers or bundles when such stopping does not interfere with any vehicle used for the transportation of materials which is waiting to enter or is about to enter such loading space. 
(Code 1972, § 20-67) 
Sec. 74-116. - Manner of using bus stops and taxicab stands. 
    When a bus stop or taxicab stand has been set apart by the chief of police in accordance with the applicable provisions of this chapter, the following regulations shall apply as to the use of such areas: No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
(Code 1972, § 20-68) 
Sec. 74-117. - Parking of commercial vehicles in residential districts prohibited. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. Such restrictions are needed in order to reduce or prevent congestion and hazardous traffic conditions in residential areas, to protect those areas from polluted air, excessive noise and other adverse environmental impacts of commercial vehicle commuting, to protect the residents of these areas from unreasonable burdens in gaining access to their property and to preserve the residential character of such areas and the property values therein. 
(b)  Commercial vehicle defined. Any motor vehicle, vehicle or combination of vehicles used to transport passengers or property which either: (i) contains more than one single drive axle (a total of two axles per vehicle), but excluding buses or vans used for the purpose of transporting school age children; and (ii) is of any size and is used in the transportation of hazardous materials. Every such motor vehicle or combination of vehicles shall be considered a commercial motor vehicle whether or not it is used in a commercial or profit-making activity. 
(c)  Restricted streets. No person shall park any commercial vehicle on or alongside any road, highway, street, or alley within or adjacent to any residential district within the city, except for the purpose of receiving loads or making deliveries. 
(Code 1972, § 20-69; Ord. No. 00-1, 1-4-00; Ord. No. 05-04, § 1, 4-6-05) 
Cross reference- Zoning, ch. 90; zoning district regulations, § 90-71 et seq. 
Sec. 74-118. - Effective days and hours of restricted time parking areas. 
    Unless otherwise posted, restrictions on the length of time a vehicle may be parked in time restricted areas shall be deemed to apply only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.; provided, however, that there shall be no restriction on the length of time a vehicle may be there parked on Sundays or legal holidays. 
(Code 1972, § 20-70) 
State Law reference- Legal holidays, Code of Virginia, § 2.1-21. 
Sec. 74-119. - Overtime. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a vehicle to remain parked in any space beyond the period of time prescribed for such parking space. 
(Code 1972, § 20-71) 
Sec. 74-120. - Presumption where vehicle illegally parked. 
    The fact that an automobile which is illegally parked is registered in the name of a person shall be considered prima facie proof that such person was in control of the automobile at the time of such parking. 
(Code 1972, § 20-73) 
Sec. 74-121. - Stopping vehicle for selling, advertising, displaying or offering goods, wares, merchandise, produce or other property. 
    No person shall stop a vehicle upon the street at any time within a two-hour parking zone for the purpose of advertising, displaying, selling or offering for sale therefrom any goods, wares, merchandise, produce or any other property. 
(Code 1972, § 20-74) 
Sec. 74-122. - Penalties for violation of article. 
(a)  Any person accused of a violation of an ordinance prohibiting parking a vehicle in an area restricting the length of time a vehicle may be parked may settle and compromise the claim against him for such illegal parking by paying to the treasurer of the city the sum of $5.00 if paid within 24 hours of the time such alleged offense was committed. 
(b)  Any person accused of a violation of an ordinance prohibiting parking of a vehicle in an area restricting the length of time a vehicle may be parked and who has not settled or compromised the claim against him within the first 24 hours may do so by paying to the treasurer of the city the sum of $10.00 if paid within five days of the time such alleged offense was committed. 
(c)  Any person accused of a violation of an ordinance prohibiting parking a vehicle in specified places other than in an area restricting the length of time a vehicle may be parked may settle and compromise the claim against him for such illegal parking by paying to the treasurer of the city the sum of $10.00 if paid within 24 hours of the time such alleged offense was committed. 
(d)  Any person accused of a violation of an ordinance prohibiting parking of a vehicle in specified places other than in an area restricting the length of time a vehicle may be parked and who has not settled or compromised the claim against him within the first 24 hours may do so by paying to the treasurer of the city the sum of $20.00 if paid within five days of the time such alleged offense was committed. 
(e)  Any person who has not settled or compromised the claim against him within the times specified in this section and is subsequently convicted of the alleged offense shall be punished pursuant to section 1-11. 
(Code 1972, § 20-72) 
Secs. 74-123-74-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REMOVAL OF VEHICLES 

Sec. 74-141. - Removal and disposition of certain unattended or immobile vehicles-Authority; sale; disposition of proceeds. 
(a)  Whenever any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer or a part thereof is: 
(1)  Left unattended on a public highway or other public property and constitutes a traffic hazard; 
(2)  Illegally parked; 
(3)  Left unattended for more than ten days either on public property or on private property without the permission of the property owner, lessee, or occupant; or 
(4)  Immobilized on a public roadway by weather conditions or other emergency situation; 
any such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer or part thereof may be removed for safekeeping by or under the direction of a police officer to a storage garage or area. Motor vehicles, trailers, semitrailers, and parts thereof shall not be removed from private property without the written request of the owner, lessee, or occupant of the premises. The person at whose request the motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, or part of a motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer is removed from private property shall indemnify the city against any loss or expense incurred by reason of removal, storage, or sale thereof. It shall be presumed that such motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, or part thereof is abandoned if it lacks either a current license plate or a current city license plate or decal or a valid state safety inspection certificate or decal and it has been in a specific location for four days without being moved. 
(b)  Each removal shall be reported immediately to the chief of police, who shall give notice to the owner of the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer as promptly as possible. The owner, before obtaining possession of the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer or part thereof shall pay to the persons entitled thereto all costs incidental to removing, storing and locating the owner of the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer or part thereof. Should the owner fail or refuse to pay the costs or should the identity or whereabouts of the owner be unknown and unascertainable after a diligent search has been made, and after notice of the owner at his last known address and to the holder of any lien of record in the office of the state department of motor vehicles against the motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer or part thereof, the vehicle shall be treated as an abandoned vehicle under state law. 
(Code 1972, § 20-25) 
State Law reference- Abandoned vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1200 et seq.; removal and disposition of unattended or immobile vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1213. 
Sec. 74-142. - Same-Contracts with private persons. 
    The city manager shall have the power to enter into contracts with the owner or operator of garages or places for the removal or storage of vehicles referred to in section 74-141. The contracts shall provide for the payment by the city of reasonable charges for the removal and storage of such vehicles to the owners thereof or their agents upon demand therefor, upon furnishing satisfactory evidence of identity and ownership or agency, and that the owners or operators of such garages or places of storage will indemnify the owners of such vehicles for injury or damage thereto resulting from the negligent removal or storage thereof, and such owners or operators shall be required to provide themselves with adequate liability insurance to cover such indemnity. 
(Code 1972, § 20-26) 
Sec. 74-143. - Ticketing, removal or immobilization of trespassing vehicles by owner or operator of parking or other lot or building; charges. 
(a)  The owner, operator, or lessee of any parking lot, parking area, or parking space in a parking lot or area or any part of a parking lot or area, or of any other lot or building, including the city, or authorized agent of the person having control of such premises may have any vehicle occupying the lot, area, space, or building without the permission of its owner, operator, lessee, or authorized agent of the one having the control of the premises, removed by towing or otherwise to a licensed garage for storage until called for by the owner or his agent if there are posted at all entrances to the parking lot or area signs clearly and conspicuously disclosing that such vehicle, if parked without permission, will be removed, towed, or immobilized. 
(b)  Whenever a trespassing vehicle is removed or towed as permitted by this section, notice of this action shall forthwith be given by the tow truck operator to a local law enforcement officer. It shall be unlawful to fail to report such tow as required by this section, and violation of the reporting requirement of this section shall constitute a traffic infraction punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00. Such failure to report shall limit the amount which may be charged for the storage and safekeeping of the towed vehicle to an amount no greater than that charged for one day of storage and safekeeping. If the vehicle is removed and stored, the vehicle owner may be charged and the vehicle may be held for a reasonable fee for the removal and storage. 
(c)  All businesses engaged in towing vehicles without the consent of their owners shall prominently display at their main place of business a comprehensive list of all their fees for towing, recovery, and storage services, or the basis of such charges. Charges in excess of those posted shall not be collectable from any motor vehicle owner whose vehicle is towed, recovered, or stored without his consent. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the foregoing subsections of this section, if the owner or representative or agent of the owner of the trespassing vehicle is present and removes the trespassing vehicle from the premises before it is actually towed, the trespassing vehicle shall not be towed, but the owner or representative or agent of the owner of the trespassing vehicle shall be liable for a reasonable fee, not to exceed $25.00, in lieu of towing. 
(e)  In lieu of having a trespassing vehicle removed by towing or otherwise, the owner, operator, lessee or authorized agent of the premises on which the trespassing vehicle is parked may cause the vehicle to be immobilized by a boot or other device that prevents a vehicle from being moved by preventing a wheel from turning, provided that the boot or other device does not damage the vehicle or wheel. The charge for the removal of any boot or device shall not exceed $25.00. In lieu of having the vehicle removed by towing or otherwise, or in lieu of causing the vehicle to be immobilized, the owner, operator, lessee or authorized agent of the premises on which the trespassing vehicle is parked may cause to have an authorized local government official or law enforcement officer issue, on the premises, a notice of the violation of a parking ordinance or regulation created pursuant to state law to the registered owner of the vehicle. 
(f)  This section shall not apply to police, fire, or public health vehicles or where a vehicle, because of a wreck or other emergency, is parked or left temporarily on the property of another. The council may, by ordinance, set limits on fees and charges provided for in this section. 
(Code 1972, § 20-27) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1231; parking regulations in cities, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220. 
Secs. 74-144-74-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PARADES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Equine Activity Liability Act, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.130 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 74-161. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Parade means any parade in the ordinary sense, any march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or procession of any kind or any similar display in or upon any street, park or other public place in the city. 
(Code 1972, § 20-98) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 74-162. - Public conduct during. 
(a)  Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade. 
(b)  Parking on parade route. The chief of police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. The chief of police shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicles in violation of such restrictions. No person shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violation of this section. 
(Code 1972, § 20-112(a), (c)) 
Secs. 74-163-74-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 74-181. - Required. 
    No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade, unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the chief of police or other appropriate official or body, except in cases of: funeral processions; students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, providing such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; and governmental agencies acting within the scope of their functions. 
(Code 1972, § 20-99) 
Sec. 74-182. - Fee. 
    There shall be paid at the time of filing the application for a parade permit, a fee of $10.00. 
(Code 1972, § 20-100; Ord. No. 05-51, § 1, 8-16-05) 
Sec. 74-183. - Application-Filing. 
    A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with the chief of police on forms provided by such officer, not less than 15 days nor more than 30 days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade. 
(Code 1972, § 20-101) 
Sec. 74-184. - Same-Filing time limit waiver. 
    The chief of police, where good cause is shown therefor, shall have the authority to consider any application under this article which is filed less than 15 days before the date such parade is proposed to be conducted. 
(Code 1972, § 20-102) 
Sec. 74-185. - Same-Information required. 
    The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade; 
(2)  If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and of the authorized and responsible heads of such organization; 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct; 
(4)  The date when the parade is to be conducted; 
(5)  The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point; 
(6)  The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which, will constitute such parade; the type of animals and description of the vehicles; 
(7)  The hours when such parade will start and terminate; 
(8)  A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed; 
(9)  The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade; 
(10)  The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such assembly area or areas; 
(11)  The interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade; and 
(12)  If the parade is designed to be held by and on behalf of or for any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the chief of police a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf. 
(Code 1972, § 20-103(a)-(l)) 
Sec. 74-186. - Same-Acting on; disapproving. 
    The chief of police shall act upon the application for a parade permit within three days after the filing thereof. If the chief of police disapproves the application, he shall mail to the applicant, within five days after the date upon which the application was filed, a notice of his action, stating the reasons for his denial of the permit. 
(Code 1972, § 20-104) 
Sec. 74-187. - Same-Appeals from disapproval. 
    Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade permit to the city council. The appeal shall be taken within ten days after notice. The council shall act upon the appeal within ten days after its receipt. 
(Code 1972, § 20-105) 
Sec. 74-188. - Standards for issuance. 
    The chief of police shall issue a parade permit upon compliance with this article, when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route. 
(2)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the city. 
(3)  The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and area contiguous thereto. 
(4)  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of or ambulance service to areas contiguous to such assembly areas. 
(5)  The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire. 
(6)  The conduct of the parade will not be reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance. 
(7)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route. 
(8)  The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, goods or event and is not designed to be held purely for private profit. 
(Code 1972, § 20-106) 
Sec. 74-189. - Alternate permit. 
    The chief of police, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within five days after notice of the action of the chief of police, file a written notice of acceptance with the chief of police. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of and shall have the effect of a parade permit under this article. 
(Code 1972, § 20-107) 
Sec. 74-190. - Notifying city officials of issuance. 
    Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, the chief of police shall send a copy thereof to the city manager and to the fire marshal. 
(Code 1972, § 20-108; Ord. No. 00-05, 5-2-2000) 
Sec. 74-191. - Form. 
    Each parade permit shall state the following information: 
(1)  Starting time; 
(2)  Minimum speed; 
(3)  Maximum speed; 
(4)  Maximum interval of space to be maintained between units of the parade; 
(5)  The portions of the street to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade; 
(6)  The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof; and 
(7)  Such other information as the chief of police shall find necessary to the enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1972, § 20-109) 
Sec. 74-192. - Duties of permittee. 
    A permittee under this article shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
(Code 1972, § 20-110) 
Sec. 74-193. - Display upon request. 
    The parade chairman or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade. 
(Code 1972, § 20-111) 
Sec. 74-194. - Revocation. 
    The chief of police shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued under this article upon application of the standards for issuance as set forth in this article. 
(Code 1972, § 20-113) 
Secs. 74-195-74-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 34. 
State Law reference- Abandoned vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1200 et seq. 

Sec. 74-221. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned motor vehicle means a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer or part thereof that: 
(1)  Is inoperable and is left unattended on public property for more than 48 hours; 
(2)  Has remained illegally on public property for more than 48 hours; 
(3)  Has remained for more than 48 hours on private property without the consent of the property's owner, regardless of whether it was brought onto the private property with the consent of the owner or person in control of the private property; 
(4)  Is left more than ten days in a garage operated for commercial purposes after notice by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner to pick up the vehicle; or 
(5)  Is left for more than ten days in a garage operated for commercial purposes after the period when, pursuant to contract, the vehicle was to remain on the premises. 
    Demolisher means any person whose business is to convert a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer into processed scrap or scrap metal or otherwise to wreck or dismantle such vehicle. 
    Property means any real property within the city which is not a street or highway. 
    Street or highway means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained or policed when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
(Code 1972, § 20-125) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 74-222. - Abandoning vehicle unlawful. 
    No person shall abandon any motor vehicle within the city and no person shall leave any motor vehicle at any place within the city for such time and under such circumstances as to cause such motor vehicle reasonably to appear to be an abandoned motor vehicle. 
(Code 1972, § 20-126) 
Sec. 74-223. - Taking into custody. 
    When so directed by the city manager, the city may take into custody any abandoned motor vehicle. The city manager shall first ascertain, if reasonably possible, the name and address of the owner of the motor vehicle from the state department of motor vehicles and shall forward notice by certified mail to such owner at such address of the city's intent to remove and dispose of the motor vehicle. Failure of such notice to reach the owner shall be no defense in any proceeding growing out of actions under this section. The city may employ its own personnel, equipment and facilities or it may hire persons, equipment and facilities from independent contractors for the purpose of removing, preserving and storing abandoned motor vehicles. 
(Code 1972, § 20-127) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1201. 
Sec. 74-224. - Notice to owner of vehicle taken into custody. 
    Whenever an abandoned motor vehicle is taken into custody, the city manager shall, within 15 days, by certified mail, return receipt requested, notify the owner of record of the motor vehicle and all persons having security interests therein of record that the vehicle has been taken into custody. The notice shall describe the year, make, model and serial number of the abandoned motor vehicle; set forth the location of the facility where the motor vehicle is being held; inform the owner and any persons having security interests of their right to reclaim the motor vehicle within 15 days after the date of notice, upon payment of an administrative fee of $75.00 and all towing, preservation and storage charges resulting from placing the vehicle in custody; and state that the failure of the owner or persons having security interests to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle within the time provided shall be deemed a waiver by the owner and all persons having any security interests of all right, title and interest in the vehicle, and consent to the sale of the abandoned motor vehicle at a public auction. If records of the state department of motor vehicles contain no address of the owner or no address of any person shown by such records to have a security interest, or if the identity and addresses of the owner and all persons having security interests cannot be determined with reasonable certainty, notice by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city shall be sufficient to meet all requirements of notice required by this section as to any person who cannot be notified pursuant to the foregoing provisions of this section. Such notice by publication may contain multiple listings of abandoned motor vehicles. Any such notice shall be within the time requirements prescribed by this section for notice by mail and shall have the same contents required for a notice by mail. The consequences of failure to reclaim an abandoned motor vehicle shall be as set forth in a notice given in accordance with and pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1972, § 20-128; Ord. No. 01-14, 2-20-01) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1202. 
Sec. 74-225. - Sale of vehicle at public auction; disposition of proceeds. 
    If an abandoned motor vehicle is not reclaimed as provided for in section 74-224, the city manager or his agent shall, notwithstanding the provisions of state law as to certificates of title, sell it at public auction. The purchaser of the motor vehicle shall take title to the motor vehicle free of all liens and claims of ownership of others, shall receive a sales receipt at the auction, and shall be entitled to apply to and receive from the state department of motor vehicles a certificate of title and registration card for the vehicle. The sales receipt from the sale shall be sufficient title only for purposes of transferring the vehicle to a demolisher for demolition, wrecking, or dismantling, and in that case no further titling of the vehicle shall be necessary. From the proceeds of the sale of an abandoned motor vehicle the city shall reimburse itself for the expenses of the auction, the cost of towing, preserving, and storing the vehicle which resulted from placing the abandoned motor vehicle in custody, and all notice and publication costs incurred pursuant to section 74-224. Any remainder from the proceeds of a sale shall be held for the owner of the abandoned motor vehicle or any person having security interests in the vehicle, as their interests may appear, for 90 days, and then be deposited into the treasury of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 20-129) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1203; sale of vehicle without certificate of title, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-617. 
Sec. 74-226. - Disposition of inoperable abandoned vehicles to a demolisher. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article or the provisions of Code of Virginia, when in the opinion of the city manager or any official designated by him to have duties which include the disposal of abandoned vehicles, any motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or part thereof which is inoperable may be disposed of to a demolisher, by the person or by the city on whose property or in whose possession such motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer is found, without the title and without the notification procedures called for in this article. 
(Code 1972, § 20-130) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1205. 
Sec. 74-227. - Keeping of inoperable motor vehicles; removal of such vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, except within a fully enclosed building or structure or shielded or screened from view, on any property zoned for residential or commercial or agricultural purposes, any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, as defined in state law, whose condition is such that it is economically impractical to make them operable; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to a licensed business which on June 26, 1970, was regularly engaged in business as an automobile dealer, salvage dealer or scrap processor. For purposes of this section, an "inoperable motor vehicle" shall mean any motor vehicle which is not in operating condition, or which for a period of 60 days or longer has been partially or totally disassembled by the removal of tires and wheels, the engine, or other essential parts required for the operation of the vehicle or on which there are displayed neither valid license plates nor a valid inspection decal. 
    In residential districts individuals shall be allowed to keep one inoperable vehicle per premises, provided it is within a fully enclosed building or structure. In commercial and downtown districts, inoperable vehicles shall be fully shielded or screened from view via fencing with slats, not to exceed six feet in height. 
(b)  In addition to the authority of the city to act under subsection (a) of this section, the owners of property zoned for residential or commercial or agricultural purposes shall remove from such property any such inoperable motor vehicles, trailers, and semitrailers that are not kept in a fully enclosed building or structure or shielded or screened from view, provided the city has given written notice to the owner of the premises to remove such vehicle, trailer or semitrailer within 21 days of the date of the notice sent to the last known address as shown on the property tax records of the city. Such notice shall also state that if such inoperable vehicle is not removed within the 21-day period, the city may act to remove such vehicle as authorized in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  In addition to the authority of the city to act pursuant to subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the city may, through its own agents or employees, remove any such inoperable motor vehicles, trailers and semitrailers, whenever the owner of the premises has failed to do so. 
(d)  If the city council, through its own agents or employees, removes any such motor vehicles, trailers and semitrailers, after having given notice as set forth, the city may dispose of such motor vehicles, trailers or semitrailers after giving an additional 14-day notice to the owner of the vehicle. Such notice shall inform the owner that the vehicle is to be disposed of by the city or its agents. The owner may within the 14 days reclaim such vehicle upon payment of all costs of removal, including storage, and upon reaching agreement with the city to dispose of such vehicle immediately or by otherwise satisfying the requirements of this section. 
(e)  The cost of any such removal or disposal, including an administrative fee of $75.00, shall be chargeable to the owner of the vehicle or premises and may be collected by the city as taxes and levies are collected. Every cost authorized by this section with which the owner of the premises shall have been assessed shall constitute a lien against the property from which the vehicle was removed, such lien to continue until actual payment of such costs shall have been made to the city. 
(Code 1972, § 20-131; Ord. No. 98-2, 3-3-98; Ord. No. 99-2, 3-2-99; Ord. No. 00-2, 2-15-2000; Ord. No. 01-14, 2-20-01; Ord. No. 06-47, 5-1-07) 
State Law reference- Definitions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100. 
Secs. 74-228-74-255. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - RAILROADS 

Sec. 74-256. - Railroad cars obstructing street or road; standing vehicle on railroad track. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any railroad company, or any receiver or trustee operating a railroad, to obstruct for a longer period than five minutes the free passage on any street or road by standing cars or trains across the same, except a passenger train while receiving or discharging passengers, but a passway shall be kept open to allow normal flow of traffic. Nor shall it be lawful to stand any wagon or other vehicle on the track of any railroad which will hinder or endanger a moving train, provided that when a train has been uncoupled, so as to make a passway, the time necessarily required, not exceeding three minutes, to pump up the air after the train has been recoupled shall not be included in considering the time such cars or trains were standing across such street or road. Any such railroad company, receiver or trustee, violating any of the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00; provided, however, that the fine may be $100.00 for each minute beyond the permitted time but the total fine shall not exceed $500.00. 
(b)  This section shall not apply when the train is stopped due to breakdown, mechanical failure or emergency. 
(Code 1972, § 22-1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 56-412.1. 
Sec. 74-257. - Whistles. 
    It shall not be lawful for any railroad company by any agent to sound any locomotive whistle at any place within the city; provided, however, that when it shall be necessary to send out any portion of a train crew to enter the front or the rear of the train to guard against a collision, the locomotive whistle may be sounded to recall such members of the train crew; provided, however, that when locomotive signals are necessary to call attention to any section of a train following, and to answer the same, such signals may be sounded by the locomotive whistle. 
(Code 1972, § 22-2) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate railroad signals, Code of Virginia, § 56-414. 
Sec. 74-258. - Speed limit between certain crossings. 
    No railroad locomotive or train shall run or operate within the city between the railroad crossing at Halifax Street and the railroad crossing at Carroll Street and Railroad Avenue at a speed greater than 15 miles per hour. 
(Code 1972, § 22-3) 
Chapter 78 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Department of public works, § 41 et seq.; department of public utilities, § 43 et seq. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 34; fire prevention and protection, ch. 38; health and sanitation, ch. 42; planning, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; installation of utility mains in streets, § 62-59; subdivisions, ch. 66. 
State Law reference- Construction of dams, etc., for water supply purposes, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-37 et seq.; water-saving ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-37.2:1; water supply emergency ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-37.3:4; general local powers pertaining to public utilities, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-292 et seq.; local sewage disposal, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-317 et seq., 15.1-876; local water supply systems, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-332.1 et seq.; municipal water, sewage, refuse disposal, electricity and gas, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-854 et seq., 15.1-875 et seq.; offenses relating to utilities, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-162 et seq.; health regulations pertaining to sewage disposal, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-163 et seq.; health regulations pertaining to public water supplies, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-167 et seq.; State Water Control Law, Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.2 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 78-1-78-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 78-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dwelling unit means one or more rooms in a residential or commercial structure which has been designed for living or sleeping purposes, and having at least one kitchen. 
(Code 1972, § 23-14(b)) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 78-32. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-11 unless otherwise provided in this article, and, in addition thereto, he shall be liable for all damages and costs accruing from such violation and conviction. 
(Code 1972, § 23-20) 
Sec. 78-33. - Right of entry of officers. 
    Any owner or occupant of any lot or tenement into which the city water is introduced shall permit the director of community services or any authorized employee of the department of community services to enter such lot or tenement at reasonable hours to inspect the work therein, and in case of refusal to allow such inspection, the water shall be cut off from such premises. 
(Code 1972, § 23-1) 
Sec. 78-34. - Conditions on which water supplied. 
    The supply of water to any person shall be on condition of his agreeing to comply with all the sections of this article, and to pay for water at the rates then existing and at such other rates as may be subsequently put into effect. 
(Code 1972, § 23-2) 
Sec. 78-35. - Water line extensions-Commercial and industrial use. 
    Applications for water line extensions for commercial and industrial use shall be referred to the council and will be considered by the council upon the merits of the individual case and determined upon estimated quantities of water to be furnished. If such application is granted, and an extension of the water line is made pursuant to this section, there shall be division of the costs of such extension as shall be agreed upon by the applicant and the city. 
(Code 1972, § 23-3) 
Sec. 78-36. - Same-Premises outside city. 
(a)  All persons desiring water from the city water system, who are located outside of the corporate limits, shall pay the entire cost and expense of extending the water main except as provided in section 78-35, as amended. 
(b)  All extended water mains which are to be tied into the water system shall be installed according to specifications of the city governing the installing of water mains. All water mains to be installed shall be inspected and approved by the city prior to any water being turned into the water mains. 
(c)  All water mains located outside of the corporate limits of the city that are tied into the city water system, upon completion and approval of such water mains, shall become the property of the city by proper conveyance prior to water from the city water system being turned into such mains. 
(d)  The water and plumbing system of residential consumers desiring water from the city water system shall be installed in accordance with the plumbing and building codes of the city. 
(e)  All water installations for consumers desiring water from the city water system shall be subject to inspections and approval by the building official of the city as set forth in the plumbing and building codes of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 23-4) 
Sec. 78-37. - Tampering with equipment, damaging or defacing property, and climbing on structures. 
    No person shall be permitted to tamper with any valve, hydrant, pump, motor, chlorinator, curb cock or meter, or any piece of equipment of the city water system wherever situated. It shall be unlawful for anyone to damage or deface any waterworks property, cut any trees or shrubbery, or dump any refuse or rubbish upon any part of the waterworks property. It shall be unlawful for anyone, except an authorized employee of the department of community services, to climb upon any elevated tank, standpipe or other structure of the waterworks. 
(Code 1972, § 23-5) 
Cross reference- Tampering with fire hydrants, § 50-305. 
Sec. 78-38. - Use of fire hydrant. 
    No person, except an authorized employee of the city in the performance of his duty, shall use water from any fire hydrant. Under no circumstances shall any person, whether a city employee or otherwise, be permitted to operate a fire hydrant without a suitable hydrant wrench of a type or style approved by the director of community services or fire marshal. 
(Code 1972, § 23-6; Ord. No. 00-05, 5-2-2000) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 38. 
Sec. 78-39. - Location of private hydrant. 
    No private hydrant shall be placed upon any sidewalk, alley or other exposed place where water may be taken therefrom by persons not entitled to its use. 
(Code 1972, § 23-7) 
Sec. 78-40. - Stopcocks required for services. 
    All services shall be provided with stopcocks on owner's premises so that, when necessary, water may be stopped without opening the stop box in the street or sidewalk. Whenever a service not provided with such a stopcock needs repairing, such stopcock shall be provided before the water is again turned on. 
(Code 1972, § 23-8) 
Sec. 78-41. - Unauthorized persons not to turn on water. 
    If any person, except an authorized employee in the performance of his duty and except as otherwise provided in this article, shall introduce into any lot or tenement water from the city pipes, or shall install any corporation cock or any fixture upon any of the pipes within the street lines, or turn on water to any premises, without the written consent of the director of community services, he shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1972, § 23-9) 
Sec. 78-42. - Use of stopcock at meter by unauthorized persons-Generally. 
    Subject to section 78-43, only authorized employees of the department of community services shall use the stopcock at the meter. The fact that the water has been turned off or on at such stopcock, without the consent of the department of community services, shall be deemed prima facie evidence of the violation of this section, and the property owner shall be subject to the penalties provided, unless he can show innocence of such violation. The department of community services further reserves the right in such case to remove the meter and refuse to furnish water to such owner until all such penalties have been paid. 
(Code 1972, § 23-10) 
Sec. 78-43. - Same-Licensed plumber. 
    Licensed plumbers may use the stopcock at a meter to stop the flow of water in extreme emergencies, such as a broken water pipe. 
(Code 1972, § 23-11) 
Sec. 78-44. - Plumber's report of nonexistent, defective or improperly installed stopcock. 
    If a licensed plumber shall, in the course of his work, ascertain that a stopcock and waste valve have not been installed on any particular prem ises or that such stopcock and waste valve are defective or have been defectively or improperly installed, he shall advise the director of community services of the situation. It shall be unlawful for any such plumber to fail, neglect or refuse to make such report. 
(Code 1972, § 23-12) 
Sec. 78-45. - Continuance of water service pending repair, installation and display of stopcock, waste valve or water line. 
    When a property owner requests that water service to his property be temporarily cut off by a licensed plumber or city employee because there is no stopcock or waste valve, because the stopcock or waste valve is defective, or because the water line is defective or leaking, water service to such property may be continued for a period of 14 calendar days to allow time for the installation of the stopcock or waste valve or for the repair of the defective stopcock or waste valve or water line. If, at the end of the 14-day period, the requisite installation or repairs have not been made and a properly functioning stopcock, waste valve and water line displayed for the approval of the director of community services, the water service to the premises in question will be discontinued until such installation or repair and display have been made. 
(Code 1972, § 23-13) 
Sec. 78-46. - Installation of meters. 
(a)  Meters and meter boxes shall be installed on the city water system by the city water department of community services at its own cost. All meters shall be located at a convenient place between the curbline and the property line. All service pipes, with the exception of fire service pipes, must be equipped with meters. The size of such meters shall be determined by the director of community services. 
(b)  There shall be a separate meter installed for each single-family residence, mobile home, commercial structure and dwelling unit within a multiple-family dwelling, apartment house or commercial structure, provided in the case of an apartment house having four or more dwelling units therein, one meter may be installed to serve all the apartments if approved by the director of community services, and provided further that any multiple-family dwelling, group or single-family dwelling units, group of mobile homes, group of commercial structures or family dwelling units within a commercial structure, each having a sanitary plumbing system meeting the requirements of the building code of the city, in existence on July 11, 1975, and having only one meter serving more than one dwelling unit, shall not be subject to the provisions of this section so long as the preexisting condition remains unaltered or unless the owner of such multiple-family dwelling, group of single-family dwelling units or group of mobile homes requests separate meters as provided in this section. 
(c)  In any case, where there are at present only outside fixtures serving a dwelling unit, the water shall not be brought into indoor fixtures without first causing the connection serving such dwelling unit to conform to the requirements of subsection (b) of this section. 
(Code 1972, § 23-14) 
Sec. 78-47. - Damage to meter by hot water. 
    If, on removing any meter for repairs, it is found that such meter has, in the judgment of the director of community services, been damaged by the passage of hot water through it, the cost of the necessary repairs to such meter shall be added to the water bill of the owner of the property served and shall be treated as a part of such bill. If, in any particular case, it is evident to the city manager that such damage will frequently recur, the property owner shall be required to install a check valve or other suitable means of protecting the meter as the city manager may direct within ten days after receiving written notice from the city manager to do so. On failure to comply with such notice, the water shall be cut off from the premises. 
(Code 1972, § 23-15) 
Sec. 78-48. - Extravagant use of water; leaking fixtures. 
    No person shall unnecessarily consume any city water by a careless or extravagant use of the water nor permit the water to run from any hydrant, cock or fixture without proper care to prevent waste. If any pipe, hydrant, cock or other fixture is found leaking, the owner of the premises shall have the necessary repairs made within five days after receipt of notice from the city manager to do so. In case the necessary repairs are not made within five days, the water shall be cut off and shall not be turned on again until such repairs have been made. 
(Code 1972, § 23-16) 
Sec. 78-49. - Procedure for cutting off water for convenience of property owner. 
    Should any property owner desire the water cut off at the meter for his convenience, the department of community services shall make such cut off and turn the water on again at the request of the property owner. 
(Code 1972, § 23-17) 
Sec. 78-50. - Independence of city system; connection of private water systems. 
(a)  The water supply distributed by the city shall be distributed through a piping system entirely independent of any piping system conveying another water supply, public or private. 
(b)  No private water system of any person may be connected with the water distribution system owned by the city. 
(Code 1972, § 23-18) 
Sec. 78-51. - Pollution. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to bathe in the Meherrin River, to throw any offensive substances therein, pollute the water thereabout in any manner, deposit any carcass of an animal on the surface of any land which drains into the river above the water treatment plant or in any manner pollute such water, by bathing or otherwise, for a distance of five miles above the water treatment plant. 
(Code 1972, § 23-19) 
Secs. 78-52-78-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TAPS; CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 78-71. - Persons authorized to make; minimum size. 
(a)  No person shall be permitted to make any taps or otherwise connect to the distribution system of the department of community services, except duly authorized employees of the department of community services. 
(b)  After the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives, no tap of less than three-fourths-inch inside diameter shall be permitted for connection to any service pipe, and no replacement shall be made of less than three-fourths-inch pipe. 
(Code 1972, § 23-33) 
Sec. 78-72. - Charges, application, and payment for water taps. 
    Charges, application, and payment for water taps are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings: $3,000.00. 
(2)  Two-family and multiple-family dwellings: $5,000.00. 
(3)  Lodging facilities: $5,000.00. 
(4)  All other types of development: $3,000.00. 
(5)  Charges for water taps exceeding three-fourths of an inch shall be $3,000.00 plus the difference in materials cost. 
(6)  There shall be a 100 percent surcharge for all customers who reside outside of the corporate limits of the city. 
(7)  Water tap requests shall be included on building permit application forms. After receipt of the building permit application, the director of public utilities will determine the size of the water tap. All water tap charges will be paid for by the owner or agent prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Should a building permit be required due to the expiration of an existing permit or addition of units within the same development, the owner or agent shall pay the current water tap charges established by city council at the time of payment. Only authorized city employees shall make water taps. 
(Code 1972, § 23-34; Ord. No. 97-5, 6-17-97; Ord. No. 06-17, 6-20-06; Ord. No. 06-55, 6-19-07; Ord. No. 08-18, 7-1-08; Ord. No. 09-40, 6-16-09; Ord. No. 09-55, 9-1-09; Ord. No. 14-21, 11-18-14; Ord. No. 15-01, 1-6-15) 
Sec. 78-73. - Circumstances by which water connections are required. 
    Every person owning a house and lot in the city abutting or adjoining a street or alley along which there runs a city water main shall connect such water main with his house, provided he can make the water connection within 300 feet. No person shall be required to cross the private property of any other person to make such connection. 
(Code 1972, § 23-35) 
Sec. 78-74. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 09-55, adopted Sept. 1, 2009, deleted § 78-74. Former § 78-74 pertained to application for connection; connection method, and derived from Code 1972, § 23-36. 
Sec. 78-75. - Laying pipe from curb to premises; connections to comply with article. 
    Whenever upon application of the property owner, a permit for the introduction of city water has been issued, the owner of the premises shall lay down the pipe conveying the water from the curb in the street into and upon such premises. The manner of such connection shall be governed by the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1972, § 23-37) 
Secs. 78-76-78-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RATES; CHARGES; BILLS 

Sec. 78-91. - Schedule of rates-Designated; billing generally. 
    The rates for water and allied services supplied by the city shall be as follows: 
(1)  Minimum 2,000 gallons ..... $19.85 
(2)  Next 48,000/1,000 ..... 9.21 
(3)  Next 3,950,000/1,000 ..... 5.60 
(4)  Over 4,000,000/1,000 ..... 4.25 
(5)  Water meter service charge-A monthly charge shall be made based on the size of the meters serving a customer according to the following schedule: 
Meter size 
 (Inches) Monthly 
Charge Up to 3/4 ..... $  1.50 1 ..... 3.00 11/2 ..... 4.00 2 ..... 5.00 3 ..... 6.00 4 ..... 10.00 6 ..... 30.00 8 ..... 60.00 10 ..... 90.00  
(6)  Water cut-on or cut-off charges ..... $30.00 
(7)  In multiple-family dwellings, group of single-family dwelling units, group of mobile homes or commercial structures served by one meter, the rates for water and allied services supplied by the city shall not be less than the number of commercial or family dwelling units, multiplied by the minimum rates set out in this section. 
When a consumer has more than one meter, the rates prescribed by this section shall apply separately to each meter, and the readings of said meters shall not be consolidated in applying such rates or charges. 
(Code 1972, § 23-49; Ord. No. 325-95, 7-18-95; Ord. No. 97-4, 6-17-97; Ord. No. 98-6, 6-2-98; Ord. No. 99-6, 6-1-99; Ord. No. 01-16, 6-26-01; 04-22, 6-30-04; Ord. No. 05-17, 6-21-05; Ord. No. 05-28, 6-28-05; Ord. No. 06-15, 6-20-06; Ord. No. 06-54, 6-19-07, Ord. No. 08-16, 7-1-08; Ord. No. 09-38, 6-16-09; Ord. No. 10-26, 6-15-10; Ord. No. 11-13, 6-21-11; Ord. No. 12-12, 6-19-12; Ord. No. 13-11, 6-18-13; Ord. No. 14-11, 6-17-14; Ord. No. 15-18, 6-16-15; Ord. No. 17-09, 5-2-17) 
Sec. 78-92. - Same-Premises outside city. 
    The following water rates and other charges for consumers of water from the water system of the city who reside outside of the corporate limits of the city are hereby established: 
(1)  All residential consumers of water from the water system of the city shall be charged a rate equal to a 100 percent increase over the rate for residential consumers residing within the corporate limits of the city. 
(2)  All commercial and industrial consumers of water from the water system of the city shall be charged a rate equal to a 50 percent increase over the rate for commercial and industrial consumers located within the corporate limits of the city. 
(3)  The above multipliers do not pertain to meter charges established under section 78-91(4). Such charges shall be equal to charges within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 23-50) 
Sec. 78-93. - Monthly billing. 
    Bills for water supplied by the city shall be rendered monthly. 
(Code 1972, § 23-51) 
Sec. 78-94. - Payment due date and late fee penalty. 
    Water bill payments are due in full by 5:00 p.m. on the 20th of each month. A $15.00 late fee penalty shall be imposed on customers not paying their bill in full by the aforementioned date and time. When city offices are closed either a portion of or the entire day on the 20th of the month. payment shall be considered due the next full business day to avoid the $15 .00 late fee penalty. Late fee penalties shall be reflected on the following month's bill. 
(Code 1972, § 23-52; Ord. No. 98-7, 6-2-98; Ord. No. 04-19, 6-30-04; Ord. No. 11-08, § 1, 5-3-11; Ord. No. 13-15, § 1, 9-17-13) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 13-15, § 1, adopted Sept. 17, 2013, amended § 78-94 by changing the title from "penalty on delinquent customers" to "payment due date and late fee penalty". 
Sec. 78-95. - Disconnecting water service for failure to pay bill. 
    Water bills shall be paid by 5:00 p.m. on the 4th of each month to avoid disconnection of service the following business day. When city offices are closed either a portion of or the entire day on the 4th of the month. payment shall be due the next full business day to avoid disconnection of water service. If payment is not received by the end of the next full business day following the 4th of the month, water service to such premises shall be disconnected the following business day. 
    Customers shall not be disconnected for non-payment or partial payment limited to one occurrence per calendar year. In these instances, all past due and current balances must be paid in full by 5:00 p.m. on the 4th of the following month in order to avoid disconnection of service the following business day. The aforementioned provisions shall apply when city offices are closed either a portion of or the entire day on the 4th of the month. 
    Prior to disconnection of service, the city shall issue disconnection notices to each customer informing them of the specific date and time payment is due in order to avoid disconnection. The notice shall also state the total payment due in order to avoid disconnection. The city shall issue the notice no fewer than five calendar days prior to disconnection. 
(Code 1972, § 23-53; Ord. No. 06-08, 2-21-06; Ord. No. 06-12, 3-22-06; Ord. No. 11-08, § 1, 5-3-11; Ord. No. 13-01, § 1, 1-15-13; Ord. No. 13-15, § 1, 9-17-13) 
Sec. 78-96. - Reconnection charge for water cut on by unauthorized person after shutting off water for failure to pay. 
    If a water meter has been turned off by the authorized personnel of the department of community services of the city for the nonpayment of the customer's bill for water supplied to such customer, and if such water meter during this period of time is turned on by any unauthorized person, the department of community services of the city shall cause the water meter to be removed from the water service line of the customer; and there shall be charged a fee of $20.00 for the reinstallation of the water meter and resumption of water service. 
(Code 1972, § 23-54) 
Sec. 78-97. - Charge for replacing lock on water meter valve and/or replacing water meter and meter setter. 
    If a water meter has been turned off by the authorized personnel of the department of public utilities of the city and a lock placed on the valve on a customer's water meter, and such lock is removed and the water turned on without authorization from the city, the customer shall be charged a fee of $100.00, additional fees will be assessed to the customer for replacement of lock, damaged water meter, or damaged meter setter due to removal of lock in the amount to replace said damaged materials, plus 25 percent administration fee. 
(Code 1972, § 23-54.1; Ord. No. 05-01, § 1, 2-15-05) 
Sec. 78-98. - Duty of owner and occupant of premises for payment of water bill. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of any premises to see that the utility bill for the use of water or sewer at such premises is promptly paid within the time provided in this division, whether a utility bill for the use of such water or sewer shall actually have been presented or received. 
(Code 1972, § 23-55; Ord. No. 00-06, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 03-03, § 1, 1-21-03) 
Sec. 78-99. - Charges where meter fails to register accurately. 
    If any meter gets out of order, or fails to register accurately, the property owner served by such meter shall be charged at the average rates as shown by the meter when in order for the preceding three months. 
(Code 1972, § 23-56) 
Sec. 78-100. - Remedy of city for unpaid charges for fixtures, repairs, material or work. 
    If any charge for fixtures, material, work or repairs, which the department of community services has to collect, remains unpaid at the end of the month succeeding the furnishing of such fixtures or material, or the completion of such work or repairs, then the director of community services may cut off the city water from the premises in question, and the water shall remain cut off until all such charges are paid. 
(Code 1972, § 23-57) 
Sec. 78-101. - Charges where there has been excessive use of water due to defective piping or fixtures. 
    If any pipe, hydrant, cock, or other fixture is found leaking, resulting in an excessive use of and subsequent charge for water, and the owner corrects the same as provided in this article, the treasurer may adjust his bill by charging the customer an average rate based on the preceding three billings, plus one-half the excess use over the average consumption. One adjustment is permitted per billing year to any customer. 
(Code 1972, § 23-58) 
Sec. 78-102. - Deposit upon opening a water account. 
    Upon the opening of a new account by any tenant, the tenant shall make a deposit to the city in the amount of $150.00. Any deposit is to be refunded upon proof of such deposit without interest upon the closing of an account which has been paid in full at the time of closing. 
(Code 1972, § 23-59; Ord. No. 05-21, 6-21-05; Ord. No. 11-08, § 1, 5-3-11) 
Secs. 78-103-78-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CROSS CONNECTION AND BACKFLOW PREVENTION 

Sec. 78-121. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Air gap separation means the unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying pure water to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the rim of the receptacle. 
    Auxiliary water system means any water system on or available to the premises other than the waterworks. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor's waterworks; water from a source such as wells, lakes, or streams; process fluids; or used water. They may be polluted or contaminated or objectionable, or constitute a water source or system over which the water purveyor does not have control. 
    Backflow means the flow of contaminants, pollutants, process fluids, used water, untreated waters, chemicals, gases, nonpotable waters into any part of a waterworks. 
    Backflow prevention device means any approved device, method, or type of construction intended to prevent backflow into a waterworks. 
    Bureau means the bureau of sanitary engineering, state department of health. 
    Consumer means the owner or person of any premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a waterworks. 
    Consumer's water system means any water system located on the consumer's premises, supplied by or in any manner connected to a waterworks. 
    Contamination means any introduction into pure water of microorganisms, wastes, wastewater, undesirable chemicals, or gases. 
    Cross connection means any connection or structural arrangement, direct or indirect, to the waterworks whereby backflow can occur. 
    Degree of hazard means that which is derived from an evaluation of the potential risk to health and the adverse effect upon the waterworks. 
    Double gate/double check valve assembly means an approved assembly composed of two single, independent acting check valves including tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly and petcocks and test gauges for testing the watertightness of each check valve. 
    Health hazard means any condition, device, or practice in a waterworks or its operation that creates, or may create, a danger to the health and well-being of the water consumer. 
    Interchangeable connection means an arrangement or device that will allow alternate but not simultaneous use of two sources of water. 
    Pollution means the presence of any foreign substance (chemical, physical, radiological, or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute an unnecessary risk or impair the usefulness of the water. 
    Pollution hazard means a condition through which an aesthetically objectionable or degrading material may enter the waterworks or a consumer's water system. 
    Process fluids means any fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically, or otherwise contaminated or polluted which would constitute a health, pollutional, or system hazard if introduced into the waterworks. This includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Polluted or contaminated waters; 
(2)  Process waters; 
(3)  Used waters originating from the waterworks which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality; 
(4)  Cooling waters; 
(5)  Contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes, streams, or irrigation systems; 
(6)  Chemicals in solution or suspension; and 
(7)  Oils, gases, acids, alkalis, and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other processes, or for firefighting purposes. 
    Pure water or potable water means water fit for human consumption and use which is sanitary and normally free of minerals, organic substances, and toxic agents in excess of reasonable amounts for domestic usage in the area served and normally adequate in supply for the minimum health requirement of the persons served. 
    Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device means a device containing a minimum of two independently acting check valves together with an automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located between the two check valves. During normal flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two checks shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure between the check valves at less than the supply pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with properly located test cocks. These devices must be of the approved type. 
    Service connection means the terminal end of a service line from the waterworks. If a meter is installed at the end of the service, then the service connection means the downstream end of the meter. 
    System hazard means a condition posing an actual, or threat of, damage to the physical properties of the waterworks or a consumer's water system. 
    Used water means any water supplied by a water purveyor from waterworks to a consumer's water system after it has passed through the service connection. 
    Water purveyor means the city. 
    Waterworks means a system that serves piped water for drinking or domestic use to the public, at least 15 connections, or an average of 25 individuals for at least 60 days out of the year. The term "waterworks" shall include all structures, equipment and appurtenances used in the storage, collection, purification, treatment and distribution of pure water except the piping and fixtures inside the building where such water is delivered, as set forth in state law. 
(Code 1972, § 23-63) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Definitions, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-167. 
Sec. 78-122. - Cross connections generally. 
(a)  No person shall install or maintain a water service connection to any premises where a cross connection to a waterworks or a consumer's water system may exist or where in the opinion of the city or the bureau the potential for a cross connection is present unless such cross connections or potential cross connection is abated or controlled to the satisfaction of the city and the bureau. 
(b)  No person shall install or maintain any connection whereby water for an auxiliary water system may enter a waterworks or consumer's water system, unless the auxiliary water system and the method of connection and use of such system shall have been approved by the city and by the bureau. 
(Code 1972, § 23-60) 
Sec. 78-123. - Inspections. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the city to cause inspections to be made of properties served by the waterworks where cross connection with the waterworks is deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections, based on potential health hazards involved, shall be established by the city in the cross connection control and backflow prevention program and as approved by the state department of health. 
(b)  The director of community services or his agent shall have the right to enter, at any reasonable time, properties served by a connection to the waterworks for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or systems for cross connections. Upon request, the owner or occupants of property served shall furnish to the inspection agency pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross connections. 
(Code 1972, § 23-61) 
Sec. 78-124. - Existing systems and new construction. 
(a)  An onsite inspection of all existing buildings will be made to determine the degree of hazard to the public potable water system. If a cross connection is found, either actual or potential, the director of community services shall inform the customer or authorized agent of the owner or premises, what steps shall be taken to correct the cross connections. A reasonable time will be given for compliance depending on the degree of hazard involved. Upon failure of the owner or authorized agent to have the defects corrected by the specified time, the director of community services shall cause the water service to the building or premises to be terminated. The division of public utilities shall, upon notice from the director of community services, disconnect the water supply to any premises where the owner or authorized agent has failed to comply with instructions of the director of community services. 
(b)  All new construction plans and specifications for commercial buildings, fire service connections, extensive lawn or irrigation systems, and other facilities to be served by the waterworks, which may require approved backflow prevention devices, shall be made available to the director of community services to determine the degree of hazard of possible cross connections and for his determination of the cross connection device required to remove any possible cross connection. 
(Code 1972, § 23-62) 
Sec. 78-125. - Required protection. 
    An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed and maintained on each service line to a consumer's water system where, in the judgment of the water purveyor or the bureau, a health, pollutional, or system hazard to the waterworks exists. 
(1)  An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service line to a consumer's water system serving premises where the following conditions exist, except as noted in subsection (1) of this section: 
a.  Premises having an auxiliary water system, unless such auxiliary system is accepted as an additional source by the water purveyor and the source is approved by the bureau; 
b.  Premises on which any substance is handled in such a manner as to create an actual or potential hazard to a waterworks (this shall include premises having sources or systems containing process fluids or waters originating from a waterworks which are no longer under the control of the water purveyor); 
c.  Premises having internal cross connections that, in the judgment of the water purveyor, or the bureau, may not be easily correctable or there are intricate plumbing arrangements which make it impracticable to determine whether or not cross connections exist; 
d.  Premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete cross connection survey; 
e.  Premises having a repeated history of cross connections being established or reestablished; 
f.  Premises having fire protection systems utilizing combinations of sprinklers, fire loops, storage tanks, pumps, antifreeze protection, or auxiliary water (fire loops and sprinkler systems with openings not subject to flooding, and containing no antifreeze or other chemicals, nor storage, or auxiliary sources, will not normally require backflow prevention); 
g.  Premises having booster pumps connected to the waterworks shall be equipped with a low pressure cutoff device to shut off the booster pump when the pressure in the waterworks drops to a minimum ten psi gauge; and 
h.  Other premises specified by the bureau when cause can be shown that a potential cross connection hazard not enumerated in this subsection exists. 
(2)  An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service line to a consumer's water system serving, but not necessarily limited to, the following types of facilities: 
a.  Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes; 
b.  Laboratories; 
c.  Piers, docks, waterfront facilities; 
d.  Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, or stormwater pumping stations; 
e.  Food and beverage processing plants; 
f.  Chemical plants, dyeing plants; 
g.  Metal plating industries; 
h.  Petroleum processing or storage plants; 
i.  Radioactive materials processing plants or nuclear reactors; 
j.  Car washes; 
k.  Lawn sprinkler systems and irrigation systems; 
l.  Fire service systems (as provided in this section); 
m.  Slaughterhouses and poultry processing plants; 
n.  Farms where the water is used for other than household purposes; and 
o.  Other specified by the purveyor and/or the bureau when reasonable cause can be shown for a potential backflow or cross connection hazard. 
(Code 1972, § 23-64) 
Sec. 78-126. - Types of protective devices required. 
    It is the policy that the potable water supply of the city shall be designed, installed and maintained in such a manner as to prevent contamination from nonpotable liquids, solids, or gases, either harmful or benign, from being introduced into the potable water supply through cross connections or any other piping connections to the system. This shall be accomplished by protecting every water outlet from the potable water system which poses a possible cross connection. Wherever these outlets cannot be protected in accordance with the minimum air gap, there shall be required a mechanical device to prevent backflow from backsiphonage or back pressure as appropriate according to the degree of hazard. In cases where, in the judgment of the director of community services or his agent, water usage is sufficiently complex or the severity of the hazard warrants or the premises have a history of cross connections being established or reestablished, an air gap or backflow prevention device shall be required immediately downstream from the service connection or at a point approved by the director of community services or his agent. 
(1)  Generally. Nonpressure type vacuum breakers may be used only as protection for direct or indirect water connections to all types of polluted or contaminated liquids where the vacuum breakers are not subjected to back pressure and not to constant pressure from the supply. Pressure type vacuum breakers may be used only as protection for direct or indirect water connections to all types of polluted or contaminated liquids where the vacuum breakers are not subjected to back pressures. These units may be installed under continuous line pressure. Double check valve assemblies may be used as protection for all direct or indirect water connections through which foreign materials might enter the system in the form of concentration such as would constitute a nuisance or be objectionable, such as steam, air, foods, beverages, or other materials which do not constitute a health hazard. This device must be installed in conjunction with two gate valves and four test cocks to allow the device to be tested for proper operation. Reduced pressure principle devices shall be used as protection for all direct or indirect water connections where such devices may be subject to back pressure from toxic or lethal substances. Barometric loops are not acceptable. 
(2)  Inlets and outlets. Fixture inlets or valved outlets with hose attachments, which may constitute a cross connection, shall be protected by an approved vacuum breaker installed at least six inches above the highest point of usage and located on the discharge side of the last valve. Fixtures with integral vacuum breakers manufactured as a unit may be installed in accordance with their approved requirements. 
(3)  Sewage facilities. All sewage treatment plants shall have a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer installed on the main potable water service lines serving such plants. 
(4)  Institutions. Hospitals, medical, dental, therapeutic, surgical, mortuary institutions, schools, clinics, or similar places shall have all water outlets protected by approved vacuum breakers on the discharge side of the last valve. Also where toxic chemicals or where bacteriological and biological laboratories are used on the premises, an approved air gap or reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be required to be installed in the potable supply service to the building. 
(5)  Industrial plants. All industrial plants either using or manufacturing chemicals shall be required to install an approved air gap or reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device in the potable water service line to the building. 
(6)  Auxiliary water systems. No direct connection between an auxiliary water system and the potable water system shall be permitted except when and where as approved by the director of community services or his agent, and then only when an approved backflow device is installed to isolate the two systems. 
(7)  Waterfront facilities and industries. An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on all outlets from the potable water system located on or near all piers and docks. In addition an approved air gap or reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be required to be installed in the potable water service line to such facility. 
(8)  Fire systems. The following fire systems may be utilized: 
a.  Systems having direct connections from waterworks with pumps or storage facilities, no connections to other water supplies, no antifreeze or other chemicals added to the fire system, and all sprinkler heads discharging to the atmosphere are not required to have positive protective devices, although the owner may wish to install a check valve to keep the sprinkler system filled at all times. 
b.  In systems the same as subsection (8)a of this section except that booster pumps are installed in the connections from the waterworks require that provisions be made to avoid lowering the pressure at the connection to the waterworks below ten psi. 
c.  Systems having direct connections to the waterworks plus one or more of the following-approved storage tanks, fire pumps taking suction from approved storage tanks, and with all facilities served by the waterworks-must provide an air gap, an approved double gate/double check valve assembly, or a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer (RP device). Storage facilities must meet the requirements for pure water storage and the water in the tank must be maintained in a pure water condition. 
d.  Systems having direct connections to the waterworks similar to subsections (8)a and (8)b of this section and with an auxiliary supply within 1,700 feet of the pump connection, must provide an air gap, a double gate/double check valve assembly, or an RP device depending on the quality of the auxiliary supply. A pump connection adjacent to a river, pond, or other raw water sources requires an air gap. An auxiliary source from an approved water supply requires either of the two mechanical devices. 
e.  Systems having direct connections to the waterworks and interconnections with auxiliary supplies such as pumps taking suction from raw water sources, exposed storage tanks, industrial water supplies, connections to unapproved groundwaters, or where antifreeze or other chemicals are added must provide an air gap. 
f.  Systems having direct connections to the waterworks from buildings having combined industrial and fire systems either with or without storage tanks or pump connections must provide an air gap. 
g.  Systems having direct connections to waterworks serving lawn sprinkler or irrigation systems must provide an air gap, double gate/double check assembly, or an RP device. If the sprinkler or irrigation system is also connected to an auxiliary source, an adequate design must be provided to prevent backflow. 
(9)  All other buildings. All other buildings or water dispensing fixtures will be protected according to the degree of hazard. 
(Code 1972, § 23-65) 
Sec. 78-127. - Installation of devices. 
(a)  Backflow prevention devices. Backflow prevention devices shall be accessibly located preferably in the same room with the fixture they serve. In all cases, installation will be in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(b)  Atmospheric vacuum breakers. Atmospheric vacuum breakers shall be installed with the critical level at least six inches above the flood rim of the fixture they serve and on the discharge side of the last control valve. 
(c)  Pressure type vacuum breakers. Pressure type vacuum breakers shall be installed with the critical level at least 12 inches above the flood rim of the fixture they serve. 
(d)  Reduced pressure principle backflow preventers; double check valves assemblies. Reduced pressure principle backflow preventers and double check valves assembly shall be installed a minimum of 12 inches above the existing ground level in an easily accessible location for testing and maintenance. 
(Code 1972, § 23-66) 
Sec. 78-128. - Approval of devices. 
    Devices for the prevention of backflow shall be tested and certified to meet the standards of the following agencies: 
American Society of Sanitary Engineers (ASSE); 
American Water Works Association (AWWA); 
American National Standards Institute (ANSI); 
University of Southern California Foundation for Cross Connection; and 
Department of Health, Education and Welfare List of Accepted Equipment for Interstate Carriers. 
(Code 1972, § 23-67) 
Sec. 78-129. - Testing. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the owner of any premises where backflow protective devices are installed to have competent inspections made at least once a year or more often in those instances where successive inspections indicate. These inspections will be made by a certified tester of the city or other qualified person approved by the director of community services. 
(b)  Whenever the testing of the backflow protective devices is performed by city personnel as provided in this section, the director of community services is hereby authorized to charge the owner of such premises for such service where the device is installed. Such cost shall indicate labor, equipment, and overhead at 25 percent. 
(Code 1972, § 23-68) 
Sec. 78-130. - Violations of division. 
(a)  The potable water made available on the properties served by the waterworks shall be protected from possible contamination or pollution by enforcement of this division and other portions of this Code. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled as "water unsafe for drinking" in a conspicuous manner. 
(b)  The city may deny or discontinue the water service to a consumer if the required backflow prevention device is not installed. If it is found that the devices have been removed or bypassed or if a cross connection exists on the premises, or if the pressure in the waterworks is lowered below ten psi gauge, the consumer shall take positive action to ensure that the waterworks is adequately protected at all times. Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the deficiencies have been corrected or eliminated in accordance with commonwealth waterworks regulations and to the satisfaction of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 23-69) 
Sec. 78-131. - Enforcement; hearings; penalty for violation of division. 
(a)  Enforcement. Whenever the director of community services or his authorized representative determines there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this division, or of any regulation adopted pursuant to this division, he shall give notice of such violation as provided in this subsection. Such notice shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance; 
(3)  Allow a reasonable time, which shall not exceed 30 days, for the performance of any act it requires; 
(4)  Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent when a copy thereof has been mailed to the current address of the owner as shown on the tax records of the city by certified mail, with a return receipt, postage prepaid thereon; 
(5)  Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this division or any part thereof, and with the regulations adopted pursuant to this division. Upon failure of the owner to have the violation corrected by the end of the specified time, if in his judgment an imminent health hazard exists, the director of community services, shall cause the water service to the building or premises to be terminated or deny service to such premises. 
(b)  Hearings. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued, or action taken, in connection with the enforcement of any provision of this division, or of any regulation adopted pursuant to this division, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the city manager, wherein such person shall be given the opportunity to show cause why such termination of water service should be discontinued or why such termination shall not take place, provided that such person shall file with the city clerk a written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor within ten days after the notice was served. The filing of the request for a hearing shall operate as a stay of the notice and the suspension, except where an imminent health hazard is found to exist pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, in which case such hearing shall be granted wherein such person shall be given the opportunity to show cause why such termination should be discontinued. Upon receipt of such petition, the city clerk shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice. At such hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be commenced not later than ten days after the day on which the petition was filed; provided, however, that upon application of the petitioner, the city clerk may postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such ten-day period when, in his judgment, the petitioner has submitted good and sufficient reasons for such postponement. After such hearing, the city manager shall make findings as to compliance with the provisions of this division and regulations issued thereunder, the Cross Connection Control Manual, U.S. EPA, the plumbing section of the Virginia State Uniform Building Code and section 6.00 of the Virginia Water Works Regulations, and shall issue an order, in writing, sustaining, modifying, or withdrawing the notice which shall be served as provided in this section. 
(c)  Penalties for violation of division. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the requirements or provisions of this division or who fails or refuses to comply with any notice, order or direction of the director of community services or his authorized representative shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, such person shall be punishable as provided in section 1-11. In addition to the penalties described in this subsection, all other actions are hereby reserved including an action in equity for the proper enforcement of this division. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of, or noncompliance with, this division shall not excuse the violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue. Any person in violation shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and noncompliances within the time prescribed in the original notice of violation, as amended, by any stay prescribed by this section and, upon failure of the owner to have the violation corrected, the director of community services shall cause the water service to the premises to be terminated. The cost of all disconnections and reconnection shall be paid by the owner. 
(Code 1972, § 23-70) 
Secs. 78-132-78-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWAGE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 78-161. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
    Director means the director of community service of the city, or his authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce. 
    Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
    Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwater, surface water, and groundwater are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such groundwater, surface water, and stormwater as may be present. 
    Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
    Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Slug means any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
    Storm drain (storm sewer) means a sewer which carries stormwater, surface water and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water. 
    Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1972, § 17-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 78-162. - Disposition of human waste. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. 
(Code 1972, § 17-5) 
Sec. 78-163. - Disposition of sewage and other polluted waters. 
    It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1972, § 17-6) 
Sec. 78-164. - Private system use illegal when public system available. 
    Except as provided in this article, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Code 1972, § 17-7) 
Sec. 78-165. - Connections to public sewer required. 
    The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so, provided that the sewer is within 200 feet (61 meters) of the property line. 
(Code 1972, § 17-8) 
Sec. 78-166. - Connection to public sewer when owner fails to do so. 
    If the owner of any premises fails to make a sewer connection as required in this article, after the completion of any sewer, he shall be guilty of maintaining a nuisance detrimental to the public health. The city manager may, in his discretion, cause such sewer connection to be made, and necessary toilet and water connections constructed, at cost to the owner of such premises. Such cost shall be a lien upon the real estate connected with such premises, and shall be collected in the same manner that taxes levied upon real estate are collected. Such expenses shall be docketed in the office of the city treasurer, in a book kept for that purpose, and indexed in the name of the owner of the property. Before causing such work to be done, the city manager shall cause notice to be served upon the owner of such premises, or his agent, ten days in advance. If work upon such sewer connection, toilet and water connection is not begun by the owner, or his agent, at or before the expiration of such ten days, the city manager may, in his discretion, proceed to have the work done. 
(Code 1972, § 17-9) 
Cross reference- Nuisances, § 34-86 et seq. 
Sec. 78-167. - Industrial and commercial sewer line extensions for industrial and commercial use. 
    Applications for sewer line extensions for commercial and industrial use shall be referred to the city manager and will be considered by the council upon the merits of the individual case and determined upon estimated quantities of water to be furnished. 
(Code 1972, § 17-76) 
Cross reference- Installation of utility mains in streets, § 62-59. 
Sec. 78-168. - Tampering with sewage system. 
    No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this section shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. 
(Code 1972, § 17-61) 
Secs. 78-169-78-185. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 78-186. - Tampering with public sewer system. 
    No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof. 
(Code 1972, § 17-21) 
Sec. 78-187. - Owner to pay cost of connection. 
    All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Code 1972, § 17-22) 
Sec. 78-188. - Charges, application, and payment for sewer taps. 
    Charges, application, and payment for sewer taps are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings: $4,000.00. 
(2)  Two-family and multiple-family dwellings: $8,000.00. 
(3)  Lodging facilities: $8,000.00. 
(4)  All other types of development: $4,000.00. 
(5)  Charges for water taps exceeding four inches shall be $4,000.00 plus the difference in materials cost. 
(6)  There shall be a 100 percent surcharge for all customers who reside outside of the corporate limits of the city. 
(7)  Sewer tap requests shall be included on building permit application forms. After receipt of the building permit application, the director of public utilities will determine the size of the sewer tap. All sewer tap charges will be paid for by the owner or agent prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Should a building permit be required due to the expiration of an existing permit or addition of units within the same development, the owner or agent shall pay the current sewer tap charges established by city council. Only authorized city employees shall make sewer taps. 
(Code 1972, § 17-23; Ord. No. 97-6, 6-17-97; Ord. No. 06-18, 6-20-06; Ord. No. 06-57, 6-19-07; Ord. No. 08-19, 7-1-08; Ord. No. 09-41, 6-16-09; Ord. No. 09-55, 9-1-09; Ord. No. 14-21, 11-18-14; Ord. No. 15-01, 1-6-15) 
Sec. 78-189. - Separate connection required. 
    A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building or multiple housing unit; except where the building is an apartment of more than two dwelling units or where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. The installation of any such multiconnected building sewer shall be subject to approval by the director. 
(Code 1972, § 17-24) 
Sec. 78-190. - Use of old building sewers. 
    Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the director, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(Code 1972, § 17-25) 
Sec. 78-191. - Size of sewer connection. 
    The size, slope, alignment, materials or construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 17-26) 
Sec. 78-192. - Discharge point. 
    Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(Code 1972, § 17-27) 
Sec. 78-193. - Downspouts not to be connected. 
    No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(Code 1972, § 17-28) 
Sec. 78-194. - Piping to be gastight and watertight. 
    The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the director before installation. 
(Code 1972, § 17-29) 
Sec. 78-195. - Inspection of building sewer. 
    The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the director when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the director or his representative. 
(Code 1972, § 17-30) 
Sec. 78-196. - Safety precautions. 
    All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Code 1972, § 17-31) 
Sec. 78-197. - Use of sewer before connection. 
    No discharge shall be made into any building sewer before all requirements of the building code are completed and connection is made to the public sewer. 
(Code 1972, § 17-32) 
Secs. 78-198-78-212. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SEWER USE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 17-16, adopted July 18, 2017, repealed the former Div. 3, §§ 78-216-78-225, and enacted a new Div. 3 as set out herein. The former Div. 3 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1972, §§ 17-41-17-50. 

Subdivision 3.1. - General Provisions 

Sec. 78-213. - Purpose and policy. 
    This division sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works for the City of Emporia and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code [U.S.C.] section 1251 et seq.), the General Pretreatment Regulations (Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations [CFR] Part 403, and the Virginia Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (VPDES) Permit Regulation (9 VAC 25-31-730 et seq.). The objectives of this division are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the Publicly Owned Treatment Works that will interfere with its operation; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will pass through the publicly owned treatment works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works; 
(3)  To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public; 
(4)  To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the publicly owned treatment works; and 
(5)  To enable the city to comply with its Virginia Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the publicly owned treatment works is subject. 
    This division shall apply to all users of the publicly owned treatment works. The division authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-214. - Abbreviations. 
    The following abbreviations, when used in this division, shall have the designated meanings: 
BOD-Biochemical Oxygen Demand 
BMP-Best Management Practice 
BMR-Baseline Monitoring Report 
CFR-Code of Federal Regulations 
CIU-Categorical Industrial User 
COD-Chemical Oxygen Demand 
EPA-U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
gpd-gallons per day 
IU-Industrial User 
mg/l-milligrams per liter 
NPDES-National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
POTW-Publicly Owned Treatment Works 
RCRA-Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 
SIU-Significant Industrial User 
SNC-Significant Noncompliance 
TSS-Total Suspended Solids 
U.S.C.-United States Code 
VAC-Virginia Administrative Code 
VPDES-Virginia Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-215. - Definitions. 
    Act or "the Act" means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. section 1251 et seq. 
    Approval authority means the Department of Environmental Quality of the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    Authorized or duly authorized representative of the user. 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for wastewater discharge permit requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(4)  The individuals described in paragraphs (1) through (3), above, may designate a duly authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the city. 
    Best management practices or BMPs means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in sections 78-218 and 78-219 of this division. BMPs include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand or BOD means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five days at 20 degrees centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l). 
    Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. section 1317) that apply to a specific category of Users and that appear in 9 VAC 25-31-780. 
    Categorical industrial user means an industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard. 
    City means the City of Emporia. 
    Chemical oxygen demand or COD means a measure of the oxygen required to oxidize all compounds, both organic and inorganic, in water. 
    Control authority means the city. 
    Daily maximum means the arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a pollutant collected during a calendar day. 
    Daily maximum limit means the maximum allowable discharge limit of a pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of the day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day. 
    Director [means] the person designated by the city to supervise the operation of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this division. The term also means a duly authorized representative of the director. 
    Environmental protection agency or EPA means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the regional water management division director, the regional administrator, or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
    Existing source means any source of discharge that is not a "new source." 
    Grab sample means a sample that is taken from a wastestream without regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes. 
    Indirect discharge or discharge means the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source. 
    Instantaneous limit means the maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
    Interference means a discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. 
    Local limit means specific discharge limits developed and enforced by the city upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement the general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in 9 VAC 25-31-770(C) and (D). 
    Medical waste means isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes. 
    Monthly average means the sum of all "daily discharges" measured during a calendar month divided by the number of "daily discharges" measured during that month. 
    Monthly average limit means the highest allowable average of "daily discharges" over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all "daily discharges" measured during a calendar month divided by the number of "daily discharges" measured during that month. 
    New source means: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act that will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; 
b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)b. or c. above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite construction program (i) any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or (ii) significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
    Noncontact cooling water means water used for cooling that does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
    Pass through means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the city's VPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities. 
    pH means a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units. 
    Pollutant means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor). 
    Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
    Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
    Pretreatment standards or standards means prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. 
    Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges means absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in sections 78-218 and 78-219 of this division. 
    Publicly owned treatment works or POTW means a treatment works, as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. section 1292), which is owned by the city. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances, which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. 
    Septic tank waste means any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks. 
    Sewage means human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.). 
    Significant industrial user (SIU) means: 
(1)  An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or 
(2)  An industrial user that: 
a.  Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
b.  Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
c.  Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
    Slug load or slug discharge means any discharge at a flow rate or concentration, which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section 78-219 of this division. A slug discharge is any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass through, or in any other way violate the POTW's regulations, local limits or permit conditions. 
    Storm water means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt. 
    Total suspended solids or suspended solids means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and that is removable by laboratory filtering. 
    User or industrial user means a source of indirect discharge. 
    Wastewater means a liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW. 
    Wastewater treatment plant or treatment plant means that portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-216. - Public sewers; natural runoff. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(Code 1972, § 17-41; Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-217. - Disposition of stormwater and unpolluted drainage. 
    Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the director. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the director, to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet. 
(Code 1972, § 17-42; Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Subdivision 3.2. - General Sewer Requirements 

Sec. 78-218. - Prohibited waste conditions. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas. 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant including, but not limited to, cyanides in excess of two mg/l as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer. 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works. 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(Code 1972, § 17-43; Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-219. - Prohibited discharges. 
(a)  General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all Users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(b)  Specific prohibitions. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the director that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, he will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. 
The substances prohibited are: 
(1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees F (60 degrees C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. 
(2)  Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference. 
(3)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius) or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104 degrees F (40 degrees C). 
(4)  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through. 
(5)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. 
(6)  Trucked or hauled pollutants. 
(7)  Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (0 to 65 degrees Celsius). 
(8)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the director. 
(9)  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron, pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not. 
(10)  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the director for such materials. 
(11)  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the director as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters. 
(12)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the director in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(13)  Any waters or wastes having a pH less than 5.5 or in excess of 9.5. 
(14)  Materials which exert or cause: 
a.  Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate). 
b.  Excessive discoloration such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions which adversely impact the treatment processes or result in discoloration of the receiving stream upon discharge by the wastewater treatment plant. 
c.  Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works. 
d.  Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting slugs. 
(15)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degrees that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(Code 1972, § 17-44; Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-220. - National categorical pretreatment standards. 
    The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 C.F.R. Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471, are hereby incorporated. 
(1)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the city may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 9 VAC 25-31-780(C). 
(2)  When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the city may convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentration for purposes of calculating effluent limitations applicable to individual industrial users in accordance with 9 VAC 25-31-780(C)(2). 
(3)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the city shall impose an alternative limit using the combined waste stream formula in 9 VAC 25-31-780(E). 
(4)  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 9 VAC 25-31-850, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by the EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(5)  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 9 VAC 25-31-870. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-221. - Local limits. 
(a)  The director is authorized to establish local limits pursuant to 9VAC25-31-780(C) and (D). No person shall discharge wastewater containing an excess of the established limits. 
(b)  The city may apply local limits through issuance of industrial user permits, as provided in subdivision 3.4 of this division. The city may apply local limits based on EPA categorical pretreatment standards, state water quality standards or criteria, treatment plant process inhibitions, or sludge disposal standards, as necessary to comply with the general prohibitions against pass through, interference, and sludge contamination in 9 VAC 25-31-770. The local limits may be stricter than EPA categorical limits, if determined necessary by the POTW. 
(c)  The limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for total metal unless indicated otherwise. The director may impose mass limitations in addition to the concentration-based limitations. 
(d)  The director may develop best management practices (BMPs), by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, to implement local limits and the requirements of sections 78-218 and 78-219. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-222. - City's right of revision. 
    The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW consistent with the purpose of this division. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-223. - Dilution. 
    No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The director may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Subdivision 3.3. - Pretreatment of Wastewater 

Sec. 78-224. - Pretreatment facilities. 
    Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this division and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in sections 78-218 and 78-219 of this division within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state, or the director, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the director for review, and shall be acceptable to the director before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-225. - Accidental discharge/slug discharge control plans. 
    The director shall evaluate whether each SIU needs an accidental discharge/slug discharge control plan or other action to control slug discharges. The director may require any User to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan or take such other action that may be necessary to control slug discharges. Alternatively, the director may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug discharge control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the wastewater treatment plant superintendent of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by section 78-247 of this division; and 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-226. - Grease, oil and sand interceptors. 
    Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the director, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients. Such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the director, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(Code 1972, § 17-46; Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-227. - Flow control facilities. 
    Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(Code 1972, § 17-47; Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Subdivision 3.4. - Wastewater Discharge Permits 

Sec. 78-228. - Testing or measurement; control manhole. 
    When required by the director, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the director. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Code 1972, § 17-48; Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-229. - System of testing. 
    All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole. If no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pH's are determined from periodic grab samples. 
(Code 1972, § 17-49; Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-230. - Wastewater discharge permit requirement. 
(a)  No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the director, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely application pursuant to section 78-231 of this division may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein. 
(b)  The Director may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this division. 
(c)  Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this division and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in sections 78-257 through 78-268 of this division. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and local law. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-231. - Wastewater discharge permitting: existing connections. 
    Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this division and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within 60 days after said date, apply to the director for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with section 78-233 of this division, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 120 days of the effective date of this division except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the director. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-232. - Wastewater discharge permitting: new connections. 
    Any User required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with section 78-233 of this division, must be filed at least 90 days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-233. - Wastewater discharge permitting application contents. 
    Users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file with the city an application in the form prescribed by the city and accompanied by a fee as set by the city. Existing users shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within 60 days after the effective date of this division and proposed new users shall apply at least 90 days prior to connecting to or contributing to the POTW. The city may require all users to submit as part of an application the following information: 
(1)  Identifying information. 
a.  The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
b.  Contact information, description of activities, facilities, and plant production processes on the premises; 
(2)  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)  Description of operations. 
a.  A brief description of the nature, average rate of production (including each product produced by type, amount, processes, and rate of production), and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram, which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
b.  Types of wastes generated, and a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW; 
c.  Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation; 
d.  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); 
e.  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge; 
(4)  Time and duration of discharges; 
(5)  The location for monitoring all wastes covered by the permit; 
(6)  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in section 78-220 and 9 VAC 25-31-780(E). 
(7)  Measurement of pollutants. 
a.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process and any new categorically regulated processes for existing sources. 
b.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the director, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. 
c.  Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. 
d.  The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 78-250 of this division. Where the standard requires compliance with a BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the user shall submit documentation as required by the director or the applicable standards to determine compliance with the standard. 
e.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in section 78-251 of this division. 
(8)  Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the director to evaluate the permit application. 
    Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-234. - Application signatories and certifications. 
(a)  All wastewater discharge permit applications, user reports and certification statements must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(b)  If the designation of an authorized representative is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new written authorization satisfying the requirements of this section must be submitted to the director prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-235. - Wastewater discharge permit decisions. 
    The director will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within 60 days of receipt of a complete permit application, the director will determine whether to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The director may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Subdivision 3.5. - Wastewater Discharge Permit Issuance 

Sec. 78-236. - Wastewater discharge permit duration. 
    A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five years, at the discretion of the director. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-237. - Wastewater discharge permit contents. 
    A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the director to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW. A wastewater discharge permit must contain: 
(1)  A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge permit issuance date, expiration date and effective date; 
(2)  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the city in accordance with section 78-240 of this division, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit; 
(3)  Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on applicable pretreatment standards; 
(4)  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants (or best management practice) to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law. 
(5)  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law. 
(6)  Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the director to be necessary. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-238. - Permit reissuance process. 
    A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with section 78-233 of this division, a minimum of 60 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-239. - Permit modification. 
    The director may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of the wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(3)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(4)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the city's POTW, city personnel, or the receiving waters; 
(5)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; 
(6)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(7)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 9 VAC 25-31-850; 
(8)  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or 
(9)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator where requested in accordance with section 78-240. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-240. - Permit transfer. 
(a)  Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least 60 days advance notice to the city and the city approves the transfer. The notice to the city must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which: 
(1)  States that the new owner or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
(2)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and 
(3)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing permit. 
(b)  Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the permit void as of the date of facility transfer. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-241. - Permit revocation. 
(a)  The city may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to notify the city of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
(2)  Failure to provide prior notification to the city of changed condition(s) pursuant to section 78-246 of this article; 
(3)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the permit application; 
(4)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
(5)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(6)  Refusing to allow the city timely access to the facility premises and records; 
(7)  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
(8)  Failure to pay fines; 
(9)  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
(10)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
(11)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the permit application; 
(12)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted facility; or 
(13)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the permit or this division. 
(b)  Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user and location are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user and location. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Subdivision 3.6. - Reporting Requirements 

Sec. 78-242. - Baseline monitoring reports. 
(a)  Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 9 VAC 25-31-780(A)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical industrial users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the director a report which contains the information listed in paragraph (b0, below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the director a report which contains the information listed in paragraph (b), below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(b)  Users described above shall submit the information set forth below. 
(1)  All information required in section 78-233(1)a., section 78-233(2), section 78-233(3)a., and section 78-233(6). 
(2)  Measurement of pollutants. 
a.  The user shall provide the information required in section 78-233(7) a. through d. 
b.  The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this paragraph. 
c.  Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment the user should measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula in 9 VAC 25-31-780(E) to evaluate compliance with the pretreatment standards. Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with 9 VAC 25-31-780(E) this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted to the city; 
d.  Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with section 78-250; 
e.  The director may allow the submission of a baseline report which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures; 
f.  The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place of sampling and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW. 
(3)  Compliance certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative as defined in section 78-215 and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(4)  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M must be provided. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in section 78-243 of this division. 
(5)  Signature and report certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be certified in accordance with section 78-234 of this division and signed by an authorized representative as defined in section 78-215. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-243. - Compliance schedule progress reports. 
    The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by section 78-242(a)(4) of this division: 
(1)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); 
(2)  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months; 
(3)  The user shall submit a progress report to the director no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
(4)  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the director. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-244. - Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. 
    Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the director a report containing the information described in section 78-233 (6) and (7) and 78-242 (a)(2) of this division. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in section 78-220, this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 78-234 of this division. All sampling will be done in conformance with section 78-251. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-245. - Periodic compliance reports. 
(a)  All significant industrial users must, at a frequency determined by the director submit no less than twice per year (June and December or on dates specified) reports indicating the nature, concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation required by the director or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user. 
(b)  All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 78-234 of this division. 
(c)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(d)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any regulated pollutant at the appropriate sampling location more frequently than required by the director, using the procedures prescribed in section 78-251 of this division, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-246. - Reports of changed conditions. 
    Each user must notify the director of any significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 90 days before the change. 
(1)  The director may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 78-233 of this division. 
(2)  The director may issue a wastewater discharge permit under section 78-238 of this division or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under section 78-239 of this division in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-247. - Reports of potential problems. 
(a)  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, a slug discharge or slug load, that might cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the director of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(b)  Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the director, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which might be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this division. 
(c)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of a discharge described in paragraph (a), above. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who could cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(d)  Significant industrial users are required to notify the director immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-248. - Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. 
    If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the director within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. Resampling by the industrial user is not required if the city performs sampling at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the city performs sampling at the user between the time when the initial sampling was conducted and the time when the user or the city receives the results of this sampling, or if the city has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-249. - Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste. 
(a)  Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this paragraph need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under section 78-246 of this division. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of sections 78-242, 78-244, and 78-245 of this division. 
(b)  Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of paragraph (a), above, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
(c)  In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the director, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations. 
(d)  In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(e)  This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this division, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-250. - Analytical requirements. 
    All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines that the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the director or other parties approved by EPA. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-251. - Sample collection. 
    Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be based on data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the report, based on data that is representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period. 
(1)  Except as indicated in subsection (2) and (3) below, the user must collect wastewater samples using 24-hour flow-proportional composite sampling techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the director. Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the city, the samples must be representative of the discharge. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a 24-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the city, as appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous limits. 
(2)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(3)  For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and 90-day compliance reports required in section 78-242 and 78-244 [9 VAC 25-31-840(B) and (D)], a minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the director may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by paragraphs section 78-245 (9 VAC 25-31-840(E) and 9 VAC 25-31-840(H)), the industrial user is required to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance by with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-252. - Timing. 
    Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the U.S. Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-253. - Recordkeeping. 
    Users subject to the reporting requirements of this division shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this division and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements and documentation associated with best management practices established under section 78-221(d). Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the director. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Subdivision 3.7. - Compliance Monitoring 

Sec. 78-254. - Right of entry for inspection or sampling. 
    The director or his agent shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this division and any permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the director or his agent ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of additional duties. 
(1)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city, state, and EPA will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(2)  The director or his agent, state, and EPA shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. 
(3)  The director may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated semiannually to ensure their accuracy. 
(4)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the director and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user. 
(5)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the director or his agent access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this division. 
(6)  All applicable inspection, sampling analysis, enforcement, and related program fees as determined by the director shall be paid by the user. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-255. - Search warrants. 
    If the director has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this division, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this division or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, the director may seek issuance of a search warrant from the General District Court of Emporia, Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Subdivision 3.8. - Confidential Information 

Sec. 78-256. - Confidential information. 
    Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, permit applications, permits, and monitoring programs, and from the director's inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made immediately available upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the VPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Subdivision 3.9. - Publication of Industrial Users in Significant Noncompliance 

Sec. 78-257. - Publication of industrial users in significant noncompliance. 
    The director shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general circulation that provides meaningful public notice in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of the users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term "significant noncompliance" shall mean: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other discharge violation that the city believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any other discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the city's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to provide, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standards and deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation(s) which the city determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Subdivision 3.10. - Administrative Enforcement Remedies 

Sec. 78-258. - Notification of violation. 
    When the director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this division, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within 14 days of the receipt of such notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the director. Submission of such a plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the director to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-259. - Consent orders. 
    The director may enter into consent orders, assurances of compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents shall include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to sections 78-261 and 78-262 of this division and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-260. - Show case hearing. 
    The director may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this division, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the director and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least seven days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user as defined in section 78-215 and required by section 78-234. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-261. - Compliance orders. 
    When the director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this division, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-262. - Cease and desist orders. 
    When the director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this division, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the director may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
(1)  Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-263. - Emergency suspensions. 
    The director may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge, which reasonably appears to present, or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The director may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. 
(1)  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the director may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The director may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the User has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in section 78-264 of this division are initiated against the user. 
(2)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the director prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under section 78-260 or 78-264 of this division. 
    Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-264. - Termination of discharge. 
    In addition to the provisions in section 78-241 of this division, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination: 
(1)  Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions; 
(2)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
(3)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge; 
(4)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or 
(5)  Violation of the pretreatment standards in subdivision 3.2 of this division. 
    Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under section 78-260 of this division why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the director shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Subdivision 3.11. - Judicial Enforcement Remedies 

Sec. 78-265. - Injunctive relief. 
    When the director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this division, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may petition the General District Court of Emporia, Virginia through the city's attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this division on activities of the user. The director may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-266. - Civil penalties. 
(a)  A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this division, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the city for a maximum civil penalty of not less than $2,500.00 per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. 
(b)  The director may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city. 
(c)  In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(d)  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-267. - Criminal prosecution. 
(a)  A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this division, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $2,500.00 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than 12 months, or both. 
(b)  A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of at least $2,500.00 per violation, per day, or be subject to imprisonment for not more than 12 months, or both. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law. 
(c)  A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this division, wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this division shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $2,500.00 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than 12 months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-268. - Remedies nonexclusive. 
    The remedies provided for in this division are not exclusive. The director may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city's enforcement response plan. However, the director may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the director is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. 
(Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-269. - City remedial action on unsatisfactory sewage. 
    If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in section 78-219 and which in the judgment of the director, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the director may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 
(4)  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of section 78-225. 
    If the director permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the director, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws. 
(Code 1972, § 17-45; Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Sec. 78-270. - Acceptance of unusual wastes. 
    No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the industrial concern. 
(Code 1972, § 17-50; Ord. No. 17-16, 7-18-17) 
Secs. 78-271-78-284. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 17-16, adopted July 18, 2017, amended the Code by the addition of new §§ 78-213-78-270, in effect renumbering Div. 4, §§ 78-241-78-243, Div, 5, §§ 78-261, 8-262, Div. 6, §§ 78-281-78-284, and Art. IV, §§ 78-300-78-303, 78-311, 78-321-78-326, and 78-341, have been renumbered as Div. 4, §§ 78-285-78-287, Div. 5, §§ 78-296, 78-297, Div. 6, §§ 78-306-78-309, and Art. IV, §§ 78-321-78-323, 78-336, 78-346-78-350, and 78-361. The historical notation has been retained with the amended provisions for reference purposes. 

Sec. 78-285. - Right of entry. 
    The director and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. The director or his representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. 
(Code 1972, § 17-71) 
Sec. 78-286. - Safety and liability. 
    While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in section 78-241, the director or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company. The company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees, and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operations, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in section 78-223. 
(Code 1972, § 17-72) 
Sec. 78-287. - Easements. 
    The director and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Code 1972, § 17-73) 
Secs. 78-288-78-295. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RATES; CHARGES; BILLS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- See the editor's note to Art. III, Div. 4. 

Sec. 78-296. - Schedule of rates-Designated; billing generally. 
    The rates for sewage services supplied by the city shall be based upon the amount of water metered to the premises, as follows: 
(1)  Minimum 2,000 gallons ..... $21.11 
(2)  Next 48,000/1,000 ..... 7.89 
(3)  Next 950,000/1,000 ..... 6.03 
(4)  Over 1,000,000/1,000 ..... 4.70 
(5)  Customers who receive partial sewer service and who do not meter sewage discharged shall be charged the sewage charge for the first 1,000,000 gallons of water used. 
(Code 1972, § 17-77; Ord. No. 324-95, 7-18-95; Ord. No. 97-3, 6-17-97; Ord. No. 98-8, 6-2-98; Ord. No. 99-7, 6-1-99; Ord. No. 01-17, 6-26-01; Ord. No. 04-20, 6-30-04; Ord. No. 05-18, 6-21-05; Ord. No. 05-29, 6-28-05; Ord. No. 06-16, 6-20-06; Ord. No. 06-56, 6-19-07; Ord. No. 08-17, 7-1-08; Ord. No. 09-39, 6-16-09; Ord. No. 10-27, 6-15-10; Ord. No. 11-14, 6-21-11; Ord. No. 12-13, 6-19-12; Ord. No. 14-10, 6-17-14; Ord. No. 15-19, 6-16-15; Ord. No. 17-10, 5-2-17) 
Sec. 78-297. - Same-Premises outside city. 
    The following rates for customers of the city who reside outside the corporate limits of the city are hereby established: 
(1)  All residential customers receiving sewer service from the sewage system of the city shall be charged a rate equal to a 100 percent increase over the rate for residential customers residing within the corporate limits of the city. 
(2)  All commercial and industrial customers receiving sewer service from the sewage system of the city shall be charged a rate equal to a 50 percent increase over the rates for commercial and industrial customers located within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 17-78) 
Secs. 78-298-78-305. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- See the editor's note to Art. III, Div. 4. 

Sec. 78-306. - Connection to public system required when public sewer available. 
    At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
(Code 1972, § 17-15) 
Sec. 78-307. - Private sewage system maintenance. 
    The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(Code 1972, § 17-16) 
Sec. 78-308. - Health department requirements. 
    No statement contained in this division shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the state department of health. 
(Code 1972, § 17-17) 
Sec. 78-309. - Disposition of abandoned private sewage systems. 
    When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be connected to the sewer within 60 days, and the private sewage disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank run gravel or dirt. 
(Code 1972, § 17-18) 
Secs. 78-310-78-320. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- See the editor's note to Art. III, Div. 4. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 78-321. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the word: 
    Director shall mean the director of the department of public works. 
    Driveway pipe shall mean pipe used to convey water from a natural drainage system or a stormwater drainage system or facility under a driveway. 
    Natural drainage system shall mean the path along which surface or ground water would flow under natural conditions, including storm conditions. 
    Stormwater conveyance channel shall mean a permanent, designed waterway, shaped and lined with appropriate vegetation or structural material to convey excess stormwater runoff away from a developing area. 
    Stormwater drainage system or facility shall mean any natural, or manmade, system or facility conveying or intended to convey stormwater, including but not limited to stormwater conveyance channels, ditches, streams, pipes, culverts, and other drainage systems or facilities. 
(Ord. No. 12-31, § 1, 12-4-12) 
Sec. 78-322. - Maintenance of stormwater drainage systems or facilities on city property, right-of-way, or stormwater drainage easements. 
    Any stormwater drainage system or facility installed or located on city property, right-of-way, or within a stormwater drainage easement will be maintained by the city at its sole expense to ensure adequate flow and to minimize damage to surrounding public or private property. With the exception of a driveway over driveway pipe, construction of any kind over such a stormwater drainage system or facility without the consent of the city is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 12-31, § 1, 12-4-12) 
Sec. 78-323. - Private stormwater drainage systems or facilities. 
    Unless the installation, alteration, repair, or replacement of a stormwater drainage system or facility is made by the city at its sole expense pursuant to division 2 or involves city participation pursuant to division 3, such installation, alteration, repair, or replacement will be made at the sole expense of the owner or owners of the land on which the stormwater drainage system or facility is or will be located or at the expense of any other interested person or persons. This includes maintenance and cutting of grass, weeds, and brush along ditches. All such work must meet city specifications and receive final approval from the director. 
(Ord. No. 12-31, § 1, 12-4-12) 
Secs. 78-324-78-335. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - INSTALLATION, ALTERATION, REPAIR, OR REPLACEMENT OF STORMWATER SYSTEMS OR FACILITIES BY THE CITY WITHOUT PRIVATE PARTICIPATION 

Sec. 78-336. - Criteria for decision by the city to install, alter, modify, repair, or replace stormwater drainage system or facility. 
(a)  The installation, alteration, repair, or replacement of stormwater drainage system or facilities will be made by the city without private participation, except as outlined in chapter 62, Streets, sidewalks, and other public places, when: 
(1)  The stormwater drainage system or facility is or will be located on city property, right-of-way, or within a stormwater drainage easement, or 
(2)  There is a failure of an existing manmade stormwater drainage system or facility on private property previously constructed by the city which conveys street drainage; or 
(3)  The stormwater drainage problem has been caused by inadequately designed or functioning stormwater drainage improvements made on a city right-of-way or on public property, including but not limited to undersized culverts; or 
(4)  The stormwater drainage or flooding is causing damage to city-owned utilities, bridges, streets, or other city-owned property; or 
(5)  The stormwater drainage or flooding is interfering with the flow of traffic on a city street or highway. 
(b)  In determining the priority of the installation, alteration, repair, or replacement of any specific stormwater drainage system or facility to be accomplished solely with city funds, the city manager shall consider the funds appropriated and available, the cost of the project, the frequency of flooding, the severity of the flooding or erosion, the number of persons who will benefit, and the extent of the threat to the safety of persons or the damage to the property. 
(c)  If the installation, alteration, repair, or replacement of a stormwater drainage system or facility pursuant to the provisions of this division requires the acquisition of an easement through, under, or across private property, such easement will be acquired. 
(d)  The city shall make an installation, alteration, repair, or replacement of a stormwater drainage system or facility only to the extent needed for adequate resolution of any erosion or flooding problem and only in the manner that will result in the least cost to the city. 
(Ord. No. 12-31, § 1, 12-4-12) 
Secs. 78-337-78-345. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - JOINT PARTICIPATION BY THE CITY IN THE INSTALLATION, ALTERATION, REPAIR, OR REPLACEMENT OF STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEMS OR FACILITIES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY 

Sec. 78-346. - When the city may jointly participate in the installation, alteration, repair, or replacement of stormwater drainage system facilities on private property. 
(a)  Subject to the provisions of the other sections in this division, the city manager and the director shall review and recommend whether the city should jointly participate in the installation, alteration, repair, or replacement of a stormwater drainage system or facility located on private property where one or more of the following circumstances exist: 
(1)  There is a failure of an existing natural stormwater drainage system or facility on private property which conveys street drainage causing or threatening significant damage to improvements on private property resulting from stormwater runoff from city streets and/or private development. 
(2)  In order to correct a flooding or erosion problem, the extension onto private property of an existing stormwater drainage system or facility which conveys street drainage is necessary. 
    The city may participate in such installation, alteration, repair, or replacement only to the extent needed for adequate resolution of any erosion or flooding problem and only in the manner that will result in the least cost to the city. 
(b)  In reviewing and recommending the priority of the installation, alteration, repair, or replacement of any stormwater drainage system or facility pursuant to the provisions of this division, the city manager and director shall consider the funds appropriated and available, the cost of the project, the frequency of the flooding, the severity of the flooding or erosion, the number of persons who will benefit, the extent of the threat to the safety of persons or the damages to property, and the date on which such request for participation was made in relation to other similar requests. All requests must be approved by city council in order for the city to participate in the installation, alteration, repair, or replacement of any stormwater drainage system or facility pursuant to the provisions of this division. 
(c)  If the installation, alteration, repair, or replacement of a stormwater drainage system or facility pursuant to the provisions of this division requires the acquisition of an easement through, under, or across private property, such easement will be acquired. 
(Ord. No. 12-31, § 1, 12-4-12) 
Sec. 78-347. - Agreement required. 
    The city will not participate in the installation, alteration, repair, or replacement of any stormwater drainage system under this division until a stormwater drainage system or facility agreement has been executed between the city and all parties having an ownership or other interest in the land on which the stormwater drainage system or facility is or will be located. 
(Ord. No. 12-31, § 1, 12-4-12) 
Sec. 78-348. - Limitation on city's participation. 
    The city shall not be responsible for more than 50 percent of the actual cost of installing, altering, repairing, or replacing any stormwater drainage system or facility referred to in this division. However, if the property owner or owners or other person or persons requesting city participation desires to construct a stormwater drainage system or facility that exceeds the estimated cost of a system or facility the city deems to be adequate, the city will only pay 50 percent of the estimated cost of a system or facility the city deems adequate. 
(Ord. No. 12-31, § 1, 12-4-12) 
Sec. 78-349. - Property owners required to share in the cost. 
    Prior to the city or its contractor beginning any work relating to the correction of a stormwater problem on private property, the property owner or owners or person or persons requesting city participation shall deposit with the treasurer one-half of the estimated cost of such work, including the cost of both labor and materials. 
    Should the actual cost of the project be less than the estimated cost, the city shall refund any excess funds deposited with the city. Should the actual cost of the project be more than the estimated cost, the property owner or owners shall be responsible for that portion. 
    As to any project where the work is to be done by a private contractor, if the bid received by the city exceeds the initial estimate made by the city then the property owner shall be notified of the private contractor's bid and shall be required to deposit any additional amount necessary to make the deposit equal his 50 percent share of the total cost. 
(Ord. No. 12-31, § 1, 12-4-12) 
Sec. 78-350. - Availability of funds as prerequisite. 
    The city shall not participate in the installation, alteration, repair, or replacement of any stormwater drainage system or facility referred to in this division unless funds have been appropriated and are available for such purposes. 
(Ord. No. 12-31, § 1, 12-4-12) 
Secs. 78-351-78-360. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DRIVEWAY PIPES 

Sec. 78-361. - Installation, alteration, repair, or replacement of driveway pipe. 
(a)  If a person installs, alters, repairs, or replaces driveway pipe on private property, he will use pipe of sufficient size and material, as authorized by the director, to accommodate the flow of such stormwater as may reasonably be expected in the city. 
(b)  If the driveway pipe will be located within street right-of-way, the city department of public works may install, alter, repair, or replace the driveway pipe, at the request of the property owner. In this circumstance, the property owner will be responsible for paying the costs to do such work. The property owner may get a contractor to do the work or do the work themselves; however, all such work must meet city specifications and receive final approval from the director. 
(Ord. No. 12-31, § 1, 12-4-12) 
Chapter 82 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Environment, ch. 34; health and sanitation, ch. 42; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; subdivisions, ch. 66. 
State Law reference- Tree conservation ordinance, civil penalties, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1127.1; planting of trees destroyed during construction, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-14.1; replacement of trees during development process in certain localities, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-14.2; destruction of trees, shrubs, etc., Code of Virginia, § 18.2-139 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 82-1-82-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TREES AND SHRUBS 

Sec. 82-31. - Planting by landowners authorized. 
    Any owner of a lot of land in the city may plant shade trees at proper and regular intervals within the curbline of the sidewalk, immediately in front of and adjacent to his lot, provided the city may, at any time, cause such trees to be removed at the expense of the owner of such lot. 
(Code 1972, § 18-28) 
Sec. 82-32. - Varieties which may not be planted. 
    No aspen, mulberry, locust or cottonwood tree shall be planted on the sidewalks, streets or other public places of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 18-29) 
Sec. 82-33. - Obstructing view at intersections. 
    No person shall allow to remain or shall plant any tree or shrub in such manner as to block or obstruct the view at a street intersection. 
(Code 1972, § 18-30) 
Sec. 82-34. - Injuring or destroying. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person without proper authority to injure or destroy any shade or ornamental tree planted in or alongside of any of the streets, sidewalks, alleys, lanes, parks, or any other public place, within the city. 
(Code 1972, § 18-31) 
Cross reference- Damaging property generally, § 50-303. 
Chapter 86 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; taxation, ch. 70; traffic and vehicles, ch. 74; zoning, ch. 90. 
State Law reference- Municipal permits for taxicabs and other vehicles for hire, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-892; local licensing of drivers of taxicabs and similar for-hire passenger vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-310; license plates for vehicles for hire, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-711; municipal regulation of taxicabs, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-2016. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 86-1-86-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 86-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Taxicab means any motor-driven vehicle used for the transportation, for hire or reward, of passengers upon the streets of the city, except buses being operated under franchise and over fixed routes and between fixed termini, and except ambulances, emergency vehicles and rescue squad vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, 4-6-99) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 86-32. - Compliance with article. 
    The operation of taxicabs upon the streets of the city shall be subject to the conditions, regulations and restrictions set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, 4-6-99) 
Sec. 86-33. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Every owner or operator of a motor vehicle used as a vehicle for the transportation of persons for a consideration on any highway, street, road, lane or alley in the city who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, be fined not more than $100.00 for the first offense and not more than $500.00 for each subsequent offense. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, 4-6-99) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-2020. 
Sec. 86-34. - Stands and parking places. 
    The city manager may designate the stands or parking places for taxicabs. It shall be unlawful for any driver to park at any place or to use any stand other than that so assigned to the taxicab. The city manager may require the taxicab owner to furnish a stand for the vehicles not on the city streets. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, 4-6-99) 
Sec. 86-35. - Insurance. 
    No taxicab shall be operated on the streets of the city unless protected by liability insurance issued by a company authorized to do business in the state in the sum of at least $25,000.00 for injury to one person, $50,000.00 for injury to more than one person, and $20,000.00 for damage to property. Satisfactory evidence shall be filed with the city manager showing that such insurance is in effect. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, 4-6-99) 
State Law reference- Liability insurance policies, Code of Virginia, § 38.2-2200 et seq.; motor vehicle liability insurance policies, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-472 et seq. 
Sec. 86-36. - Requirements as to vehicle. 
(a)  Every taxicab operated within the city must meet all requirements of the state law as to speed, lights, brakes, horn, inspection, and other requirements, and shall be kept in good, clean, neat and safe condition and appearance. 
(b)  Every taxicab shall display the name of the cab company on the driver's and passenger's doors in letters no smaller than three inches in height. 
(c)  Every taxicab shall maintain an identity light on the roof of the car that shall be turned off when transporting customers. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 00-09, 9-5-00) 
State Law reference- Motor vehicle and equipment safety, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1000 et seq. 
Sec. 86-37. - Misleading, improper, false or unauthorized calls for service. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make misleading, improper, false or unauthorized calls for service upon any taxicab operated pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 00-09, 9-5-00) 
Secs. 86-38-86-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DRIVERS 

Sec. 86-61. - Taxi operator's permit. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate in the city any taxicab unless a taxi operator's permit has been issued by the chief of police to the operator thereof pursuant to the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 00-09, 9-5-00) 
Sec. 86-62. - Taxi operator's permit to be posted in vehicle. 
    No taxicab shall operate in the city unless there is posted viewable from front and rear seats of such vehicle the permit upon which is plainly written the driver's name, his business address, a brief description of the driver, including age, weight, height, color of eyes and color of hair, together with a picture of such driver. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 09-00, 9-5-00) 
Sec. 86-63. - Application; examination of applicants. 
    Any person desiring a taxi operator's permit pursuant to the provisions of this division shall make application therefore in writing, in duplicate, upon forms to be provided by the chief of police and shall furnish the following: 
(1)  Full name, age, sex, race, and home and business address of applicant. 
(2)  Convictions or pleas of guilty, if any, for violation of any law. 
(Ord. No. 00-09, 9-5-00) 
Sec. 86-64. - Term and renewal. 
    Taxi operator's permits shall be issued from January 1 of each year for a period of one year and shall be renewed annually thereafter upon application on or before January 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 00-09, 9-5-00) 
Sec. 86-65. - Persons to whom permits will not be granted. 
    No taxi operator's permit shall be granted to a person under 18 years of age nor to a person who, in the opinion of the chief of police, is not morally or mentally fit to receive the same, or who has been a repeated and persistent violator of the traffic and safety laws and ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 00-09, 9-5-00) 
Sec. 86-66. - Revocation. 
    Any taxi operator's permit issued under this division may be revoked by the chief of police for violating any rules under this section: 
(1)  Failure to maintain the taxicab in his operation in good order and repair. 
(2)  Failure to pay the personal property tax or other taxes due to the city or the commonwealth. 
(3)  Failure to maintain insurance as required by this article or by state law. 
(4)  Failure to exhibit the permit in the taxicab as required by section 86-62. 
(5)  Repeated and persistent violations of traffic and safety provisions of this Code. 
(6)  Conviction three times of a violation of any state, county, municipal or federal law, or of a felony, or of the alcoholic beverage control laws of the state, or of a crime involving moral turpitude (i.e, lying, cheating, or stealing), or of a drug violation. 
(7)  Purchasing alcoholic beverages of any description for any passenger, who possesses or transports alcoholic beverages in a taxicab, or who tolerates any disorderly conduct in such vehicle, or who takes any passengers to a house, room, or other place known or suspected of being used for illicit purposes. 
(8)  Wilful or continued failure to comply with the provisions of this article or any law regulating the operation of taxicabs within the city. 
(9)  Wilful neglect to render prompt service. 
(Ord. No. 00-09, 9-5-00) 
Sec. 86-67. - State operator's license required. 
    Drivers of taxicabs operated pursuant to the provisions of this article shall have an operator's license as required by state law. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 00-09, 9-5-00) 
Sec. 86-68. - Information to be filed at police station. 
    The information contained in section 86-63 and a record of an operator's license as required by section 86-67 shall be on file at the police station. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 00-09, 9-5-00) 
Sec. 86-69. - Cruising. 
    Drivers of taxicabs shall not be permitted to cruise seeking employment. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 00-09, 9-5-00) 
Sec. 86-70. - Refusal to carry passengers. 
    Drivers of taxicabs may refuse to carry passengers unless the legal fare is prepaid, but no driver shall otherwise refuse to carry an orderly person anywhere in the city unless already engaged. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 00-09, 9-5-00) 
Sec. 86-71. - Carrying more than one passenger; nonpaying passengers. 
    Not more than one passenger shall be transported in a taxicab at one time without the consent of the person first engaging the vehicle. Nonpaying passengers shall not be transported in taxicabs with paying passengers. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 00-09, 9-5-00) 
Sec. 86-72. - Driver to give receipt on request. 
    The driver in charge of the taxicab shall, upon request, deliver to the person paying the fare a receipt in legible type or writing showing the charge and amount of fare paid, the date of payment, the names of the owner and driver, and city license number of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 00-09, 9-5-00) 
Sec. 86-73. - Record of calls. 
    Each licensed owner of a taxicab shall keep or cause to be kept a clear and neat record of the origin and destination of all calls, time and fare paid, and the distance traveled on each trip on each licensed vehicle, which record shall be open at all times to the chief of police, city manager, or their designees, and which shall be kept for a period of 12 months. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 00-09, 9-5-00) 
Sec. 86-74. - Purchase of alcoholic beverages; tolerating disorderly conduct; taking passenger to place used for illicit purpose. 
    No driver of a taxicab may purchase alcoholic beverages of any description for any passenger or transport or possess the same in such vehicle; tolerate any disorderly conduct in such vehicle; or take any passenger to a house, room, cabin or other place known to be used or suspected of being used for illicit purposes. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 00-09, 9-5-00) 
Secs. 86-75-86-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EMERGENCY SERVICE ORGANIZATIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Emergency medical service vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-148 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 86-126. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Ambulance means any privately or publicly owned vehicle that is specially designed, constructed or modified and equipped and is intended to be used for and is maintained or operated to provide immediate medical care to or to transport upon the streets of the city persons who are sick, injured, wounded, or otherwise incapacitated or helpless. 
    Emergency service organization means any person, either as owner, agent or otherwise, who shall furnish, operate, conduct, maintain, advertise, solicit for funds or otherwise engage in or profess to be engaged in the business or service of transporting patients, responding to first aid calls, responding to emergency calls or operating a rescue squad upon the streets of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 22-76) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Definitions, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-148. 
Sec. 86-127. - Vehicle to be occupied by qualified attendant. 
    Every vehicle operated under this article, when operated on an emergency mission in the city, shall be occupied by at least one person who possesses a valid emergency medical care attendant's certificate issued by authority of the state board of health, or occupied by a doctor of medicine or a graduate nurse. 
(Code 1972, § 22-81) 
State Law reference- Certification of emergency medical services personnel, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-153. 
Sec. 86-128. - Advisory committee. 
    A committee composed of the presidents of any existing emergency service organizations shall act in an advisory capacity to the council in relation to any application for any additional emergency service organizations. 
(Code 1972, § 22-82) 
Sec. 86-129. - Exemptions from article provisions. 
    The following are exempted from the operation of the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Private vehicles not ordinarily used in transporting patients or not ordinarily used in rendering emergency first aid. 
(2)  Vehicles of an emergency service organization rendering services in case of a major catastrophe or emergency when ambulances and emergency service organizations based in the city are insufficient to render the services required. 
(3)  Ambulances owned and operated by an agency of the United States government. 
(4)  The fire, police and sheriff's departments. 
(Code 1972, § 22-83) 
Secs. 86-130-86-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 86-146. - Required. 
    No emergency service organization shall be operated unless such organization holds a currently valid permit issued by the city council authorizing the operation thereof. 
(Code 1972, § 22-77) 
Sec. 86-147. - Prerequisite to any activity. 
    No emergency service organization shall organize, advertise in any manner, hold out to the public, or solicit funds or contributions, whether its services are to be rendered gratuitously or nongratuitously, without first obtaining a permit under this division. 
(Code 1972, § 22-78) 
Sec. 86-148. - Public hearing prior to issuance. 
    No permit under this division shall be issued by the city council unless it shall be made to appear to the council at a public hearing on the question of the issuance of the permit that there is a need for the service in the city of the type mentioned and described in the application; that such service is not being provided efficiently by another emergency service organization; that the applicants are trained, equipped and otherwise qualified in all respects to render emergency service of the type requested in the application; and that the applicants are in compliance with all applicable statutes of the commonwealth and all applicable ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 22-79) 
Sec. 86-149. - Duration. 
    Permits issued under this division shall be valid until revoked by city council for good cause shown and after a public hearing thereon. 
(Code 1972, § 22-80) 
Chapter 90 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Amusements and entertainments, ch. 6; animals, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; community development, ch. 22; environment, ch. 34; planning, ch. 54; secondhand goods, ch. 58; subdivisions, ch. 66; heavy truck parking in residential zones, § 74-117; vehicles for hire, ch. 86. 
State Law reference- Notice of planning or zoning matters, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-33.1; planning, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-427 et seq.; zoning, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-486 et seq.; regulations to be uniform, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-488; conflict with statutes, local ordinances or regulations, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-498. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 90-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory building means a detached subordinate building located on the same lot with the main building or use, the use of which is customarily incidental to that of the main building or to the use of the land. Garages, carports, and storage sheds are common accessory buildings. Where a wall of the accessory building is part of the wall of the main building, or where an accessory building such as a garage is attached in any manner to the main building, such accessory building shall be considered a part of the main building. The accessory building shall be less than the main building in height, except in industrial districts where a higher building is required in the manufacturing process. No accessory building shall be used for residential purposes. Accessory buildings shall be permitted only in the rear and side yards and shall not be located within five feet of any interior lot side or rear lot line. Accessory buildings constructed on corner lots shall have the same street side yard setback required of the main building. 
    Administrator means the city manager, or his duly authorized agent, designated to enforce this chapter. 
    Adult day support facility means a non-residential facility that provides a variety of health, social and related support services in a protective setting during part of the day to four or more adults over the age of 18 who reside elsewhere. 
    Alley means a public service way providing a secondary means of access to abutting properties. 
    Alteration means any change in the total floor area, use, adaptability or external appearance of an existing structure. 
    Animal foster home means a private residential dwelling and its surrounding grounds at which site through an affiliation with a pound, animal shelter, or other releasing agency care or rehabilitation is provided for no more than three companion animals for a period not to exceed 12 months. 
    Apartment means a room, or suite of two or more rooms, which is designed or intended for occupancy by, or which is occupied by, one family doing its cooking therein. 
    Apartment house means any building or portion thereof which contains three or more apartments, the occupants of any two or more of which use any entrance or hall in common, and all living units of which are intended to be maintained under single ownership or management. This shall be interpreted to include cooperative apartment houses. 
    Assembly hall means a hall or structure where many people congregate for a particular event, purpose or general gathering. 
    Awning means a cloth, plastic, or other nonstructural covering that projects from a wall for the purposes of shielding a doorway or window. An awning is either permanently attached to a building or can be raised or retracted to a position against the building when not in use. Awnings shall not project more than four feet from the building nor shall extend above the roofline. 
    Banner means any cloth, plastic, vinyl, paper, or similar lightweight material attached to any structure, staff, pole, rope, wire, or framing which is anchored on two or more edges or at all four corners. Banners are temporary in nature and do not include flags or feather signs. 
    Banquet facility means a room which is utilized for the purpose of hosting a party, banquet, reception or other social event which is many times located in the buildings of clubs, fraternal and nonprofit organizations, and/or restaurants and is rented out as a fundraising mechanism. 
    Base floor or lowest floor elevation means the level of the lowest floor of a building or structure or basement, if included in the building or structure. 
    Base floor or lowest floor elevation means the level of the lowest floor of a building or structure or basement, if included in the building or structure. 
    Basement means any story of a building in which the surface of the floor above is less than six feet above the adjacent ground elevation at all points. 
    Bed and breakfast house means a house, or portion thereof, where shortterm lodging rooms and meals are provided and the operator shall live on the premises. 
    Boardinghouse means a building where, for compensation, lodging and meals are provided for at least three and up to 14 persons. 
    Body piercing means the practice of physical body adornment in permitted establishments by operators utilizing tattooing and/or body piercing cosmetics. Body piercing activities shall be in accordance with the Virginia Department of Professional and Occupational Regulations' "Body Piercing Regulations" and may be permitted only as an accessory use in commercial zoning districts. 
    Building means a structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels. When separated by division walls from the ground up without openings, each portion of such building shall be deemed a separate building. The word "building" also includes the words "use" and "structure." 
    Building height means the vertical distance measured from the level of the curb or established centerline of the street opposite the middle of the front elevation of the main entrance of the building to the highest point of the roof surface, if a flat roof; to the deck line of the mansard roof; and to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for a gable, hip or gambrel roof. If built on a terrace, the height of the building may be increased by the height of the terrace, but this increase of height shall not exceed five feet. 
    Building setback means the required distance by which any building or structure must be separated from the lot lines. 
    Camper. See Recreational vehicles. 
    Certificate of occupancy means a certificate issued by the administrator providing he has determined the occupancy, use, erection or alteration of a building or land or part thereof is in conformity with this chapter and other city ordinance provisions. 
    Child care center means any facility in which more than five children are received for care, protection, and guidance during a part of the day, except children who are related by blood or marriage to the person who maintains the home. 
    Commercial means any wholesale, retail, or service business activity established to carry on trade for a profit. 
    Commission means the planning commission of the city. 
    Conditional use means a use listed as such in this chapter and which may be permitted in a specified district under certain conditions, such conditions to be determined in each case by the terms of this chapter and by the city council, in accordance with the procedures specified by this chapter and applicable state law. 
    Conditional use permit means a permit issued by the city council after recommendation by the planning commission for a use allowed as a conditional use in a designated district or in section 90-55 after evaluation of the impact and compatibility of such use. Such permit shall stipulate such conditions and restrictions, including any such conditions contained in this chapter, as will ensure the use being compatible with the neighborhood in which it is to be located; or, where that cannot be accomplished, shall deny the use as not in accord with adopted plans and policies or as being incompatible with existing uses or development permitted by right in the area. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
    Dwelling means any structure which is designed for use for residential purposes, except hotels, boardinghouses, lodginghouses, tourist cabins, apartments and automobile trailers. The word "dwelling" includes the word "residence." 
    Dwelling, multiple-family means a structure arranged or designed to be occupied by three or more families living independently of each other. 
    Dwelling, single-family means a structure arranged or designed to be occupied by one family, the structure having only one dwelling unit. 
    Dwelling, two-family means a structure arranged or designed to be occupied by two families, the structure having only two dwelling units. 
    Dwelling unit means one or more rooms in a dwelling designed for living or sleeping purposes, and having at least one kitchen. 
    Family means any individual, or two or more persons living together on the premises as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit, including domestic servants, not more than three boarders and the occupants of not more than two rooms as roomers, but excluding fraternities, sororities, clubs and institutions of all types. 
    Flag means any sign printed or painted on cloth, plastic, canvas, or other like material with distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols attached to a pole or staff and anchored along only one edge or supported or anchored at only two corners. Flags do not include feather signs or banners. Flags containing commercial messages shall be considered freestanding or projecting signs limited to the number and size permitted for the applicable zoning district and shall require a permit. 
    Fence, wall or hedge means a freestanding structure of wood, chainlink or hedge, or any combination thereof, resting on or partially buried in the ground and rising above ground level, and used for confinement, screening, or partition purposes. The height of such fences, walls, or hedges shall be determined by the zoning district. (See special provisions.) 
    Flood means a general and temporary inundation of normally dry land areas. 
    Flood, 100-year means a flood that, on the average, is likely to occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one percent chance of occurring each year, although the flood may occur in any year). 
    Floodplain means a relatively flat or low land area, adjoining a river, stream or watercourse, which is subject to partial or complete inundation, or an area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Floodway means the designated area of the floodplain required to carry and discharge floodwaters of a given magnitude. For the purpose of this chapter, the floodway shall be capable of accommodating a flood of the 100-year magnitude. 
    Floodway fringe means that portion of the floodplain between the floodway and 100-year floodplain boundaries. 
    Floor area means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the building or buildings on a lot, measured from the exterior walls or from the centerline of party walls separating two buildings. 
    Group home means a facility or dwelling unit serving physically handicapped, mentally ill, mentally retarded or other developmentally disabled persons, not related by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship and operating as a group family household. A group home may include family care home, foster home, half-way house, and nursing home. 
    Home occupations means occupations such as dressmaking, voice, piano, preserving or home cooking, including a professional occupation of a resident of the premises (providing such professional occupation does not occupy more than 300 square feet of floor area for a professional use), but not including a beauty parlor, barbershop, convalescing or nursing home, tourist home, massage parlor or similar establishment offering services to the general public. Home occupations shall be carried on only by a member of the family residing on the premises, and no mechanical equipment shall be used except such as is customary for purely domestic household purposes, provided further that there shall be no sign exceeding 144 square inches in area, nor any artificial lighting of such sign, nor any display that will indicate from the exterior that the building is being utilized for any purpose other than that of a dwelling. 
    Hotel means any building or portion thereof which contains ten or more sleeping rooms which are designed or intended to be used, let or hired out primarily for transient occupancy for compensation, whether the compensation be paid directly or indirectly, and in which no provision is made for cooking in any individual room or suite. 
    Internet sweepstakes cafe means any venue where an electronic machine or device is operated under a sweepstakes premises. Only in the context of this definition, an "electronic machine or device" means a mechanically, electrically or electronically operated machine or device, that is owned, leased or otherwise possessed by a sweepstakes sponsor or promoter, or any sweepstakes sponsor's or promoter's partners, affiliates, subsidiaries or contractors, that is intended to be used by a sweepstakes entrant, that uses energy, and that is capable of displaying information on a screen or other mechanism. 
    Kennel means any place in which more than three dogs, more than six months of age, are kept, or any number of dogs are kept for the purpose of sale or rental or in connection with boarding, care or breeding, for which any fee is charged. 
    Licensed family day home means a child day program offered in the residence of the provider or the home of any of the children in care of six through 12 children under the age of 13, exclusive of the provider's own children and any children who reside in the home, when at least one child receives care for compensation. 
    Loading space, off-street, means an off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building, or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of vehicles while loading or unloading merchandise or material, and which has access to a street, alley or other appropriate means of ingress and egress. 
    Lot means a parcel of land either occupied or vacant, or to be occupied by a building or group of buildings and accessory buildings and used together with such yards and other open spaces as are required by this chapter. 
    Lot, corner means a lot abutting on two or more streets at their intersection. Of the two sides of a corner lot, the front shall be deemed to be the shortest of the two sides fronting on streets. 
    Lot, depth of means the average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
    Lot, double frontage means an interior lot having frontage on two streets. 
    Lot, front of means that side of the lot which fronts on a street. In the case of a corner lot, the narrowest side fronting on the street shall be considered to be front of the lot. 
    Lot, interior means any lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot of record means a lot which has been recorded in the clerk's office of the circuit court, or on a plat of record, or it may include parts of, or a combination of such lots when adjacent to one another, provided such ground is used for egress by means of a street or public right-of-way. 
    Lot, width means the distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front and rear lot lines. 
    Manufacture and/or manufacturing means the processing and/or converting of raw, unfinished materials, or products, or either of them, into articles of substances of different character, or for use for a different purpose. The word "manufacturing" includes mixing, blending, fabricating and producing. 
    Manufactured home/mobile home means a structure intended for human habitation that is subject to federal regulation, is transportable in one or more sections, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected is 320 or more square feet in area. Such a structure is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation, connected to the required utilities and contains plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems. All such homes constructed since 1976 have been required to conform to the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974. The term "mobile home," once widely used to describe transportable housing units, has been replaced in the Code of Virginia by the term "manufactured housing." See Code of Virginia, § 36-85.2 et seq. 
    Manufactured home/mobile home lot means the unit of land used or intended to be used by one manufactured home/mobile home, whether in a manufactured home/mobile home park or not. 
    Manufactured home/mobile home, multi-sectional (double-wide or larger) means a structure built in accordance with 1974 national manufactured housing construction and safety standards that is mounted on and anchored to a permanent foundation in accordance with the Virginia Unified Statewide Building Code and which has its wheel, axle and towing apparatus removed. 
    Manufactured home/mobile home park means any site, lot, field, or tract of land upon which are located four or more manufactured home/mobile home lots. 
    Manufactured home/mobile home, single wide means a structure, transportable in one section, which is eight body feet or more in width and is 32 body feet or more in length and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. 
    Modular home means a single-family dwelling designed for transportation after fabrication on streets and highways on a flatbed or other trailer and arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling, which dwelling shall be placed on a permanent foundation, and connected to city utilities and the like. 
    Also, "modular" means a combination of one or more sections or modules, subject to state regulations and including necessary electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilating and other service systems, manufactured off-site and transported to the point of use for installation to comprise a finished building. In addition to the compliance assurance label, each dwelling unit shall be marked by a Virginia Registration Seal secured by the department of housing and community development. 
    Motel means one or more buildings containing individual sleeping rooms, designed for or used temporarily by tourists or transients, with parking space conveniently located to each unit. Cooking facilities may be provided for each unit. 
    Nightclub means an establishment for evening entertainment, generally open until the early morning hours that serves liquor and usually food and offers patrons music, comedy acts, a floor show, or dancing. 
    Nonconforming activity means the otherwise legal use of a building or structure or of a tract of land that does not conform to the use regulations of this chapter for the district in which it is located, either as of April 4, 1975, or as a result of subsequent amendments to this chapter. 
    Nonconforming building means a building, structure or portion thereof lawfully existing and used at the time the ordinance from which this chapter derives became effective, which was designed, erected or structurally altered, for a use that does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located, or a building or structure that does not conform to all the height and area regulations of the district in which it is located. 
    Nonconforming lot means an otherwise legally platted lot that does not conform to the minimum area or width requirements of this chapter for the district in which it is located either as of April 4, 1975, or as a result of subsequent amendments to this chapter. 
    Nonconforming sign means any sign, excluding temporary signs, erected or placed prior to August 7, 2007 that is not in conformance with the requirements of this chapter. 
    Nonconforming structure means an otherwise legal building or structure that does not conform with the lot area, yard, height, lot coverage or other area regulations of this chapter, or is designed or intended for a use that does not conform to the use regulations of this chapter for the district in which it is located, either as of April 4, 1975, or as a result of subsequent amendments to this chapter. 
    Nonconforming use means a use which lawfully occupied a building, or portion thereof or land at the time the ordinance from which this chapter derives became effective and which does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located. 
    Nursing home means a place devoted primarily to the maintenance and operation of facilities for the treatment and care of any person suffering from illnesses, diseases, deformities, or injuries not requiring extensive and/or intensive care that is normally provided in a general hospital or other specialized hospital. 
    Office building means a building used primarily for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service, industry or government, or like activity and where there are no goods offered for sale. 
    Off-street parking area means space provided for vehicular parking outside of the dedicated street right-of-way. 
    Parking lot means an open, unoccupied space used, or required for use, for the parking of automobiles or other private vehicles exclusively, and in which no gas or automobile accessories are sold or no other business is conducted. 
    Parking space means a space used as an area for temporary storage of passenger vehicles. Such space shall be a minimum of ten feet in width and 20 feet in length, except that off-street parking facilities containing any parking spaces may use 20 percent of the total spaces as "compact car" spaces with a minimum size of 71/2 feet in width and 15 feet in length. Such spaces shall be indicated by the posting of signs reading "small cars only." 
    Pennant means any lightweight fabric, plastic or similar material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire or string, usually in a series, designed to move in the wind. 
    Principal building means a building in which the primary use of the lot on which the building is located is conducted. 
    Professional office means an office building for doctors, dentists, lawyers, and similar professional occupations, provided such building does not exceed four offices. 
    Public and semipublic uses means any public works supplied generally by a governmental or nonprofit organization. Such public and semipublic works shall include, but not be limited to: public roads, schools, water supply and sewer facilities, rescue squads, and police and fire protection facilities. 
    Public utilities means a group of uses which provide essential energy and communication services to the general public. These include, but are not limited to: electrical, natural gas, water and sewer and telephone companies; their distribution and transmission lines; poles and towers; substations, pumping stations and storage facilities. By definition, some of these activities are industrial in nature, although local distribution facilities usually are compatible uses in residential areas. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is self-propelled or towed, can be operated independently of utility connections and is designed to be used principally as temporary living quarters for travel, recreation, or vacation purposes. 
    Recreational vehicle park means any lot or parcel of land upon which two or more sites are located, established. or maintained for occupancy by recreational vehicles for a fee as temporary living quarters. Temporary shall mean a period not to exceed 365 days of continuous occupancy of a recreational vehicle on a site within a recreational vehicle park. 
    Restaurant, standard or sit-down means any premises utilized for the sale, dispensing, and/or serving of food, refreshments, or beverages where the customer is normally involved with an individual menu and is served by an employee at a table, booth, or counter at which said items are consumed. 
    Rest home or convalescent home means any place containing beds for two or more patients, established to render domiciliary care for chronic or convalescent patients, but not including child care homes or facilities for the cure of feeble-minded, mental, epileptic, alcoholic patients, or drug addicts. 
    Retail stores and shops means buildings for display and sale of merchandise at retail or for the rendering of personal services (but specifically exclusive of coal, wood and lumber yards), such as the following which will serve as illustration: drugstore, newsstand, foodstore, candy shop, milk dispensary, dry goods and notions store, antique store and gift shop, hardware store, household appliance store, furniture store, florist, optician, music and radio store, tailor shop, barbershop and beauty shop. 
    Roominghouse means any building or portion thereof which contains guestrooms which are designed or intended to be used, let or hired out for occupancy by, or which are occupied by, three or more, but not exceeding 14, individuals for compensation, whether the compensation is paid directly or indirectly. 
    Setback means the minimum distance by which any building or structure must be separated from the front lot line or side yard abutting the street of a corner lot. 
    Sign means any device, structure, fixture, painting, emblem, or visual that uses words, graphics, colors, illumination, symbols, numbers, or letters for the purpose of communicating a message. Sign includes the sign faces as well as any supporting structure. 
    Sign area means the total area in the smallest square, rectangle or triangle, which will contain the entire sign including lighting but excluding supports that are not lighted or signs. 
    Sign, balloon means a lighter-than-air, gas-filled balloon, tethered in a fixed location used for commercial purposes, which may or may not contain an advertisement message on its surface or attached to the balloon in any manner. 
    Sign, business means a sign which directs attention to a product, commodity or service available on the premises, exclusive of a window sign. 
    Sign, feather means a freestanding sign, which may or may not contain an advertisement message, typically constructed of a single plastic or metal shaft driven in the ground with an attached pennant that is vertically elongated and attached to the shaft used for commercial purposes. Feather signs do not include banners or flags. 
    Sign, flashing means a sign having or containing an intermittent or sequential light source that pulsates, causing the sign to turn on and off or become intermittently brighter and darker. 
    Sign, freestanding means a sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on, or anchored in, the ground; and that is independent and detached from any building or other structure. 
    Sign, general advertising means a sign which directs attention to a product, commodity or service not necessarily available on the premises. Such sign may be referred to as a billboard. 
    Sign, home occupation means a sign containing the name and occupation of the occupant or directing attention to a product, commodity or service available on the premises. 
    Sign, incidental means a sign that displays general site information, instructions, directives, or restrictions that are primarily oriented to pedestrians and motor vehicle operators who have entered a property from a public street. These signs shall not contain any commercial advertising. 
    Sign, inflatable means a sign or device, which may or may not contain an advertisement message, that is an air-inflated object, which may be of various shapes, made of flexible fabric, resting on the ground or structure and equipped with a portable blower motor that provides a constant flow of air into the device used for commercial purposes. 
    Sign, menu board means a sign located at the drive-through window of a restaurant detailing the prices of specific food items. 
    Sign, permanent means a sign attached or affixed to a building, window, or structure, or to the ground in a manner that enables the sign to resist environmental loads, such as wind, and that precludes ready removal or movement of the sign and whose intended use appears to be indefinite. 
    Sign, personal expression means a sign that expresses an opinion, interest, position, or other non-commercial message. 
    Sign, portable means a sign designed to be transported or moved and not permanently attached to the ground, a building, or other structure. Such sign may be referred to as an "A" and "T" frame sign. 
    Sign, projecting means a building-mounted, double-sided sign with the two faces generally perpendicular to the building wall, not to include signs located on a canopy, awning, or marquee. 
    Sign, reader board/changeable copy means a sign or portion thereof with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or surface of the sign. This definition includes, without limitation, electronic message boards, which are defined as signs that use changing lights to form a sign message or messages wherein the sequence of messages and the rate of change is electronically programmed and can be modified by electronic processes. Wall signs, freestanding signs, and general advertising signs shall also be considered reader board/changeable copy signs. 
    Sign, snipe means a sign tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued or otherwise attached to trees, poles, stakes, fences, public benches, streetlights, or other objects, or placed on any public property or in the public right-of-way or on any private property without the permission of the property owner. 
    Sign, temporary means a non-permanent sign located on private property that can be displayed for no more than 45 consecutive days at one time intended to promote brief activities such as grand openings, promotions of products and services, special and seasonal sales, and special civic or cultural events such as fairs, plays, concerts, and meetings. Such sign may be referred to as a banner. Temporary signs also include inflatable signs and devices, vehicular signs, balloon signs, and feather signs. Temporary signs do not include flags. 
    Sign, vehicular means a sign affixed to a vehicle in such a manner that the sign is used primarily as an advertisement for the business on which the vehicle sits or as an advertisement for an off-site business. This does not include the use of incidental business logos, identification, or advertising on vehicles primarily and actively used for business purposes and/or personal transportation. 
    Sign, wall means a building-mounted sign which is either attached to, displayed on, or painted on an exterior wall in a manner parallel with the wall surface. Signs applied to or painted on an awning or canopy shall be considered wall signs. 
    Sign, window means the primary identification sign(s) placed inside or upon a window or door which is intended to be seen or actually is seen from the exterior of a building used to advertise the specific business in which it is located. Signs painted on windows or doors shall be considered window signs. Customary displays of merchandise or objects and material without lettering behind a store window are not considered signs. 
    Site plan means a plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete dimensions, the boundaries of a site and location of all buildings, structures, uses, and principal site development features proposed for a specific parcel of land. 
    Story means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above or the roof, if it is directly above. When measuring height a habitable basement extending at least five feet above the ground level, or a habitable attic shall be counted as a story. 
    Story, half means a space under a sloping roof, which has the line of intersection or roof decking and wall face not more than three feet above the top floor level, and in which space not more than two-thirds of the floor area is finished off for use. 
    Street means a public thoroughfare, 30 feet or more wide between property lines. 
    Street line means the dividing line between a street or road right-of-way and the contiguous property. 
    Street or road means a public thoroughfare which affords principal means of access to abutting property. 
    Structural alteration means any change in the supporting members of a building or structure, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any substantial change in the roof. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected, which requires location on the ground, or attached to something having location on the ground. 
    Subdivision means a division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots or parcels for the purpose of either immediate or future transfer of ownership or building development; provided, however, that the definition of a subdivision shall not include a bona fide division or partition of agricultural land into parcels of five acres or more and not involving a new street, nor division of land which might be ordered or approved by a court. 
    Telecommunications tower means a wireless, cellular or personal communications service antenna its antenna support structure, accessory buildings and parking and may include other uses associated with and ancillary to providing wireless communications, cellular communications or personal communications services. Any wireless, cellular, personal communication or other service antenna addition to an existing telecommunications tower shall be known as co-location on an existing tower 
    Temporary outdoor yard sale means to offer for sale any items of tangible property at sales, commonly known as "yard, garage, rummage, or backyard sales," whereby such sale is conducted on private property in a commercial district limited to four times per year per applicant. All temporary outdoor yard sales shall require a signed permission document from a business/property owner and be regulated in accordance with applicable provisions of Chapter 18, Article VII of this Code. 
    Tourist court means a group of attached or detached buildings containing individual sleeping or living units, designed for or used temporarily by automobile tourists or transients, with garage attached or parking space conveniently located to each unit, including auto courts, motels, or motor lodges. 
    Travel trailer means a mobile unit less than 29 feet in length and less than 4,500 pounds in weight which is designed for human habitation. 
    Unlicensed family day home means a child day program offered in the residence of the provider or the home of any of the children in care of one through five children under the age of 13, exclusive of the provider's own children and any children who reside in the home, when at least one child receives care for compensation. However, no family day home shall care for more than four children under the age of two, including theprovider's own children and any children who reside in the home, unless the family day home is licensed or voluntarily registered. However, a family day home where the children in care are all grandchildren of the provider shall not be required to be licensed. 
    Use means the occupancy of or principal business conducted in a building or portion thereof or land of the premises. 
    Variance means a relaxation of the terms of this chapter where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the action of the applicant, a literal enforcement of this chapter would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. As used in this chapter, a variance is authorized only for height, area and size of structure or size of yards and open spaces. Establishment or expansion of a use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed by variance, nor shall a variance be granted because of the presence of nonconformities in the zoning district or adjoining zoning districts. 
    Vehicle loading zone. See Loading space, off-street. 
    Yard, front means the yard across the full width of the plat facing the street extending from the front line of the building to the front property line. Either yard facing a street may be selected as the front yard of a corner lot. 
    Yard, rear means the yard across the full width of the plat opposite the front yard extending from rear line of building to rear property line. The rear yard of a corner lot is the yard opposite the selected front yard. 
    Yard, side means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot as a building between the side line of the building, excluding steps, and the side line of the lot, and extending from the front yard line to the rear yard line. 
    Zoning administrator. See Administrator. 
(Code 1972, § 24-3; Ord. No. 97-9, 9-2-97; Ord. No. 98-10, 7-21-98; Ord. No. 99-10, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 03-19, § 1, 5-20-03; Ord. No. 05-13, § 1, 5-17-05; Ord. No. 06-66, 8-7-07; Min. of 7-17-08; Ord. No. 09-20, 6-2-09; Ord. No. 10-3, 1-19-10; Ord. No. 10-41, 10-19-10; Ord. No. 14-08, 6-17-14; Ord. No. 16-29, § 1, 11-15-16; Ord. No. 18-01, 1-16-18) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Definitions, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-430. 
Sec. 90-2. - Purpose of chapter. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of state law, as amended, there is hereby adopted zoning regulations, together with accompanying map or maps, dividing the city into districts of such number, shape, and area deemed best suited to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the community; lessening congestion in the streets, roads and highways; securing safety from fire, flood, panic and other dangers; providing adequate light and air; preventing overcrowding of land and the undue concentration of population; and facilitating the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements. 
(Code 1972, § 24-1) 
State Law reference- Zoning, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-486 et seq. 
Sec. 90-3. - Interpretation and application of chapter. 
    In the interpretation and application of this chapter, its provisions shall be held to be minimum requirements. It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with any other provisions of law or ordinance, or any regulations or permits adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use or construction of buildings or premises, or private restrictions, except as expressly provided in this chapter; provided, however, that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction than is imposed by such other provisions, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(Code 1972, § 24-2) 
Sec. 90-4. - Enforcement of chapter. 
(a)  This chapter shall be enforced by the city manager or his duly authorized agent. No land or structure shall be changed in use and no structure shall be erected, altered or moved until the agent has issued a permit certifying that the plans and intended use of land, buildings, and structure are in conformity with this chapter. 
(b)  Every application for a permit shall be accompanied by a plat, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimension of the parcel of land to be built upon the lot, the size and location of the building to be erected, off-street parking to be provided and such other information as may be deemed necessary to provide for the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Code 1972, § 24-56) 
Sec. 90-5. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made under this chapter, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specification or plans submitted and approved under this chapter, or any certificate or permit issued under this chapter, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the board of zoning appeals or by a court of competent jurisdiction, which the time fixed in this chapter, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor or be cited with a violation notice, punishable by a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for the former and a $75.00 administrative fee for the latter. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time. 
    Additionally, there is established herein a schedule of civil penalties for any violation of this chapter. Designation of a particular violation of this chapter for a civil penalty pursuant to this section shall be in lieu of criminal sanctions, and except for any violation resulting in injury to persons, such designation shall preclude the prosecution of a violation as a criminal misdemeanor. 
    The existence of a civil penalty shall not preclude action by the zoning administrator under the Code of Virginia, provision 4 of § 15.2-2286 or action by the governing body under § 15.2-2208. 
    This schedule of civil penalties shall be uniform for each type of specified violation, and the penalty for any one violation shall be: 
(1)  $100.00 for the initial summons, and 
(2)  $150.00 for each additional summons. 
    Each day during which the violation is found to have existed shall constitute a separate offense. However, specified violations arising from the same operative set of facts shall not be charged more frequently than once in any ten-day period, and a series of specified violations arising from the same operative set of facts shall not result in civil penalties which exceed a total of $3,000.00. 
    The zoning administrator or his deputy may issue a civil summons as provided by law for a scheduled violation. Any person summoned or issued a ticket for a scheduled violation may make an appearance in person or in writing by mail to the department of finance or the treasurer of the locality prior to the date fixed for trial in court. Any person so appearing may enter a waiver of trial, admit liability, and pay the civil penalty established for the offense charged. Such persons shall be informed of their right to stand trial and that a signature to an admission of liability will have the same force and effect as a judgment of court. 
    If a person charged with a scheduled violation does not elect to enter a waiver of trial and admit liability, the violation shall be tried in the general district court in the same manner and with the same right of appeal as provided for by law. In any trial for a scheduled violation authorized by this section, it shall be the burden of the locality to show the liability of the violator by a preponderance of the evidence. An admission of liability or finding of liability shall not be a criminal conviction for any purpose. 
    No provision herein shall be construed to allow the imposition of civil penalties (i) for activities related to land development or (ii) for violation of any provision of a local zoning ordinance relating to the posting of signs on public property or public rights-of-way. 
(b)  The application of the penalty described in subsection (a) of this section shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Code 1972, § 24-57; Ord. No. 03-47, § 1, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 09-18, 6-2-09) 
State Law reference- Penalties for violation, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-491(e). 
Sec. 90-6. - Division of city into districts. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the territory of the city is divided into districts as follows: 
R-1 residential district 
R-2 residential district 
R-3 residential district 
R-PRD planned residential development district 
R-3-MHS manufactured home/mobile home subdivision district 
DT downtown district 
C-1 commercial district 
C-2 commercial district 
I-1 industrial district 
I-2 industrial district 
(Code 1972, § 24-4; Ord. No. 03-50, § 1, 11-18-03) 
Sec. 90-7. - Boundaries and maps. 
(a)  The location and boundaries of the several districts created herein shall be established as shown on a map entitled, "City of Emporia Zoning Map," which map and all the notations, dimensions and designations shown thereon shall be as much a part of this chapter as if the same were fully described herein. 
(b)  The district boundaries shown on the zoning map are intended to follow lot lines, property lines, or the centerlines of streets or alleys as they exist on at the time of adoption of this chapter(September 3, 1991); except that where a district boundary obviously does not follow any such line, and is not defined by dimensions or other means, it shall be determined by scaling. 
(c)  Questions concerning the exact location of district boundary lines shall be determined by the board of zoning appeals in accordance with rules and regulations which it may adopt. Where a district boundary line shown on the map divides a lot which was in single ownership and of record on at the time of adoption of this chapter (September 3, 1991), or any amendment thereto, the board may authorize a variance in the line to include all of the lots in the same district, provided such a variance does not extend more than 50 feet. 
(d)  In case any territory is not included definitely within any of the districts aforesaid, such territory shall be deemed to be in the R-1 district until otherwise classified by amendment as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1972, § 24-5; Ord. No. 273-91, 9-3-91) 
Sec. 90-8. - Conformance with chapter provisions required. 
    Except as provided in this chapter for existing uses, no land, building, structure or premises shall be used, and no building or part thereof, or other structure, shall be erected, located, reconstructed, enlarged, converted, or altered, nor shall any parcel of land, with or without buildings, be subdivided, resubdivided, or reduced in any way, except in conformity with the regulations specified in this chapter for the district in which it is located. 
(Code 1972, § 24-6) 
Sec. 90-9. - Yards or spaces for other buildings. 
    No yard or other open space provided about any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building, and no yard or other open space on one lot shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for a building on any other lot. 
(Code 1972, § 24-7) 
Sec. 90-10. - Parking area, parking spaces or loading space. 
    No parking area, parking space or loading space which existed on April 4, 1975, or which subsequent thereto is provided for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall thereafter be relinquished or reduced in any manner below the requirements established by this chapter. 
(Code 1972, § 24-8) 
Sec. 90-11. - Continuation of existing uses and permits. 
    Any lawful use, building, or structure existing on April 4, 1975, or at the time of any amendment to this chapter may be continued, even though such use, building or structure may not conform with the provisions of this chapter for the district in which it is located. Such use, building, or structure shall be deemed a nonconforming use. A change in occupancy or ownership shall not affect such right to continue such use, building or structure. 
(Code 1972, § 24-9) 
Sec. 90-12. - Nonconforming structures and uses. 
(a)  Nonconforming structures. 
(1)  Where a lawful structure exists at the time of passage or amendment to this chapter, which structure could not be built under the terms of this chapter by reason of restrictions on area, bulk, lot coverage, height, yards, or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such structure may be continued so long as the structure is maintained in its then structural condition and is not enlarged or altered in any way which increases any nonconforming characteristic of the structure or nonconforming characteristic of its location on the lot. 
(2)  Should such nonconforming structure be moved for any reason for any distance on the same lot or to any other lot, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved. However, a nonconforming sign may be relocated on the same property, if such sign was moved due to highway, utility, or other construction for public purposes. 
(3)  The owner of any nonconforming structure which is damaged or destroyed by an accidental fire, natural disaster or other act of God, or any other accidental means may repair, rebuild, or replace any such structure to its original conforming condition as long as the structure is not enlarged or altered in any way which increases its nonconforming characteristic. The owner shall apply for a building permit and any work done to repair, rebuild, or replace such building shall be in compliance with the provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code and the city's floodplain zoning regulations. Unless such structure is repaired, rebuilt, or replaced within two years of the date of the accidental fire, natural disaster or other act of God, or other accidental means which directly caused its damage or destruction, such structure shall only be repaired, rebuilt, or replaced in accordance with the regulations for the zoning district in which it is located. However, if the nonconforming structure is in area under federal disaster declaration and the structure has been damaged or destroyed as a result of conditions that gave rise to the declaration, then the owner shall have an additional two years for the structure to be repaired, rebuilt, or replaced as otherwise provided in this subsection. For the purposes of this section, "act of God" shall include any natural disaster or phenomena including a hurricane, tornado, storm, flood, high water, wind-driven water, earthquake, or fire caused by lightening or wildfire. 
(b)  Nonconforming uses. 
(1)  Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment to this chapter, a lawful use exists of a structure, individually or in combination with another structure, which use is made no longer permissible under the terms of this chapter as enacted or amended, such use may be permitted so long as it is not abandoned for more than two years and so long as the structure in which such use is located is maintained in its then structural condition. Abandonment means the intentional stopped use of the property and that the property has been vacant for two consecutive years. Should a structure in which such nonconforming use is located be enlarged, extended, reconstructed, or structurally altered, except as otherwise permitted by the provisions of this article, the use of such a structure thereafter shall conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(2)  No nonconforming use shall be enlarged, intensified, increased, or extended to occupy a larger square footage of building or lot area than was occupied on the effective date of the adoption of, or amendment to, this chapter. Such intensification, increase, or extension shall include enlargement of the building or other structure, expansion of the use on the premises, or the erection of an additional principal or accessory structure associated with such nonconforming use on the property on which the nonconforming use is located. 
(3)  No nonconforming use shall be moved on the same lot or to any other lot which is not properly zoned to permit such use. 
(4)  Any use which replaces, in whole or part, a nonconforming use shall conform to the requirements of the district in which it is located and the nonconforming use shall not be resumed. 
(5)  Any nonconforming use may be resumed or restored after the structure in which the use is located is damaged or destroyed by an accidental fire, natural disaster or other act of God, or other accidental means. The owner shall apply for a building permit and any work done to repair, rebuild, or replace the structure in which such use is located shall be in compliance with the provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code and the city's floodplain zoning regulations. Unless such use is resumed, restored, or replaced within two years of the date of the accidental fire, natural disaster or other act of God, or other accidental means which directly caused its damage or destruction, such use shall only be restored or resumed in accordance with the regulations for the zoning district in which it is located. However, if the nonconforming use is in an area under a federal disaster declaration and the use has been damaged or destroyed as a direct result of conditions that gave rise to the declaration, then the owner shall have an additional two years for the use to be restored or resumed as otherwise provided in this subsection. For the purposes of this section, "act of God" shall include any natural disaster or phenomena including a hurricane, tornado, storm, flood, high water, wind-driven water, earthquake, or fire caused by lightening or wildfire. 
(Ord. No. 16-29, § 1, 11-15-16) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 16-29, § 1, adopted Nov. 15, 2016, repealed the former § 90-12 and enacted a new § 90-12 as set out herein. The former § 90-12 pertained to nonconforming uses; regulations and derived from Code of 1972, § 24-10(1)-(5), (7). 
Sec. 90-13. - Certificates of occupancy required. 
(a)  No building or other structure shall be erected, reconstructed, enlarged, moved or structurally altered without an appropriate permit therefor, and no structure shall be used, and the use of any land or building shall not be changed, without a certificate of occupancy therefor approved or issued by the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall in no case approve or grant a permit or certificate of occupancy for the construction, alteration, use or change of use of any building or land if the building or land as proposed to be constructed, altered or used would be in violation of this chapter. 
(b)  Every certificate of occupancy shall state that the building or the proposed use of a building or land complies with all provisions of law and of all city ordinances and regulations. No occupancy, change of occupancy, use or change of use of any land or building shall take place until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the zoning administrator. This provision shall include a new building, an existing building which has been altered, the use of vacant land, a change in the use of land or of a building or change in a nonconforming use. 
(c)  Such certificate shall be issued within ten days after a written request for the same has been made to the zoning administrator, provided it has been determined that such occupancy, use, erection or alteration of such building or land or part thereof has been completed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and other city ordinance provisions. 
(Code 1972, § 24-11) 
Sec. 90-14. - Fees. 
    Upon application of zoning requests as provided for in this chapter, there shall be paid a fee for each item in accordance with this section. Such fees shall be payable to the treasurer of the city and shall not be prorated or refunded. The applicant shall produce a receipt of proof of payment to the city planning and zoning department. At the time of installation of improvements, additional permit and inspection fees shall be as generally provided for and specified in other ordinances or resolutions of the city. The zoning fees shall be as follows: 
(1)  Zoning compliance review ..... $25.00 
(2)  Site plan review ..... 200.00 
+ $25.00/acre or portion thereof 
(3)  Conditional use permit/special exception request ..... 300.00 per 
(4)  Variance request ..... 300.00 per 
(5)  Telecommunications tower (conditional use) ..... 1,500.00 
(plus additional fee paid by applicant 
for review by private consultant 
if necessary for final approval) 
(6)  Co-location on telecommunications tower (conditional use) ..... 300.00 per 
(plus additional fee paid by applicant 
for review by private consultant 
if necessary for final approval) 
(7)  Amendment to conditional use ..... 300.00 
per amendment 
(8)  Renewal of conditional use ..... 300.00 per 
(9)  Request for private road name/sign ..... 100.00 per 
(10)  Text amendment request ..... 400.00 per 
(11)  Appeal ..... 300.00 
(12)  Rezoning request ..... 400.00 
+ $50.00/lot 
(13)  Amendment to proffered rezoning ..... 300.00 per 
(14)  Zoning letter ..... 50.00 
(15)  Vacation of easement, plat or right-of-way ..... 50.00 
(16)  Sign permit (zoning compliance) 
plus square footage in accordance with Sec. 14-39 ..... 25.00 
(17)  Erosion and sediment control plan ..... Reviewed by 
a certified 
plan review 
professional 
in accordance 
with Sec. 34-120(c) 
(Ord. No. 05-24, § 1, 6-21-04; Ord. No. 05-31, § 1, 6-28-05; Ord. No. 09-32, 6-16-09; Ord. No. 09-46, 7-21-09) 
Secs. 90-15-90-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPECIAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 90-41. - Uses. 
    Dwelling and apartment houses erected or altered on a lot in a district other than the district in which such building or structure for dwelling or apartment purposes is first permitted by this chapter, shall be subject to the regulations that are specified by this chapter for the district in which building or structure for dwelling or apartment purposes is first permitted. 
(Code 1972, § 24-12) 
Sec. 90-42. - Two-family dwellings in R-1 and R-2 districts. 
    In any R-1 or R-2 district any one-family residence building containing 16,000 cubic feet, exclusive of basement or garage area may be converted to provide for two families; provided, however, that, at the time of the effective date of Ordinance No. 73-75, 40 percent or more of the frontage on that side of a street between two intersecting streets is occupied by two-family or multiple dwellings. 
(Code 1972, § 24-13) 
Sec. 90-43. - Uses not specified. 
    Uses other than those specified in the various districts in this chapter, nay proposed use shall adhere to the provisions of section 90-256, Procedure. 
(Code 1972, § 24-14; Ord. No. 09-21, 6-2-09) 
Sec. 90-44. - Transitional uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted on any lot or lots in any R districts where the side of such lot abuts upon a lot in any C or I district, or is separated therefrom by an alley not over 24 feet in width; provided, however, that such transitional use does not extend more than 100 feet, not including the alley, from the boundary of the less restricted district which it adjoins: 
(1)  Off-street parking area for passenger vehicles only, provided no fee is charged for such off-street parking; and 
(2)  Professional office buildings for doctors and dentists, provided such building does not exceed four offices. 
(Code 1972, § 24-15) 
Sec. 90-45. - Height limitations. 
    The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to any penthouses or roof structures for the use of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans, or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the building, nor shall it apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas, domes, monuments, water towers, fire or parapet walls, skylights, steeples, roof signs, flagpoles, chimneys, smokestacks, radio or television towers, silos or similar structures which may be erected above the height limit. 
(Code 1972, § 24-16) 
Sec. 90-46. - Vision clearance. 
    On any corner lot in any district, there shall be no planting, structure, fences, shrubbery, or obstruction from vision permitted three feet higher than the curb or street level within that area between the setback lines as prescribed for the district at the intersection of the adjacent two street lines. 
(Code 1972, § 24-17) 
Sec. 90-47. - Reduced lot area. 
    No lot shall be so reduced in area that any required open space will be smaller than prescribed in the regulations for the district in which the lot is located. 
(Code 1972, § 24-18) 
Sec. 90-48. - Lot of record. 
(a)  If a lot of official record on 1972 is smaller than the minimum size (width, length, and area) specified for the district in which it is located, but compliance with the yard and other requirements of this chapter is met, the lot may be used without appeal. Any lot that has been annexed from Greensville County shall be considered a lot of record if no alteration has taken place since annexation. The provisions below regulate the construction of a structure on a lot of record: 
(1)  If lot of record has frontage on an improved right-of-way, construction of a structure shall be permitted. 
(2)  If a lot of record has frontage on an unimproved right-of-way, the property owner or developer must improve the unimproved right-of-way in accordance with Chapter 66, Subdivisions. 
(3)  If a lot of record is landlocked with no street frontage, proof of adequate access from an improved right-of-way only via an access easement shall be provided to the zoning administrator prior to approval of any construction. The city shall not be responsible for the maintenance or improvement of any private access easement agreement. 
(b)  If improvements are requested to any unimproved right of way, the procedure shall be initiated by the property owner(s) and shall be in accordance with applicable provisions of Chapter 62, Article 11, Streets and IV, Improvement of Request of the City Code. 
(Code 1972, § 24-19; Ord. No. 09-22, 6-2-09) 
Sec. 90-49. - Irregular building line. 
    Where a uniform front yard line between two intersecting streets does not exist, then the required front yard line shall be established by projecting a line between the two nearest buildings on each side of the proposed building, and the proposed building shall not project beyond such line; provided, however, that the nearest existing buildings shall be situated on lots located not further than 125 feet from the proposed building site. 
(Code 1972, § 24-20) 
Sec. 90-50. - Projections permitted into yards. 
    Steps or unenclosed porches not exceeding 24 square feet in area, cornices, eaves and window sills may project into any required yard, provided that such projection shall not be less than three feet from any lot line. Open, unenclosed fire escapes may extend or project four feet into any required side or rear yard. 
(Code 1972, § 24-21) 
Sec. 90-50.1. - Orientation of structures on lots in residential districts. 
    All main structures shall be positioned or oriented square to the street frontage serving the structure such that the primary entrance of the main structure is oriented to the same street frontage. For lots with an irregular shape, main structures shall be placed as approved by the zoning administrator in conformance with this section as is practically feasible, as well as all other requirements of this chapter. Accessory structures shall be placed square to the main structure as is practically feasible; however, doors may be placed as needed to serve the purpose of the accessory structure. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, an "irregular lot" shall mean a lot that is not rectangular or square. 
(Ord. No. 03-21, § 1, 5-20-03) 
Sec. 90-51. - Mobile home and trailer parking. 
    Except as provided in subsection 90-77(b), the parking or storage of a single wide manufactured home/mobile home, travel trailer or recreational vehicle in any district except in a manufactured home/mobile home park is hereby prohibited, except that one travel trailer or recreational vehicle may be parked or stored on any lot, provided that no living quarters shall be maintained within such travel trailer or recreational vehicle while such vehicle is parked or stored. It is further provided, however, that mobile vehicles may be placed on railroad right-of-way for the purpose of supplying temporary housing for personnel engaged in emergency repair work, subject to the approval of the zoning administrator and the health department, for a period not to exceed 30 days. 
(Code 1972, § 24-22; Ord. No. 14-08, 6-17-14) 
Sec. 90-52. - Screening. 
(a)  Screening shall be provided on the side and rear of properties devoted to a business use when such side or rear area is adjacent to an improved public street or adjacent to or across an alley from residential districts. Such screening shall be placed so as to screen such side or rear area from any such street. Fencing and screening of side areas shall not be placed any closer to the street than the primary building. The rear area of a property shall be the area behind the rear or back line of a building extended to the sidelines of the lot on which said building sits. If there is no building on a lot devoted to business use, then all screening and fencing shall not be closer to any street than the side, front or rear set back lines or existing building line, whichever is more restrictive, required by zoning ordinances of the city. 
(b)  Such screening shall consist of a continuous visual buffer of a minimum height of six feet. The buffer shall be a compact evergreen hedge or other foliage having the same effect as a compact evergreen hedge or shall be a combined fence or wall with shrubbery on the side toward residential property. Such hedge foliage, fence or wall shall be constructed so as to screen one hundred per cent of the business activity at the time of planting and/or installation. No such buffer shall be located as to interfere with traffic visibility required for reasons of safety. 
(c)  If the administrator finds that the outside storage of bulky waste, supplies, finished or semifinished products, potential public safety hazards or other unsightly materials would impede the use of or have an adverse impact on an adjacent property, then the administrator may require such materials to be partially or fully screened from view from the adjoining property. Acceptable screening materials include, but are not limited to: a solid masonry wall, a uniformly painted solid board fence, an evergreen hedge, fencing with slats, or other similar screening mechanism as approved by the administrator. 
(Ord. No. 98-16, 12-15-98; Ord. No. 09-23, 6-2-09) 
Sec. 90-52.1. - Fences, walls, hedges. 
    The height of fences, walls, and/or hedges shall be determined by the zoning district. All fences, walls, or hedges shall be regulated as follows: 
Residential Districts Front Yard Rear Yard Four feet maximum height Six feet maximum height  
    Barbed wire is prohibited within residential zoning districts. Rear yards are determined by the existing residential structure. All fences higher than four feet shall be located behind the front building wall/line. In case of corner lots, because there are two front yards and two side yards, a fence higher than four feet shall not be placed any closer to the right-of-way line than the front building line/wall. 
    Commercial districts: six feet maximum (no barbed wire, except under special provisions). 
    Industrial districts: eight feet or higher, not including barbed wire. 
(Ord. No. 99-10, 9-21-99) 
Sec. 90-53. - Sexually oriented businesses. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The following are provided as guidelines for the construction, interpretation and enforcement of this section: 
(1)  It is the purpose and intent of this section to regulate sexually oriented business establishments so as to protect and promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city and visitors thereto, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city. 
(2)  This section intends a balance of the right of the citizens of the city to maintain a decent moral society and, on the other hand, the right of individuals to express themselves freely in accordance with the guidelines of the Constitution of the United States and U.S. Supreme Court rulings pursuant thereto. 
(3)  This section is also intended to deter property uses and activities conducted thereon which, directly or indirectly, cause or would cause adverse effects on the stability of the immediate neighborhood surrounding the sexually oriented business. 
(4)  This section has neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. 
(5)  Similarly, it is not the purpose or intent of this section to restrict or deny lawful access by adults to sexually oriented materials nor to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented materials to their intended market. 
(6)  Similarly, it is not the purpose or intent of this section to impose judgment on the content or merits of any constitutionally protected form of speech or expression. 
(7)  Operators of sexually oriented businesses are also hereby generally charged with complying with a policy of "keep it indoors and under control". All operators bear first line answerability, directly or indirectly, for all uses of the premises and activities conducted thereon. 
(b)  Prohibited locations of any type of sexually oriented business. 
(1)  An operator of a sexually oriented business commits a violation if he/she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business in a zoning district which does not expressly permit that type of commercial use in said zoning district. 
(2)  In addition to being located in a proper zoning district, an operator commits a violation if he/she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of an existing: 
a.  Church; 
b.  School; 
c.  Public park; 
d.  Residentially zoned property; 
e.  Designated historical district; 
f.  Other sexually oriented business; 
g.  Child care businesses; 
h.  Government building; or 
i.  Hotel or motel. 
(3)  For the purpose of subparagraph (2) above, measurement of the 1,000-foot distance shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the property line of an existing church, school or sexually oriented business, or from the boundary line of a public park, residentially zoned property or designated historical district, to the nearest property line of the property sought to be used as a sexually oriented business. 
(4)  Also for the purposes of subparagraph (2) above, measurement of the 1,000-foot distance shall also include churches, schools, public parks, residentially zoned properties, or other sexually oriented businesses which are located in an adjoining city, township or rural land area and which are within the 1,000-foot distance of the nearest property line of the property sought to be used as a sexually oriented business within the City of Emporia. 
(5)  A person commits a violation if he/she causes or permits the establishment or operation of more than one (1) sexually oriented business on the same property, in the same building or structure, or any portion thereof. 
(6)  A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use after December 15, 1998, is not rendered a nonconforming use by the subsequent location of a church, school, public park, residentially zoned property or designated historical district within 1,000 feet of the sexually oriented business. 
(c)  Use regulations for all sexually oriented businesses. The application of the following regulations in this subsection (c) may be modified only by prior written approval of the zoning administrator to reasonably accommodate legitimate needs of a particular business to promote on-premises security and safety measures for the premises and the persons thereon. (Ex.: security personnel, security doors, money cages, storage rooms, limited access areas; etc.) Otherwise, the city's code enforcement personnel may issue citations for violations of the following regulations which occur on the premises of a sexually oriented business at any time the establishment is occupied or open for business: 
(1)  No increase of the floor area or modification in the internal structural configuration of a sexually oriented business shall be made beyond the area or configuration as shown in the floor plan as approved with the issuance of the specialized certificate of occupancy. The operator shall maintain a copy of the approved floor plan posted with the specialized certificate of occupancy in a conspicuous place within the premises. 
(2)  The operator of a sexually oriented business shall permit and cooperate with the appropriate city enforcement personnel to inspect the entire premises as well as all activity being conducted therein. 
(3)  Subject to reasonable accommodations for legitimate security measures, including approved internal surveillance video systems, the operator shall maintain the entire premises so as to permit walk-through inspections, without interference, by city enforcement personnel. 
(4)  The operator shall maintain the interior of the premises in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view into every area of the premises to which any customer is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. The operator shall ensure that the ability to view into any area where customers are allowed remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials. This regulation shall not apply to adult motels only. 
(5)  If the premises contain two (2) or more separate rooms, the operator shall maintain each room with at least one (1) wall or door equipped with clear windows or openings of at least three (3) feet in width and two (2) feet in height located no less than three (3) feet above the floor but no less than two (2) feet below the ceiling for viewing into the entire area and all activity therein. This regulation shall not apply to adult motels only. 
(6)  The operator shall maintain every portion of the premises where customers are permitted access equipped throughout and illuminated at all times with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient illumination to provide reasonably safe lighting conditions for patrons, employees or city enforcement personnel walking throughout the premises. 
(7)  During hours of darkness when a sexually oriented business is in operation, the operator shall maintain all parking and pedestrian areas of the premises equipped and illuminated by overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient illumination to provide reasonably safe lighting conditions for persons or vehicles traveling into, on and out of the property. Said lighting fixtures shall be directed onto the property as much as is possible so as to avoid being directed onto neighboring properties. 
(8)  The operator shall not utilize or allow restrooms or employee dressing rooms for sexually oriented business purposes, video equipment or for the offering of any sexually oriented merchandise to customers. 
(9)  The operator shall maintain at least one (1) conspicuous sign at each public entrance, in accordance with the city's sign codes, of a size of at least eighteen (18) inches in height and twenty-four (24) inches in width, easily visible and legible to all persons prior to entry into the establishment, which contains a statement to the effect: 
"THIS IS A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT WHICH REGULARLY FEATURES [description of the type of activity or merchandise as permitted herein]. IF NUDITY OR ACTIVITY OR A SEXUAL NATURE OFFENDS YOU, DO NOT COME IN. NO PERSON UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE ALLOWED ENTRY" [if alcoholic beverages are sold on the premises] -"NO PERSON UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE ALLOWED ENTRY" 
(10)  A conditional use permit is required to be approved by the planning and zoning commission prior to opening a business only within C-2 district. 
(d)  Effective date and grace period. All regulations set forth in this section shall become effective immediately. 
(e)  Enforcement and penalties. 
(1)  City code enforcement personnel may issue citations for violations of this section. 
(2)  Each day that a violation is permitted or continues to exist shall constitute a separate violation. 
(3)  When a citation is issued, the person to whom the citation was issued shall within ten (10) days make appropriate arrangements in the city's municipal courts to either plead guilty, plead no contest or request a docket setting. 
(4)  Any person who is found guilty of a violation under this ordinance shall be fined an amount not to exceed $500.00 for each violation. 
(f)  Definitions. The following terms shall, for the purposes of this section, have the meanings indicated as follows: The following terms are not necessarily mutually exclusive as one (1) sexually oriented business operation may provide more than one (1) form of activity, entertainment or merchandise. 
(1)  "Sexually oriented businesses" which are subject to the regulations shall mean and include any commercial venture whose operations include: 
a.  The providing, featuring or offering of employees or entertainment personnel who appear on the premises while in a state of nudity or simulated nudity and provide live performances or entertainment for customers; or 
b.  As a "principal business operation" [thirty-five (35) percent or more] as defined herein, provides, features or offers non-live, sexually-explicit entertainment, materials, or items for sale or rental to customers; or provides or offers a service or exhibition of materials or items which are intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to its customers, said materials or items being distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on subject matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities "and/or" specified anatomical areas"; and 
c.  Shall include but is not limited to any form of sexually oriented business, adult arcade, adult bath, adult bookstore, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult entertainment cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, nude modeling business, massage parlor, nude modeling studio, adult out-call establishment, escort agencies, sexually oriented encounter center, or other business establishment conducting sexually oriented activity as defined or regulated herein. 
(2)  The term "sexually oriented business" shall not be construed to regulate: 
a.  An otherwise lawfully operating retail business which does not offer or feature sexually explicit merchandise, material or items for sale or rental to customers as "principal business operation" [thirty-five (35) per cent or less] and does not offer or feature any form of live sexually oriented entertainment; 
b.  Any clothing business offering wearing apparel for sale to customers but does not exhibit merchandise on live models; 
c.  A bar, nightclub or lounge or other non-sexually oriented business that occasionally promotes a swimsuit or similar contest in which the contestants do not appear "nude" or in "a state of nudity"; 
d.  Any medical practice operated by or employing licensed psychologists, physicians, psychiatrists, registered nurses, chiropractors, or athletic trainers engaged in practicing the healing arts; or 
e.  Any educational courses conducted at a proprietary school licensed by the State of Virginia, or conducted by a private college or university which operates educational programs in which credits are transferrable to a junior college, college or university licensed by the State of Virginia; and where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three (3) days in advance of the class and where no more than one (1) nude model appears before the class at any one (1) time. 
(3)  "Adult arcade" means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one (1) time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters exhibiting, depicting or describing "specific sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" as defined herein. 
(4)  "Adult bookstore" and "adult video store" shall mean a commercial establishment which offers for sale or rental any one (1) or more of the following: 
a.  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters exhibiting, depicting or describing "specific sexual activities" or "specific anatomical areas"; or 
b.  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities" or "simulated nudity." This does not include items used for conception control or for protection from sexually transmitted diseases. 
(5)  "Adult entertainment cabaret" means a nightclub, bar, lounge, or similar commercial establishment which provides or features to customers live performances by employees or entertainment personnel which are distinguished or characterized by any one (1) or more of the following: 
a.  An emphasis on the exposure of "specific anatomical areas"; or 
b.  An emphasis on "specific sexual activities"; or 
c.  An emphasis on "nudity", "state of nudity" or "simulated nudity"; or 
d.  A combination of any of the above. 
(6)  "Adult motel" means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which rents or otherwise permits a room to be occupied in exchange for any form of consideration, and also: 
a.  Offers accommodations to the tenant or occupier of the room for any television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters exhibiting, depicting or describing "specific sexual activities" and/or "specific anatomical areas"; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way or otherwise advertises the availability of this type of adult accommodations; or 
b.  Offers a sleeping room(s) for rent for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours; or 
c.  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours. 
d.  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two (2) or more times in less than a ten (10) hour period creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is operated as an adult motel. 
(7)  "Adult motion picture theater" means a commercial establishment which regularly features non-live performances or entertainment such as films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters exhibiting, depicting or describing "specific sexual activities" and/or "specific anatomical areas". 
(8)  "Adult theater" means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity, or features live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by an emphasis on "specific sexual activities". 
(9)  "Church" means a building in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship and activities intended primarily for purposes connected with such worship or for propagating a particular form of religious belief. 
(10)  "City enforcement personnel" means an authorized representative of any of the following city departments or divisions: 
a.  City manager's office; 
b.  Health department; 
c.  Fire department; or 
d.  Police department. 
(11)  "Customer" means any person who: 
a.  Enters the premises and patronizes a sexually oriented business, whether or not in exchange for the payment of an admission fee or any other form of consideration, gratuity or as a guest of a member; or 
b.  Purchases, rents, otherwise partakes of any sexually oriented merchandise, goods, entertainment or other services while on the premises; 
(12)  "Employee" means any person on the premises of a sexually oriented business who receives any form of compensation, including tips or gratuities, from the operator, manager, customers, other employees or entertainment personnel, and in exchange therefore: 
a.  Renders any work, service, performance or exhibition whatsoever, directly or indirectly, to or for a customer; or 
b.  Renders any other support service whatsoever, directly or indirectly, for or on behalf of the furtherance of the business operations; and 
c.  Shall include but is not necessarily limited to bartenders, cashiers, dancers, disc jockeys, escorts, hosts, hostesses, models, masseurs, out call persons, strippers, models, waiters, waitresses, or other persons working on or about the premises. 
(13)  Sexually oriented "entertainment" means any variety of live or non-live performances or exhibitions which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters exhibit, depicting or engaging in "specified sexual activities" or while exposing "specified anatomical areas", or which provides sexual gratification or sexual stimulation to customers. 
(14)  "Entertainment personnel" means any person, including persons traditionally regarded as "independent contractors", who receives any form of compensation, including tips or gratuities, from the operator, customers, employees or other entertainment personnel and in exchange therefore: 
a.  Renders any live entertainment, service, performance or exhibition whatsoever, directly or indirectly, to or for a customer or the furtherance of the business operation; and 
b.  Shall include but is not necessarily limited to bartenders, cashiers, dancers, disc jockeys, escorts, hosts, hostesses, models, masseurs, out call persons, strippers, models, waiters, waitresses, or other persons working on or about the premises. 
(15)  "Massage" means any method by which a person utilizes his or her hands, feet or an instrument for treating the superficial parts of a customer's body for medical, hygienic, exercise, entertainment, relaxation, or stimulation purposes by rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping, pounding or vibrating. 
(16)  "Nude modeling business" means any establishment where an employee or entertainment personnel performs a massage or "specified sexual activities" while appearing in a "state of nudity", "simulated nudity" or while displaying "specified anatomical areas", and is also provided or allowed to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted to customers. 
(17)  "Nude modeling studio" means any establishment where an employee or entertainment personnel appears in a "state of nudity", "simulated nudity" or displays "specified anatomical areas", and is also provided or allowed to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted to customers. 
(18)  "Nudity" or "a state of nudity" means appearing while any of the following portions of the human body are less than completely and opaquely covered: 
a.  Genitals, whether or not in a state of sexual arousal; or 
b.  Pubic region or pubic hair; or 
c.  Buttock(s); or 
d.  The portions of the female breast(s) beginning from a point immediately above the top of the areola and continuing downward to the lowest portion of the breast(s); or 
e.  Any combination of the above. 
(19)  "Operated" or "caused to be operated" means to cause to function or to put or keep in operation. 
(20)  "Operator" means: 
a.  The person(s) in whose name a valid Specialized Certificate of Occupancy has been issued for a sexually oriented business pursuant to section 90-13 above; or 
b.  The person(s) in whose name a Specialized Certificate would be required in order to lawfully operate a sexually oriented business pursuant to Section 90-13 above; or 
c.  The person(s) who operates or causes to be operated any form of sexually oriented business which is subject to regulation by Section 90-53, Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance. 
(21)  "Person" means any individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
(22)  "Public park" means any land area dedicated to and/or maintained by the city for traditional park-like recreational purposes, but shall not include privately-owned amusement parks. 
(23)  "Principal business operation" for the purposes of determining whether a business is subject to regulation, shall mean and include any non-live, sexually oriented retail sale or rental business activity as defined herein for which amounts to thirty-five (35) per cent or more of the total business operation at a particular location. The thirty-five (35) per cent criteria may be determined by percentages of floor space utilized, inventory of items for sale or rental, display areas, presentation time of entertainment or performances, or gross revenue of the business as measured over any continuous ninety (90) day period. However, the thirty-five (35) per cent criteria shall not apply to any sexually oriented business featuring or offering any form of live performances, entertainment, modeling or other live activity, as all such activity is subject to regulation as a "sexually oriented business". 
(24)  "Regularly" means offering, featuring, promoting or advertising a happening, occurrence or activity on a recurring basis or at fixed intervals, or as a customary and regular aspect of the business. 
(25)  "Rent" or "subrent" means the act of permitting a room or other portion of the premises to be occupied in exchange for any form of consideration. 
(26)  "Residentially zoned property" means any residentially zoned district as defined elsewhere in this Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance of the City of Emporia. 
(27)  "School" means and includes any of the following: 
a.  Public and private, primary and secondary educational facilities providing education up through and including the twelfth (12) grade level; and 
b.  Licensed day care centers, meaning a facility licensed by the State of Virginia or by the City of Emporia that provides care, training, education, custody, treatment or supervision for more than six (6) children under fourteen (14) years of age, and for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day. 
(28)  "Sexually oriented encounter center" means a commercial enterprise that, for any form of consideration or prize, offers physical activities, contact, wrestling or tumbling between male and female persons, or between persons of the same sex, when one (1) or more of the persons is in a "state of nudity" or "simulated nudity" and the activity is intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to its customers. 
(29)  "Simulated nudity" means a state of dress in which any artificial device of covering is worn on a person and exposed to view so as to simulate an actual "state of nudity". 
(30)  "Specified anatomical areas" means the following portions of the human body: 
a.  Genitals whether or not in a state of sexual arousal; 
b.  Pubic region or pubic hair; 
c.  Buttock(s); 
d.  The portions of the female breast(s) beginning from point immediately above the top of the areola and continuing downward to the lowest portion of the breast(s); or 
e.  Any combination of the above. 
(31)  "Specified sexual activities" means and includes one or more of the following: 
a.  The fondling, massaging or other erotic touching or stimulation of "specified anatomical areas" or of an erogenous zone; 
b.  Normal or perverted sexual activity, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
c.  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
d.  Excretory functions as part of or in conjunction with any of the activities above. 
(Ord. No. 98-17, 12-15-98) 
Sec. 90-54. - Compatibility requirements. 
    Any development in the city shall be designed to promote harmonious relationships with surrounding adjacent and nearby properties, developed and undeveloped, and to this end may employ such design techniques as may be appropriate to a particular case, including location of permitted elements, orientation, spacing and set back of buildings, maintenance of natural vegetation, location of access points, size and location of signs, open spaces, and parking areas, grading, landscaping and servicing. 
(Ord. No. 09-23, 6-2-09) 
Sec. 90-55. - Conditional uses. 
    City council (herein after "council") shall hear and decide applications for such conditional uses as are authorized in this section, including the specific exceptions listed in this subsection and others authorized elsewhere in this chapter. In considering an application for a conditional use, council shall give due regard to the recommendation offered by the planning commission, the nature and condition of all adjacent uses and structures, and the probable effect upon them of the proposed use. It shall also take into account the special characteristics, design, location, construction, method of operation, effect on traffic conditions, or any other aspects of the particular use or structure, that may be proposed by the applicant. If it should find, after the hearing, that the proposed establishment or use will not adversely affect the health, safety or welfare of persons residing or working on the premises or in the neighborhood, will not unreasonably impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, nor increase congestion in the streets, nor increase public danger from fire or otherwise unreasonably affect public safety, nor impair the character of the district or adjacent districts, nor be incompatible with the general plans and objectives of the official land use plan of the city, nor be likely to reduce or impair the value of buildings or property in surrounding areas, but that such establishment or use will be in substantial accordance with the general purpose and objectives of this chapter, council shall grant the conditional use and authorize the issuance of a conditional use permit. In those instances where council finds that the proposed use may be likely to have an adverse effect as described in this subsection, council shall determine whether such effect can be avoided by the imposition of any special requirements or conditions with respect to location, design, construction, equipment, maintenance or operation, in addition to those expressly stipulated in this chanter for the particular class of use. If such determination is in the affirmative, council shall impose such requirements or conditions, and if these are accented by the applicant, council shall authorize the issuance of the conditional use permit; otherwise the permit shall be denied. The council may require satisfactory evidence and guarantee or bond that the conditions stipulated will be and will continue to be complied with. Any conditional use permit may be authorized and issued for either a limited or an indefinite period of time and shall be revocable by council at any time for failure to adhere to the applicable conditions. Before revoking any such permit, however, council shall afford the permit holder an opportunity to be heard, giving at least five days' written notice of the time and place of such hearing, served as prescribed by law. Construction or operation shall be commenced within one year of the date of issuance of a conditional use permit or it shall become void. In addition to permitting the conditional uses authorized elsewhere in this chapter, the council shall have the power to permit the following: 
(1)  Temporary uses and structures, in any district, for a purpose that does not conform to the regulations prescribed by this chapter for the district in which located; provided however, that such uses be of a temporary nature and do not involve the erection of substantial buildings. Such use or structure shall be authorized by the issuance of a temporary and revocable permit for not more than a 24-month period, subject to such conditions as will safeguard the public health, safety and welfare. 
(2)  Public buildings and uses owned or operated by any public agency, and public service buildings and uses owned or operated by any public utility company, (except any facilities for construction or repair, or for the service or storage of utility materials or equipment), in any district where reasonably necessary in the public interest, provided the construction or use shall be such as to adequately safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the occupants of adjacent property, shall not unreasonably impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, shall not increase congestion in the streets and shall not increase public danger from fire or otherwise affect public safety. 
(3)  Nursery schools, child care centers, kindergartens, day nurseries, day care centers or any other use, however designated which is operated for the purpose of providing training, guidance, education, or care for four or more children under six years of age, separated from their parents or guardians during any part of the day other than from 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m., and serving primarily the children residing in the neighborhood; provided, however, that any play areas shall be fenced where necessary to protect adjacent property and that before such permit shall be granted, the council shall carefully consider the factors set out in subsection (4) of this section and any applicable state and federal laws and regulations. 
(4)  Sanitary landfill refuse disposal areas and sewage treatment plants. 
(5)  The council may impose such conditions relating to the use for which a permit is granted as it may deem necessary in the public interest including limiting the duration of a permit, and may require a guarantee or bond to ensure that the conditions imposed are being and will continue to be complied with. 
(6)  No conditional use may be granted except after notice and hearing as provided by state law. 
(7)  The council may revoke a conditional use if it determines that there has not been compliance with the terms or conditions of the permit. No conditional use may be revoked except after notice and hearing as provided by state law. 
(Ord. No. 10-4, 1-19-10) 
Secs. 90-56-90-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DISTRICT REGULATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Heavy truck parking in residential zones, § 74-117. 

Sec. 90-71. - R-1 residential district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. R-1 districts shall be quiet, low density residential areas plus certain open spaces where similar residential development appears likely to occur. Regulations for this district are designed to stabilize and protect the essential characteristics of the district, to promote and encourage a suitable environment for family life and to prohibit all activities of a commercial nature. To these ends, development shall be limited to relatively low concentration, and uses are limited basically to single unit dwellings providing homes for the residents plus certain additional uses as schools, parks, and churches, and certain public facilities that serve the residents of the district. 
(b)  Uses permitted. Uses permitted in an R-1 residential district are as follows: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Churches, schools, parish houses and Sunday schools. 
(3)  Parks and playgrounds. 
(4)  Home occupations. 
(5)  Gardens, greenhouses, and nurseries for propagation and culture only with no sales facilities. 
(6)  Public utilities with conditional use permits. 
(7)  Bed and breakfast house with conditional use permit. 
(8)  Unlicensed family day homes. 
(9)  Licensed family day homes with conditional use permits. 
(c)  Height regulations. Buildings in the R-1 residential district may not be erected more than 35 feet in height. 
(d)  Area regulations. The minimum lot area for permitted uses in the R-1 district shall be 8,000 square feet. 
(e)  Lot coverage. Buildings, including accessory uses in the R-1 district, shall not cover more than 30 percent of the area of the lot. 
(f)  Setback regulations. The front setback line in the R-1 district shall be located 25 feet from any street right-of-way. 
(g)  Width regulations. The minimum lot width at the setback line in the R-1 district shall be 75 feet. 
(h)  Yard regulations. Yard regulations in an R-1 district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Side. The minimum total width of the side yards for each main structure shall be 20 feet, with no one side yard being less than ten feet. 
(2)  Rear. Each main structure shall have a minimum rear yard of 25 feet. 
(i)  Parking. Off-street parking in an R-1 district shall be provided as specified in this chapter. 
(j)  Signs. Signs in an R-1 district may be erected as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1972, § 24-23; Ord. No. 97-9, 9-2-97; Ord. No. 99-10, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 18-01, 1-16-18) 
Sec. 90-72. - R-2 residential district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. R-2 districts shall be composed of quiet, residential areas plus certain open areas where similar residential development appears likely to occur. The regulations of this R-2 district are designed to stabilize and protect the essential characteristics of the R-2 district, to promote and encourage a suitable environment for family life, and to prohibit all activities of a commercial nature. Development shall be limited to single unit dwellings, providing homes for the residents plus certain additional uses such as schools, parks, churches, and certain public facilities. 
(b)  Uses permitted. Uses permitted in an R-2 residential district are as follows: 
(1)  All uses permitted in R-1 districts. 
(2)  Libraries and museums. 
(3)  Nonpublic clubs, lodges (except those of which the chief activities are customarily carried on as a business), subject to approval by the planning commission. 
(4)  Bed and breakfast houses with a conditional use permit. 
(c)  Height regulations. Buildings in an R-2 district may not be erected more than 35 feet in height. 
(d)  Area regulations. The minimum lot area in an R-2 district for single-family dwellings shall be 6,000 square feet. 
(e)  Lot coverage. Buildings in an R-2 district, including accessory uses, shall not cover more than 35 percent of the lot area. 
(f)  Setback regulations. The front setback line in an R-2 district shall be located 25 feet from any street right-of-way. 
(g)  Width regulations: The minimum lot width at the setback line in an R-2 district shall be 60 feet. 
(h)  Yard regulations. Yard regulations in an R-2 district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Side. The minimum total width of the side yards for each main structure shall be 15 feet, with no one side yard being less than five feet. 
(2)  Rear. Each main structure shall have a minimum rear yard of 25 feet or more. 
(i)  Parking. Off-street parking space in an R-2 district shall be provided as specified in this chapter. 
(j)  Signs. Signs in an R-2 district may be erected as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1972, § 24-24; Ord. No. 99-10, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 18-01, 1-16-18) 
Sec. 90-73. - R-3 residential district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. R-3 districts shall be composed of certain medium to high concentrations of residential uses ordinarily located between residential and commercial areas, plus certain open areas where similar development appears likely to occur. The regulations for this R-3 district are designed to stabilize and protect the essential characteristics of the district, to promote and encourage, insofar as compatible with the intensity of land use, a suitable environment for family life composed of an adult population with children, and to permit certain professional uses of a character unlikely to develop general concentration of traffic and crowds of customers. To these ends, retail activity shall be limited and this district shall be protected against encroachment of commercial or industrial uses. All residential types of structures for both permanent and transient occupancy are permitted. This R-3 residential district is not completely residential as it includes public and semipublic and other related uses. However, it is basically residential in character and, as such, shall not be spotted with commercial and industrial uses. 
(b)  Uses permitted. Permitted uses in an R-3 residential district are as follows: 
(1)  All uses permitted in R-1 and R-2 districts. 
(2)  Group homes with conditional use permit. 
(3)  Two-family dwellings. 
(4)  Multiple-family dwellings. 
(5)  Multisectional manufactured home/mobile home with conditional use permit. 
(6)  Tourist homes. 
(7)  Bed and breakfast house. 
(8)  Roominghouses and boardinghouses. 
(9)  Doctors' offices and other professional offices. 
(10)  Nonpublic clubs, lodges (except those of which the chief activities are customarily carried on as a business), subject to approval by the planning commission. 
(11)  Hospitals. 
(c)  Height regulations. Buildings in the R-3 district may not be erected more than 45 feet in height. 
(d)  Area regulations. Area regulations in the R-3 district are as follows: Each single-family dwelling lot shall have a minimum width of 60 feet and a minimum area of 6,000 square feet; each two-family dwelling lot shall have a minimum width of 75 feet and a minimum area of 7,000 square feet; each multiple-family dwelling lot shall have a minimum width of 75 feet and a minimum area of 10,500 square feet. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit for two-family and multiple-family dwellings, including resident employee's dwelling unit, shall be as follows: 
No. of Bedrooms Lot Area Required/Dwelling Unit (square feet) 1 3,500 2 4,000 3 4,500 4 5,000  
(e)  Lot coverage. Buildings, including accessory buildings, in an R-3 district shall not cover more than 40 percent of the lot. 
(f)  Setback regulations. The front setback line in an R-3 district shall be located 25 feet from any street right-of-way. 
(g)  Width regulations. The lot width at the setback line in an R-3 district shall be 60 feet for single-family dwellings, 75 feet for two-family dwellings, -and 75 feet for multiple-family dwellings. 
(h)  Yard regulations. Yard regulations in an R-3 district are as follows: 
(1)  Side. The minimum total width of the side yards for each main structure shall be 15 feet, with no one side yard being less than five feet. 
(2)  Rear. Each main structure shall have a rear yard of 25 feet or more. 
(i)  Parking. Off-street parking space in an R-3 district shall be provided as specified in article V of this chapter. 
(j)  Signs. Signs in an R-3 district may be erected as provided in article V of this chapter. 
(Code 1972, § 24-25; Ord. No. 99-10, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 01-20, 10-2-01; Ord. No. 10-5, 1-19-10; Ord. No. 18-01, 1-16-18; Ord. No. 18-11, 4-17-18) 
Sec. 90-74. - R-PRD planned residential development district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. R-PRD districts shall be designed and developed in accordance with a master plan of cluster-type communities under one ownership or control. Within such communities, the location of all improvements shall be controlled in such a manner as to permit a variety of housing accommodations in an orderly relationship to one another, with the greatest amount of open area and the least disturbance to natural features. A planned residential development may include light commercial facilities to the extent necessary to serve the needs of the particular planned residential development. 
(b)  Uses permitted. Permitted uses in an R-PRD district are as follows: 
(1)  All uses permitted in R-1 and R-2 districts. 
(2)  Multiple-family dwellings. 
(3)  Child care center or family day care home. 
(4)  Neighborhood commercial uses intended to serve the needs of the residents of the planned residential development (R-PRD), if the size of development is ten acres or more. Not more than five percent of the gross area of the R-PRD project shall be devoted to commercial uses. 
(5)  Recreational uses, including clubhouses, golf courses, swimming pools, tennis courts, and similar recreational improvements and facilities. 
(6)  Off-street parking as required in section 90-146. 
(7)  Signs in accordance with section 90-149. 
(c)  Performance criteria. Performance criteria in an R-PRD district are as follows: 
(1)  Height regulations. All structures in the R-PRD district may not be erected more than 35 feet in height without prior approval of the city planning commission. 
(2)  Area regulations. The minimum permitted size of any R-PRD district shall be five contiguous acres. 
(3)  Density. The permitted density in dwelling units per gross acre in an R-PRD district shall not be more than the following: 
District Dwelling Units 
Per Gross Acre R-1  4 R-2  6 R-3 10  
(4)  Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size of a single-family dwelling lot in an R-PRD district may not be less than 4,000 square feet. A diversification of lot sizes is encouraged. Lot widths may be varied to allow for a variety of structural design. It is also recommended that setbacks be varied. 
(5)  Buffer space. Buffer space along the perimeter of an R-PRD planned residential development district shall be in substantial compliance with yard and setback standards applicable in other zoning districts in which comparable land uses are commonly found. The planning commission may approve less buffer space if the perimeter contains physical or natural barriers. 
(6)  Building location. The location of buildings in an R-PRD district in relation to each other and to streets and shall provide: 
a.  Adequate light and ventilation to protect the health of the occupants and users thereof. 
b.  Necessary access for fire equipment and other emergency vehicles. 
c.  A reasonable degree of privacy for the residents and occupants of the development. 
d.  Transitional yard. Whenever any nonresidential use is established in this R-PRD district on a lot shown or proposed within the site plan which adjoins any other lot, shown or proposed to be residentially developed within the site plan within the R-PRD planned residential development district, a transitional yard shall be provided on such lot by the nonresidential use along such common boundary to a depth of ten feet, and screening shall be provided within such yard which shall be sufficient to insulate visually the nonresidential use from the residential property. Such transitional yard shall be landscaped and shall not contain any structures or any parking lot or driveway. 
(d)  Required open space. Required open space in an R-PRD district shall be as follows: 
(1)  The required open space shall not be less than 25 percent of the total gross area of the R-PRD district. 
(2)  The required developed recreational space shall not be less than ten percent of the total gross area of the R-PRD district. 
(3)  Open space shall be defined for the purpose of this section as the total land and water within the boundaries of a R-PRD district designed and intended for use and enjoyment as open areas, and not improved with a building, structure, street, road parking area, or any type of sidewalk except for recreational structures. The open space includes developed recreational space, and shall be accessible and available to all occupants of dwelling units for whose use the space is intended. 
(4)  Developed recreational space shall be defined for the purpose of this article as that portion of the open space within the boundaries of the R-PRD district which is improved for recreational purposes. Such improvements may include, but shall not be limited to, pedestrian ways, bicycle paths, playlots and playgrounds, tennis courts, and swimming and boating areas. 
(5)  All open space, including developed open space in an R-PRD district, shall be specifically included in the development schedule and be constructed and fully improved by the developer at an equivalent or greater rate than the construction of residential structures. 
(e)  Management of open space. Management of open space in an R-PRD district shall be as follows: 
(1)  There shall be established a nonprofit association, corporation, trust, or foundation of all individuals or corporations owning residential property within the planned development to insure the maintenance of open spaces. 
(2)  When the open space is to be maintained through a nonprofit association, corporation, trust or foundation, such organization shall conform to the following requirements: 
a.  The developer must establish the organization prior to the sale of any lots. 
b.  The membership in the organization shall be mandatory for all residential property owners, present or future, within the planned community, and such organization shall not discriminate in its members or shareholders. 
c.  The organization shall manage all open space and recreational and cultural facilities; shall provide for the maintenance, and any other land within the planned community; and shall secure adequate liability insurance on the land. 
d.  The organization shall conform to the condominium law of the state, as amended. 
(f)  Utility requirements. Within an R-PRD district, all utilities, including telephone, television cable and electrical systems, shall be installed under the ground. Appurtenances to these systems which require aboveground installations must be effectively screened. 
(g)  Procedure for establishing a planned residential development district. The procedure for establishing an R-PRD district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Before submitting an application for an R-PRD planned residential development district, an applicant at his option may confer with the planning commission to obtain information and guidance before entering into binding commitments or incurring substantial expense in the preparation of plans, surveys and other data. 
(2)  Applications for an R-PRD planned residential development district shall be submitted as for other amendments under section 90-256. Material submitted with the application or on subsequent request by the planning commission shall include all plans, maps, studies and reports which may reasonably be required to make the determinations called for in the particular case, with five copies for necessary referrals and records. More specifically, all of the following shall be required: 
a.  Preliminary development plan The preliminary development plan for an R-PRD district shall be clearly drawn to a scale as specified below and shall show the following: 
1.  The proposed title of the project and the name of the engineer, architect or landscape architect, and the developer. 
2.  The north point, scale and date. The scale of the development plan shall be not more than 100 feet to one inch for projects containing five to 100 acres; for projects containing more than 100 acres, the scale shall be not more than 200 feet to one inch. 
3.  Existing zoning and zoning district boundaries. 
4.  The boundaries of the property involved, county or municipal boundaries, the general location of all existing easements, and property lines, existing streets, buildings or waterways, major tree masses and other existing physical features in or adjoining the project. 
5.  Topography of the project area with contour intervals of five feet or less, unless waived by the planning commission as clearly unnecessary to a review of the project or proposal. 
6.  The general location of proposed streets, alleys, driveways, curb cuts, entrances and exits, loading areas, including the number of parking and loading spaces. 
7.  The general location of proposed lots, setback lines and easements and proposed reservations for common open spaces and other appropriate uses. 
8.  Location with respect to each other and to lot lines and approximate height of all proposed buildings and structures. The locations shall be drawn to scale but full dimensioning is not required in the preliminary development plan. 
9.  Preliminary plans and evaluation of the several dwelling types and other buildings, as may be necessary. 
10.  A tabulation of the total number of gross acres in the project, and the percentage thereof proposed to be devoted to the several dwelling types, other nonresidential uses, off-street parking, streets, open space and other reservations. 
11.  A tabulation of the total number of dwelling units of various types in the project and the overall project density in dwelling units per gross acre. 
12.  The project development schedule indicating: 
i.  The approximate date when construction of the development can be expected to begin. 
ii.  The stages in which the development will be constructed and the approximate date when construction of each stage can be expected to begin. 
iii.  The approximate date when the development will be completed. 
The planning commission may establish additional requirements for a preliminary development plan, and in special cases, may waive a particular requirement if, in its opinion, the inclusion of that requirement is not essential to a proposed decision on the project. 
b.  Final development plan. The final development plan for an R-PRD district shall show all of the features required on the preliminary plan as well as the following: 
1.  The location and sizes of sanitary and storm sewers, water mains, culverts and other underground structures, existing and planned, in or near the project. 
2.  The location of outdoor lighting systems, storm drainage, sanitary and water facilities. 
3.  The location, character, size, height and orientation of proposed signs. 
4.  The proposed plans for erosion and sedimentation control during and after construction. 
The final development plan of an R-PRD district shall show all of the features required with sufficient accurate dimensions and construction specifications to support the issuance of building permits. 
(h)  Approval of final development plan. After the approval of the preliminary development plan and the lands are rezoned to R-PRD district status, no building permit shall be issued in such R-PRD district unless and until the planning commission and city council shall have approved the final development plan and reports for the development as a whole or stages deemed satisfactory in relation to total development. No structure or use other than as indicated in the approved preliminary development plan and reports shall be permitted. Upon approval of the final development plan and reports by the planning commission and city council, building permits shall be issued in the same manner as for building permits generally, provided that any requirements concerning the order or location in which building permits are to be issued in the particular R-PRD district shall be observed. Final plans and reports approved shall be binding on the applicant and any successors in interest so long as R-PRD zoning applies to the land except under the provisions of subsection (i) of this section. 
(i)  Expiration and extension of approval period. The zoning permit for an R-PRD planned residential development district shall be for a period not to exceed two years to allow for the preparation of a final development plan and the development of the project. If no construction has begun within two years after the zoning permit is granted, the planning commission shall review the circumstances for delay of a particular project and make a corresponding recommendation to city council to either extend or void the zoning permit. No zoning amendment passed during the time period granted for the zoning permit shall in any way affect the terms under which approval of the R-PRD planned residential development district was granted. 
(Code 1972, § 24-25.1) 
State Law reference- Condominium Act, Code of Virginia, § 55-79.39 et seq. 
Sec. 90-75. - R-3-MHS manufactured home/mobile home subdivision district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The city planning commission may, subject to statutory requirements, permit, in accordance with the provisions in this section the development of single-family residential manufactured home/mobile home communities (R-3-MHS districts) within previously established R-3 districts. 
(b)  Uses permitted. Permitted uses in an R-3-MHS district are as follows: 
(1)  All uses permitted in R-1 and R-2 districts. 
(2)  Single-wide and multisectional manufactured homes/mobile homes. 
(c)  Height regulations. Buildings in an R-3-MHS district may not be erected more than 35 feet in height without prior approval of the city planning commission. 
(d)  Area regulations. The minimum lot area for single-family dwellings in an R-3-MHS district shall be 4,500 square feet in area. 
(e)  Lot coverage. Buildings, including accessory buildings in an R-3-MHS district, shall not cover more than 40 percent of the lot. 
(f)  Setback regulations. The front setback line in an R-3-MHS district shall be located 25 feet from any street right-of-way. 
(g)  Width regulations. The lot width at the setback line in an R-3-MHS district shall be 50 feet for single-wide manufactured homes/mobile homes, and 55 feet for multisectional manufactured homes/mobile homes. 
(h)  Yard regulations. Yard regulations in an R-3-MHS district are as follows: 
(1)  Side. Minimum total width of the side yards for each main structure shall be 15 feet, with no one side yard being less than five feet. 
(2)  Rear. Each main structure shall have a rear yard of 25 feet or more. 
(i)  Parking. Off-street parking space in an R-3-MHS district shall be provided as specified in section 90-146. 
(j)  Signs. Signs in an R-3-MHS district may be erected as provided in section 90-149. 
(k)  Greenbelt. A manufactured home/mobile home community shall have a greenbelt planting strip not less than 20 feet in width, along all subdivision boundaries, which do not include public streets, natural floodplains, or drainage areas. 
(l)  Subdivision minimum size and plat. Every manufactured home/mobile home community shall have a minimum size of five acres and every subdivision plat proposed under the provisions of this section shall, except as provided in this section, comply with chapter 66. 
(m)  Permanent foundation required. All manufactured home/mobile homes shall be anchored to a permanent foundation, in accordance with the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, and have the wheels, axles, and towing apparatuses removed. 
(Code 1972, § 24-26; Ord. No. 99-10, 9-21-99) 
Sec. 90-76. - C-1 commercial district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. C-1 commercial districts shall be for the conduct of retail and general commercial business establishments to which the public requires direct and frequent access and is characterized by constant heavy traffic and by noises of congestion. This C-1 commercial district includes such uses as retail stores, banks, offices, restaurants and taverns located in the central area of the city. 
(b)  Uses permitted. Permitted uses in a C-1 district shall be as follows: 
ABC stores. 
Adult day support facilities. 
Assembly halls. 
Bakeries. 
Banks and financial institutions. 
Banquet facility. 
Barber and beauty shops. 
Bed and breakfast and tourist homes. 
Billiard parlors and pool rooms. 
Bookstores. 
Bowling alleys. 
Business offices and display rooms. 
Child care centers. 
Churches. 
Clubs and lodges. 
Delicatessen. 
Department stores. 
Drugstores. 
Dry goods or notion stores. 
Electronic retail sales and online auction stores with conditional use permit. 
Flower, gift, record and tobacco shops. 
Furniture stores. 
Grocery stores. 
Hardware stores. 
Hotels/motels. 
Household appliance stores. 
Jewelry stores. 
Laundromats and dry cleaners. 
Libraries. 
Magazine and news stands. 
Mini-storage facilities. 
Museums. 
Newspaper printing establishment. 
Nightclubs with conditional use permit. 
Pet service and supply establishments. 
Photographer. 
Post office. 
Printing establishments. 
Professional and public offices. 
Recreation centers. 
Restaurants, excluding drive-in or curb-service types. 
Shoe repair shops. 
Tailors. 
Tattoo parlors. 
Taxicab establishments. 
Temporary outdoor yard sale. 
Variety stores. 
Wearing apparel stores. 
(c)  Height regulations. Buildings in a C-1 district may not be erected more than 45 feet in height. 
(d)  Area regulations. None, except if the permitted use utilizes a private water or sewage system, the required area in a C-1 district shall be established by the health official. 
(e)  Lot coverage. Lot coverage in a C-1 district may be up to 100 percent if yard and other regulations are met. 
(f)  Setback regulations. The front setback line in a C-1 district shall be located 25 feet from any street right-of-way. 
(g)  Width regulations. Width regulations in a C-1 district are not applicable. 
(h)  Yard regulations. For permitted uses in a C-1 district, the minimum side or rear yard adjoining or adjacent to a residential district shall be 25 feet. 
(i)  Parking. Off-street parking space in a C-1 district shall be provided as specified in article V of this chapter. 
(j)  Signs. Signs in a C-1 district may be erected as provided in article V of this chapter. 
(Code 1972, § 24-27; Ord. No. 97-9, 9-2-97; Ord. No. 99-10, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 03-16, § 1, 5-20-03; Ord. No. 05-63, § 1, 12-6-05; Ord. No. 05-64, § 1, 12-6-05; Ord. No. 06-41, 3-6-07; Ord. No. 07-03, 9-18-07; Ord. No. 09-25, 6-2-09; Ord. No. 10-6, 1-19-10; Ord. No. 15-34, 9-15-15; Ord. No. 18-01, 1-16-18; Ord. No. 18-16, 6-19-18) 
Sec. 90-77. - C-2 commercial district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. C-2 commercial districts shall be utilized to accommodate general business areas or for auto or highway-oriented commercial uses, and wholesaling operations which, by nature or space requirements, do not lend themselves to being concentrated within a centralized, C-1 district area. 
(b)  Uses permitted. Permitted uses in a C-2 district are as follows: 
All uses permitted in C-1 districts. 
Adult day support facility. 
Appliance stores. 
Automobile, truck, manufactured housing sales, services, storage and repairs. 
Bakery. 
Barber shops and beauty parlors. 
Bed, breakfast and tourist homes. 
Bookstores. 
Bowling alleys. 
Building, plumbing, woodworking, wholesaling, air conditioning, sheet metal, electrical and painting contractors' establishments, offices and display rooms, provided that any materials or supplies in an unenclosed area must be arranged so as not to detract from the orderly appearance of the area. 
Building supplies and service with storage under cover. 
Branch banks. 
Car washes. 
Cards, flower and gift shops. 
Churches. 
Commercial, recreational and amusement facilities, with conditional use permit. 
Child care centers. 
Delicatessen. 
Drugstores. 
Food processing and wholesale distribution of food products with conditional use permit. 
Funeral homes. 
Furniture stores. 
Gasoline service stations, with all repair and storage of vehicles taking place in a fully enclosed building. 
Grocery stores. 
Jewelry stores. 
Laundromats and dry cleaners. 
Machinery sales and service. 
Mini-storage facilities. 
Motels/hotels. 
Nightclubs with conditional use permit. 
Pet service and supply establishments. 
Photographers. 
Printing establishments. 
Professional, business, and public offices. 
Radio and television broadcasting stations. 
Repair service or business, including repair of bicycles, locks, lawn mowers and other small appliances. 
Restaurants, including fast food and drive-through types. 
Roller skating rinks. 
Sexually-oriented businesses (conditional use permit). 
Shopping centers. 
Tailors and shoe repair shops. 
Taxicab establishments. 
Theaters. 
Tire recapping and vulcanizing. 
Trade or vocational schools, with conditional use permit. 
Transportation terminals, automobile and truck sales, service, storage and repairs. 
Veterinary hospitals, with conditional use permit. 
Warehouses and distribution centers, with conditional use permit. 
(c)  Height regulations. Buildings in a C-2 district may not be erected more than 45 feet in height. 
(d)  Area regulations. None, except if the permitted uses utilizes a private water or sewage system, the required area in a C-2 district shall be established by the health official. 
(e)  Lot coverage. Lot coverage in a C-2 district may be up to 100 percent if yard and other regulations are met. 
(f)  Setback regulations. The front setback line in a C-2 district shall be located 25 feet from any street right-of-way. 
(g)  Width regulations. Width regulations in a C-2 district are not applicable. 
(h)  Yard regulations. For permitted uses in a C-2 district, the minimum side or rear yard adjoining or adjacent to a residential district shall be 25 feet. 
(i)  Parking. Off-street parking space in a C-2 district shall be provided as specified in article V of this chapter. 
(j)  Signs. Signs in a C-2 district may be erected as provided in article V of this chapter. 
(Code 1972, § 24-28; Ord. No. 97-9, 9-2-97; Ord. No. 99-10, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 03-16, § 2, 5-20-03; Ord. No. 07-03, 9-18-07; Min. of 7-17-08; Ord. No. 10-7, 1-19-10; Ord. No. 10-42, 10-19-10; Ord. No. 13-24, 12-17-13; Ord. No. 14-08, 6-17-14; Ord. No. 15-20, 6-16-15; Ord. No. 18-01, 1-16-18) 
Sec. 90-78. - I-1 industrial district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent; permit required. I-1 districts shall be utilized for occupancy by certain industries which do not in any way detract from the utilization of adjacent areas to the district for residential purposes. Before a building permit shall be issued or construction commenced on any permitted use in this district, or a permit issued for a new use, an engineering report including the plans in sufficient detail to describe the operations, processes, and the probable impact shall be submitted to the zoning administrator for study. The administrator may refer the report to the planning commission for its recommendation. Modifications of the report may be required. The administrator shall act on any application received within 20 working days after receiving the application. If formal notice in writing is given to the applicant, the time for action may be extended for a 20-day period. Failure on the part of the administrator to act on the application within the established time limit shall be deemed to constitute approval of the application. 
(b)  Uses permitted. Permitted uses in an I-1 district are as follows: 
Assembly of electrical appliances, electronic instruments and devices, radios and phonographs, also the manufacture of small parts such as coils, condensers, transformers, and crystal holders. 
Automobile assembling, painting, upholstering, repairing, rebuilding, reconditioning, body and fender work, truck repairing or overhauling, tire retreading or recapping or battery manufacture. 
Blacksmith shop, welding or machine shop excluding punch presses exceeding 40-tons rated capacity and drop hammers. 
Building material sales yards, plumbing supplies storage and millwork manufacturing. 
Boat building. 
Cabinet, furniture and upholstery shops. 
Coal and wood yards, lumber yards, feed and seed stores. 
Contractor's equipment storage yard or plant or rental of equipment commonly used by contractors. 
Corporate offices and operation centers. 
Hi-tech, electronics, communication and other service industries. 
Laboratories, pharmaceutical and/or medical. 
Manufacture, compounding, assembling or treatment of articles of merchandise from the following previously prepared materials: bone, cellophane, canvas, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastic, precious or semiprecious metals or stones, shell, straw, textiles, tobacco, wood, yarn and paint. 
Manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment of such products as bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, dairy products, drugs, perfumes, pharmaceuticals, perfumed toilet soap, toiletries, and food products. 
Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties and rubber and metal stamps. 
Manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic products, using only previously pulverized clay. 
Mini-storage facilities. 
Monumental stone works. 
Public utility generating, booster or relay stations, transformer substations, transmission lines and towers, other facilities for the provision and maintenance of public utilities, including railroads and facilities, and water and sewerage installations. 
Telecommunications towers and co-location on an existing telecommunication tower with conditional use permit. 
Veterinary or dog or cat hospitals, kennels. 
Warehouse, distribution centers. 
Wholesale businesses, storage warehouses. 
(c)  Height regulations. Buildings in an I-1 district may not be erected more than 35 feet in height. 
(d)  Area regulations. The maximum lot area for permitted uses in an I-1 district shall be ten acres. For permitted uses utilizing individual sewage disposal systems, the required area for any such use shall be approved by the health official. 
(e)  Lot coverage. Buildings or groups of buildings with their accessory buildings in an I-1 district may cover up to 50 percent of the area of the lot. 
(f)  Setback regulations. The front setback line in an I-1 district shall be located 25 feet or more from any street right-of-way. 
(g)  Width regulations. Width regulations in an I-1 district are not applicable. 
(h)  Yard regulations. For permitted uses in an I-1 district, the minimum side yard and rear yard adjoining or adjacent to a residential district shall be 50 feet. 
(i)  Parking. Off-street parking space in an I-1 district shall be provided as specified in article V of this chapter. 
(j)  Signs. Signs in an I-1 district may be erected as provided in article V of this chapter. 
(k)  Development standards for I-1 industrial districts. Development standards for an I-1 district are as follows: 
(1)  Compatibility with nearby properties. Any development within the I-1 district shall be designed to promote harmonious relationships with surrounding adjacent and nearby properties, developed and undeveloped, and to this end may employ such design techniques as may be appropriate to a particular case, including location of permitted elements, orientation, spacing and setback of buildings, maintenance of natural vegetation, location of access points, size and location of signs, open spaces, and parking areas, grading, landscaping and servicing. 
(2)  Similar uses permitted. Other manufacturing uses which, in the opinion of the administrator, are of the same general character as those permitted uses listed above shall be permitted in an I-1 district. All uses shall be conducted so as not to produce hazardous, objectionable or offensive conditions at property line boundaries by reason of odor, dust, smoke, cinders, fumes, noise, vibration, heat, glare, wastes, fire or explosion. 
(3)  Storage of materials. If the administrator finds that the outside storage of raw or in process materials, supplies, finished or semifinished products manufactured on the premises would impede the use of or have a severely adverse impact on adjacent property, then the administrator may require such materials to be partially or fully screened from view from the adjoining property. Acceptable screening materials include, but are not limited to, a solid masonry wall, a uniformly painted solid board fence, or an evergreen hedge. 
(4)  Landscaping. Landscaping may be required within any established or required front setback area. Such landscaping shall be of durable materials and shall not impose excessive maintenance requirements on the property owner or owners, nor impede the use of the premises or safe flow of vehicle traffic. 
(5)  Buffer. Sufficient area shall be provided in an I-1 district to adequately screen permitted uses from adjacent residential districts and commercial districts if the administrator finds that the permitted use negatively impacts such adjacent uses. 
(6)  Operating hours. More restrictive operating hours may be required in an I-1 district if the administrator finds that the permitted use generates such noise that it is disturbing the peace and quiet of adjacent neighborhoods. 
(Code 1972, § 24-29; Ord. No. 99-10, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 03-20, § 1, 5-20-03; Ord. No. 09-26, 6-2-09; Ord. No. 18-01, 1-16-18) 
Sec. 90-79. - I-2 industrial district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent; permit required. I-2 industrial districts shall be utilized for the establishment of heavy commercial and industrial operations where the use of land may create some nuisance and the operations are not properly associated with, nor particularly compatible with, residential, institutional and neighborhood commercial service establishments. The specific intent of this I-2 district is to: 
(1)  Encourage the construction of and the continued use of the land for heavy commercial and industrial purposes; 
(2)  Prohibit residential neighborhood commercial use of the land and to prohibit any other use which would substantially interfere with the development, continuation, or expansion of commercial and industrial uses in the district; and 
(3)  To encourage the discontinuance of existing uses that would not be permitted as new uses under the provisions of this chapter. 
Any development within the I-1 district shall be designed to promote harmonious relationships with surrounding adjacent and nearby properties, developed and undeveloped, and to this end may employ such design techniques as may be appropriate to a particular case, including location of permitted elements, orientation, spacing and setback of buildings, maintenance of natural vegetation, location of access points, size and location of signs, open spaces, and parking areas, grading, landscaping and servicing. Before a building permit shall be issued or construction commenced on any permitted uses in this I-2 district, or a permit issued for a new use, an engineering report including the plans, in sufficient detail to describe the operation, processes, and probable impact, shall be submitted to the zoning administrator for study. The administrator may refer the report to the planning commission for its recommendation. Modification of the report may be required. Landscaping may be required within any established or required front setback area. Such landscaping shall be of durable materials and shall not impose excessive maintenance requirements on the property owner or owners, nor impede the use of the premises or safe flow of vehicle traffic. If the administrator finds that the outside storage of raw or in process materials, supplies, finished or semifinished products manufactured on the premises would impede the use of or have a severely adverse impact on adjacent property, then the administrator may require such materials to be partially or fully screened from view from the adjoining property. Acceptable screening materials include, but are not limited to a solid masonry wall, a uniformly painted solid board fence, or an evergreen hedge. The administrator shall act on any application received within 30 working days after receiving the application. If formal notice in writing is given to the applicant the time for action may be extended for a ten-day period. Failure on the part of the administrator to act on the application within the established time limit shall be deemed to constitute approval of the application. 
(b)  Uses permitted. Permitted uses in an I-2 district are as follows: 
All uses permitted in I-1 districts. 
Accessory uses as defined. 
Asphalt mixing plant. 
Boiler shops. 
Brick manufacture. 
Conservation areas. 
Crushed stone operations with conditional use permit. 
Fertilizer manufacture. 
Game preserves. 
Junk storage (screened). 
Meat, poultry and fish processing. 
Paper and pulp manufacture. 
Petroleum refining, including byproducts. 
Petroleum storage. 
Public utility generating, booster or relay stations, transformer substations, transmission lines and towers and other distribution facilities for the provision and maintenance of public utilities, including railroads and facilities, electric, telephone and water and sewerage installations. 
Sand and gravel operations with conditional use permit. 
Sawmills and planing mills. 
Telecommunications towers. 
Thermal demolition operations. 
Truck terminals. 
Wood preserving operations. 
(c)  Height regulations. Buildings in an I-2 district may not be erected more than 35 feet in height. 
(d)  Area regulations. For permitted uses utilizing individual sewage disposal systems, the required area in an I-2 district for any such use shall be approved by the health official. 
(e)  Lot coverage. Buildings or groups of buildings with their accessory buildings in an I-2 district may cover up to 70 percent of the area of the lot. 
(f)  Setback regulations. The front setback line in an I-2 district shall be located 25 feet or more from any street right-of-way. 
(g)  Width regulations. Width regulations in an I-2 district are not applicable. 
(h)  Yard regulations. For permitted uses, the minimum side yard and rear yard in an I-2 district adjoining or adjacent to a residential district shall be 50 feet. Landscaping of corner lots shall be limited to plantings, fences, or other landscaping features of no more than three feet in height within the space between the setback line and the property line on the street side of the lot. 
(i)  Parking. Off-street parking space in an I-2 district shall be provided as specified in article V of this chapter. 
(j)  Signs. Signs in an I-2 district may be erected as provided in article V of this chapter. 
(Code 1972, § 24-30; Ord. No. 99-10, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 03-20, § 2, 5-20-03; Ord. No. 18-01, 1-16-18) 
Sec. 90-80. - DT downtown district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The DT downtown district is hereby recognized as an integral part of the city's unique character and the goal of this section is to promote the conservation and preservation of the city's downtown areas, and to encourage retail, general commercial business establishment and other appropriate mixed uses to which the public requires direct and frequent access and is characterized by constant heavy traffic and by noises of congestion. This DT downtown district includes such uses as retail stores, banks, offices, restaurants and taverns located in the central area of the city. 
(b)  Uses permitted. Permitted uses in a DT district shall be as follows: 
Art galleries and studios. 
Assembly halls. 
Automotive sales and service with the screening of impound/storage areas with conditional use permit. 
Bakeries. 
Banks and financial institutions. 
Banquet facility. 
Barber and beauty shops. 
Bed and breakfast and tourist homes. 
Billiard parlors and pool rooms. 
Bookstores. 
Bowling alleys. 
Business offices and display rooms. 
Child care centers. 
Churches. 
Clubs and lodges. 
Convenience stores. 
Delicatessen. 
Department stores. 
Drugstores. 
Dry goods or notion stores. 
Flower, gift, record and tobacco shops. 
Furniture stores. 
Grocery stores. 
Hardware stores. 
Hotels/motels. 
Household appliance stores. 
Jewelry stores. 
Laundromats and dry cleaners. 
Libraries. 
Machinery sales and service with conditional use permit. 
Magazine and news stands. 
Mobile food units with conditional use permit. 
Newspaper printing establishments. 
Nightclubs with condition use permit. 
Pet service and supply establishments. 
Photographer. 
Post office. 
Printing establishments. 
Professional and public offices. 
Recreation centers. 
Repair, sale and service of bicycles, locks, lawn mowers and other small engines or appliances. 
Radio and telecommunication stations with conditional use permit. 
Residential uses, single and multi-family, above ground level floors. 
Residential use, apartment, on the ground level floor with conditional use permit provided the dwelling is located at the rear of the structure and is occupied by the current property owner(s) or business owner(s) of a business operating in the structure. Furthermore, the residential area should not be visible from the commercial space and shall not occupy more than 50 percent of total ground floor area as shown in a floor plan provided to the city for review. 
Restaurants, excluding drive-in or curb-service types. 
Shoe repair shops. 
Tailors. 
Taxicab establishments. 
Theaters. 
Variety stores. 
Wearing apparel stores. 
Wine and beer shops. 
(c)  Height regulations. Buildings in a DT downtown district may not be erected more than 45 feet in height. 
(d)  Area regulations. None. 
(e)  Lot coverage. Lot coverage in a DT downtown district may be up to 100 percent if yard and other regulations are met. 
(f)  Setback regulations. Building or structure in a DT downtown district may have a zero setback; however such building or structure shall be placed such that the front is generally "in-line" with other existing buildings. 
(g)  Width regulations. Width regulations in a DT downtown district are not applicable. 
(h)  Yard regulations. For permitted uses in a DT downtown district, the minimum side or rear yard adjoining or adjacent to a residential district shall be 25 feet. 
(i)  Parking. Due to the centralized nature of the DT downtown district, parking shall be provided as is practically possible to conform with the requirements of article V of this chapter and shall be subject to subsection (k) of this section. 
(j)  Signs. The following signs shall be permitted in a DT downtown district and shall conform to all other applicable requirements of article V of this chapter. All permitted signs shall be subject to subsection (k) of this section. 
(1)  All signs permitted in R districts. 
(2)  Business signs not to exceed a total area of two square feet for each foot of frontage of the business provided they are attached to the building and not projecting more than four feet therefrom and shall not extend above the roofline. For buildings with more than one business, the total area allowed may be divided among those businesses. 
(3)  One freestanding or monolithic business sign not to exceed 50 square feet in area and no higher than six feet tall, for each lot with a lot frontage of 75 feet or more, provided such signs do not create a visual obstruction or safety hazard. In the case of shopping or business centers where more than one business resides within a single building, each business may have an additional ten square feet of sign area, so long as it is located on the same pole or poles of the freestanding or monolithic sign, but in no case shall such sign extend over the street right-of-way line. Freestanding signs shall not be permitted on lots where the building has a setback of 25 feet or less. 
(k)  Architectural compatibility. 
(1)  All buildings and structures shall be constructed, erected, and altered to blend with the general character of the DT downtown district. To facilitate this requirement, the zoning administrator shall submit all plans and specifications involving the construction or erection of new buildings and structures and major alterations to existing buildings and structures to the planning commission for review. For the purposes of this section, major alteration means any physical modification to a structure that involves a major portion of the structure or has a substantial visual impact on the structure or surroundings. Major alterations include, but are not limited to, changes in building massing, cladding the exterior walls in a new material, and extensive replacement of windows and doors with a new or unoriginal design in a structure. 
The planning commission shall make architectural compatibility recommendations to city council. Final decision making authority shall be vested in city council. This review shall in no way require the use of specific materials. 
(2)  Minor alterations shall be subject to review and approval by the zoning administrator. For the purposes of this section, minor alteration means any physical modification to a structure that is limited in scope or has a minor visual impact in relation to the total design of the project. Minor alterations include, but are not limited to, awnings, landscaping, lighting, roofing, paint colors, and signage. 
(3)  Plans approved by the Department of Historic Resources pertaining to the Belfield Business District Revitalization Project shall be approved administratively by the zoning administrator. 
(4)  In order to ensure that buildings proposed for removal will not substantially impact or take away from the general character of the DT downtown district, the proposed demolition of any building or structure is subject to the same review and approval as outlined in subsection (k)(1) above. 
(5)  The City of Emporia shall be exempt from the review and approval procedure as outlined in subsection (k)(1) and (2) above provided any erection or alteration done by the city is consistent with the general character of the DT downtown district. 
(Ord. No. 03-50, § 2, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 04-48, § 1, 12-7-04; Ord. No. 05-26, § 1, 6-21-05; Ord. No. 06-41, 3-6-07; Ord. No. 07-03, 9-18-07; Ord. No. 09-27, 6-2-09; Ord. No. 10-8, 1-19-10; Ord. No. 12-03, 2-21-12; Ord. No. 15-09, 3-3-15; Ord. No. 17-15, 7-18-17; Ord. No. 18-01, 1-16-18) 
Secs. 90-81-90-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SITE PLAN 

Sec. 90-106. - Purpose of article. 
    The purpose of this article is to promote orderly development in the city, and to ensure that such activities are developed in a manner harmonious with surrounding properties, and in the interest of the general public welfare. More specifically, the site plan shall be used to review the project's compatibility with its environment; to review the ability of the project's traffic circulation system to provide for the convenient and safe internal and external movement of vehicles and pedestrians; to review the quantity, quality, utility and type of the project's required community facilities; and to review the location and adequacy of the project's provision for drainage and utilities. 
(Code 1972, § 24-31) 
Sec. 90-107. - Circumstances under which required. 
    For the following uses, a site plan shall be submitted to and approved by the zoning administrator: 
(1)  Multiple-family dwellings; 
(2)  Townhouses; 
(3)  Churches, schools, hospitals, nursing homes and public buildings, parks and playgrounds; 
(4)  Business and industrial buildings and developments; 
(5)  Planned unit developments; 
(6)  Manufactured housing parks; and 
(7)  Any land use or development for which a conditional use or special exception is required. 
(Code 1972, § 24-31.1) 
Sec. 90-108. - Waiver of article requirements. 
    Any requirement of this article may be waived by the zoning administrator where the waiver is not adverse to the purpose of this article and the applicant establishes that in his specific case an undue hardship would result from a strict enforcement of this article, or that the requirement is unreasonable. The zoning administrator shall permit such waiver only after a written request by the developer and making a determination that the waiver will not be adverse. The request and determination shall become a part of the site plan record. 
(Code 1972, § 24-31.2) 
Sec. 90-109. - Specifications. 
    Every site plan shall be prepared in accordance with the following specifications: 
(1)  The scale shall not be less than 100 feet to one inch. 
(2)  All site plans shall be 24-inch by 36-inch sheets. 
(3)  If the site plan is prepared on more than one sheet, match lines shall clearly indicate where the several sheets join. 
(4)  Horizontal dimensions shall be in feet and decimals of feet to the closest 1/100 of a foot. 
(Code 1972, § 24-31.3) 
Sec. 90-110. - Contents. 
    The site plan, or any portion thereof, involving engineering, urban planning, landscape architecture, architecture or land surveying shall be prepared by a qualified person. Final site plans shall be certified by an architect, landscape architect, engineer, or land surveyor, licensed to practice by the commonwealth within the limits of their respective licenses. The site plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  The proposed title of the project and the name of the engineer, architect, landscape architect, surveyor, and developer; and a signature panel for the zoning administrator's approval. 
(2)  The northpoint, scale, data, vicinity map, and numbers of sheets. 
(3)  Existing zoning and zoning district boundaries on the property in question and on immediately surrounding properties. 
(4)  The present use of all contiguous or abutting property. 
(5)  The boundaries of the property involved by bearings and distances. 
(6)  All existing property lines, existing streets, buildings, watercourses, waterways, or lakes and other existing physical features in or adjoining the project. 
(7)  Topography of the project area with contour intervals of two feet or less. 
(8)  The location and sizes of sanitary and/or storm sewers, gas lines, water mains, culverts, and other underground structures, all overhead utilities and their supporting poles in or affecting the project, including existing and proposed facilities and easements for these facilities. 
(9)  The location, dimensions, and character of construction of proposed streets, alleys, driveways, sidewalks, and the location, type, and size of ingress and egress to the site. 
(10)  The location of all existing and proposed off-street parking and loading spaces, indicating types of surfacing, size, angle of stalls, width of aisles, and the number of parking spaces. 
(11)  Proposed locations of solid waste refuse storage and pickup facilities. 
(12)  The location, height, type, and material of all existing and proposed fences, walls, screen planting, and landscaping details of all buildings and grounds. 
(13)  Provisions for the adequate disposition of surface water indicating location, sizes, types, and grades of ditches, catchbasins, and pipes and connection to an existing drainage system. 
(14)  Provisions for the adequate control of erosion and sedimentation, in accordance with chapter 34, article IV. 
(15)  Proposed finished grading by contour supplemented, where necessary, by spot elevations. 
(16)  100-year floodplain limit studies, as required by the zoning administrator. 
(17)  The location, character, size, height, and orientation of proposed signs. 
(18)  The location and dimensions of proposed recreation, open space, and required amenities and improvements. 
(19)  A landscaping plan in accordance with section 90-121. 
(20)  Any necessary notes required by the zoning administrator to explain the purpose of specific items on the plan. 
(21)  The zoning administrator may request additional information other than what has previously been stated, such as economic and/or environmental impact reviews on public services and facilities, where deemed necessary, to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Code 1972, § 24-31.4; Ord. No. 09-28, 6-2-09) 
Sec. 90-111. - Procedures; authority for review and approval. 
    Site plans may be approved administratively by the zoning administrator, after first distributing the plan to the various city departments for written comments. 
(Code 1972, § 24-31.5) 
Sec. 90-112. - Preapplication conference. 
    All applicants are encouraged to request a preapplication review conference. The purpose of the conference is to discuss the basic site plan, off-street parking, signs, and other city ordinance requirements, utilities, and drainage, and to consider preliminary features of the proposed development as they relate to this article. 
(Code 1972, § 24-31.5.1) 
Sec. 90-113. - Review and approval of final site plan. 
    Sufficient copies, as required by the zoning administrator, of the final plan shall be submitted to the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall have up to 45 days to circulate the plan to the relevant departments, boards, and/or commissions for written comments, and to notify the applicant of the action taken, which may be approved, approved subject to conditions, or disapproved. 
(Code 1972, § 24-31.5.2) 
Sec. 90-114. - Appeal. 
    An applicant may appeal, in writing, the decision of the zoning administrator within ten days to the board of zoning appeals, in accordance with article VII. 
(Code 1972, § 24-31.5.3) 
Sec. 90-115. - Review by approving authorities. 
    All site plans which are properly submitted, as provided in this article, shall be reviewed and recommended for approval by: 
(1)  The zoning administrator or his agents relative to: 
a.  Compliance with the requirements of this chapter, including setbacks, side yards and rear yards, height of building, lot area and lot coverage, fencing and screening. 
b.  Location, design and adequacy of automobile parking as to number of spaces, square footage per space, including movement lanes, and total area. 
c.  Location and design of vehicular entrances and exits in relation to streets giving access to the site, and in relation to pedestrian traffic. 
d.  Adequate provision for traffic circulation and control within the site and providing access to adjoining property. 
e.  Adequacy of drainage and erosion measures. 
f.  The provisions of the Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
g.  The preservation of the natural environment and the provision of noise buffering. The administrator may refuse to approve any site plan which proposes unnecessary destruction of trees and other natural features. The zoning administrator may require assurance that the developer has made reasonable effort in light of the proposed development to preserve, replenish and protect trees of eight-inch diameter or larger at the DBH (diameter, breast high), ornamental trees of any size; trees within required setbacks or along boundaries unless necessary to remove for access, grading, circulation, utilities or drainage; streams in their natural condition. 
(2)  The director of community services or his agents, relative to: 
a.  Adequacy of water supply and sanitary sewer facilities. 
b.  Compliance with applicable established design criteria, construction standards and specifications for all required public improvements. 
(3)  Fire marshal or his agents, relative to fire protection and compliance with the provisions of the city fire code. 
(4)  Chief of police and safety officer for police protection and city safety codes. 
(5)  State department of transportation resident engineer relative to highway matters. 
(Code 1972, § 24-31.6) 
Sec. 90-116. - Fees required. 
    The site plan shall be accompanied by a check payable to the city treasurer evidencing the payment of site plan fees, as prescribed in the fee schedule as approved by city council. 
(Code 1972, § 24-31.7; Ord. No. 99-10, 9-21-99; Ord. No. 99-10, 9-21-99) 
Sec. 90-117. - Termination or extension. 
    An approved site plan shall expire and become null and void if no building permit has been obtained for the site in 12 months after the final approval. The zoning administrator may grant a one-year extension upon written request of the applicant. 
(Code 1972, § 24-31.8) 
Sec. 90-118. - Minor or major adjustments in approved site plan. 
    After a site plan has been approved by the zoning administrator, minor adjustments of the site plan, which comply with the spirit of this article and other provisions of this chapter, with the intent of the approving bodies in their approval of site plans, and with the general purpose of the comprehensive plan for development of the area, may be approved by the zoning administrator with concurrence of the reviewing authorities concerned. Deviation from an approved site plan without the written approval of the zoning administrator shall void the plan and the zoning administrator shall require the applicant to submit a new site plan for consideration. Any major revision of an approved site plan may be made and submitted in the same manner as originally approved. 
(Code 1972, § 24-31.9) 
Sec. 90-119. - Prerequisite to issuance of permits. 
    No building permit shall be issued to construct, erect, or alter any building or structure, or any permit or authorization granted to improve or develop land subject to the provisions of this article, unless a site plan has been submitted and approved. 
(Code 1972, § 24-31.10) 
Sec. 90-120. - Compliance with approved site plan. 
(a)  Inspections shall be made during the installation of off-site and onsite improvements by the zoning administrator or his designated agents in their areas of responsibility, to ensure compliance with the approved site plan. 
(b)  The owner or developer shall provide adequate supervision at the site during installation of improvements required by the site plan and shall make one set of approved plans available at the site at all times that work is being performed. 
(Code 1972, § 24-31.11) 
Sec. 90-121. - Landscaping requirements. 
(a)  General regulations. 
(1)  Any part or portion of a site that is not used for buildings, other structures, loading, parking spaces and aisles, sidewalks and designated storage areas, shall be planted and maintained with landscaping. Maximum advantage shall be taken of existing trees and shrubs in landscaping. 
(2)  All landscaped planting areas shall be planted with grass seed, sod, or other ground cover and shall be maintained and kept clean of all debris, rubbish, weeds, and tall grass, provided, however, that if such land is naturally wooded, it may continue in its natural state. 
(3)  Unless otherwise specified, landscaped planting areas may be part of the required front, side, and rear yards. 
(4)  Except for single-family and two-family dwellings, any part or portion of a site which is not used for loading and parking spaces, aisles, sidewalks, and designated storage areas shall be landscaped according to an overall plan prepared and approved as part of the development plan, or shall be left in its natural state. A replacement program for non-surviving plant material should be included. 
(b)  Landscaping plans. 
(1)  Landscaping shall be installed and maintained in accordance with a landscape plan approved by the zoning administrator. The landscape plan shall depict all proposed plantings which relate to, complement, screen or accentuate buildings, roads, parking areas, sidewalks, walkways, sitting areas, service or maintenance structures, courtyards and other site features. 
a.  The landscaping plan shall be coordinated with the site plan and shall show the location, type, size, height and other characteristics of the proposed landscaping. 
b.  The plan shall be accompanied by or shall include information regarding the continued maintenance of plantings indicating that all plantings will be replaced, if damaged, diseased or dead, in locations shown on the approved plan. 
(c)  Specific requirements. In addition to complying with the provisions above, each new building or alteration or expansion erected after the effective date of this article, shall provide specific landscaping components as noted below (where feasible): 
Zoning District Or Use Minimum Landscaping Components Commercial and Industrial One tree or two shrubs shall be placed in the ground or in planters for every 20 feet of building width in front of the principal building. 
Landscaped strip not less than six feet wide at front and at one side of the primary building. Downtown One tree or two shrubs placed in ground or in planters every 15 feet at the front and at one side of principal building. 
Landscaped strip with grass or other ground cover, not less than four feet wide at front and at one side of building. Apartment buildings and nonresidential buildings in residential districts Same as Downtown.  
(Ord. No. 09-28, 6-2-09) 
Secs. 90-122-90-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS 

Sec. 90-146. - Vehicle off-street loading requirements. 
(a)  In all districts, off-street parking areas and proper access thereto shall be provided in connection with and as an accessory to every use, on the premises to be served. The number of parking spaces to be provided for each shall be sufficient to provide for all persons residing on, employed on or patronizing the premises, and in no case shall it be less than as follows. In the case of any use not listed, the requirements of the most similar listed use shall apply: 
(1)  Dwelling, including two-family and multiple dwelling, at least one parking space for each family unit in the building or buildings. 
(2)  Auditorium, stadium, theater, school, church or other places of public assemblage including lodges, clubs, at least one parking space for each ten seats provided for persons to be accommodated (based on the maximum seating capacity). 
(3)  Hotel, at least one parking space for each two guest sleeping rooms. 
(4)  Restaurant or other eating places, at least one parking space for each four seats. 
(5)  Retail stores and office buildings, at least one parking space for each 400 square feet of retail sales area and/or office floor space. 
(6)  Hospital, sanitarium, convalescent or nursing home, at least one parking space for each five patients. 
(7)  Tourist home, motel and tourist court, at least one parking space for each guest sleeping room. 
(8)  Roominghouse, at least one parking space for each two guestrooms. 
(9)  Manufacturing and industrial establishments, including wholesale buildings and warehouses, at least one parking space for each 1,000 square feet of gross area or for each two employees. 
(b)  Each off-street parking space shall have minimum dimensions of nine feet by 18 feet and shall be located and improved as to be effectively usable. For off-street parking facilities, up to 20 percent of the total spaces may be designated as "compact car" spaces with a minimum size of 71/2 feet in width and 15 feet in length. There shall be no drainage from a public or private parking lot for six or more vehicles in any district onto or across public sidewalks or onto adjacent property except into a natural watercourse or a drainage easement. 
(c)  All parking spaces provided pursuant to this section shall be on the same lot as the building, except when the board of zoning appeals permits the required parking space to be on any lot within 400 feet of the main entrance of the building, and the board determines it is impractical to provide parking space on the same lot with the building. Such vehicle parking space shall be deemed to be open space associated with the permitted use and shall not thereafter be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. 
(Code 1972, § 24-32; Ord. No. 04-12, § 1, 3-16-04) 
Sec. 90-147. - Off-street loading requirements. 
    There shall be provided at the time of erection of any main building or structure or at the time any main building or structure is enlarged or increased by major structural alterations equal to more than 50 percent of the capacity to the original building or structure in any district, at least one permanently maintained off-street loading space for every hospital, hotel, institution, commercial or manufacturing building or warehouse. Each off-street loading space shall not be less than ten feet in width, 25 feet in length and 15 feet in height for each such use. Warehouses, manufacturing, and distributing establishments shall provide one off-street loading space for each 15,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof. 
(Code 1972, § 24-33) 
Sec. 90-148. - Service stations and public garage regulations. 
(a)  No automobile service station, automobile repair shop or public garage shall have a vehicular entrance or exit within 200 feet, along the same side of a street and in the same block, of the premises of any school, public playground, church, hospital, public library or institution for children or dependents; and no part of any such service station, repair shop, or garage shall be within 100 feet of any of the public, semipublic, or institutional buildings or properties. On all corner lots, all vehicular entrances and exits and all curb openings shall be set back at least 25 feet from the corner property lines. No entrance or exit, whether on a corner lot or not, shall exceed 50 feet in width at the property line, nor within 121/2 feet of a 
property line. There shall be a minimum distance between driveways of 25 feet, unless such driveways are less than five feet apart. When the above entrance or exit setbacks or dimensions are impossible to conform with, they may be modified by the joint approval of the city manager, chief of police and administrator or their designated agent. Curb and gutter shall be required for all service stations. 
(b)  No gasoline pump or island for the same shall be erected closer than 15 feet to any property line, nor shall any service station, automobile repair shop, or public garage have any oil draining pit or visible appliance for such purpose located within 15 feet of any street lot line or within 25 feet of any R district, except where such is located totally within a building. 
(Code 1972, § 24-34) 
Sec. 90-149. - Sign regulations. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to promote the public health, safety, and welfare; and regulate the markets through a comprehensive system of reasonable, effective, consistent, content-neutral, and nondiscriminatory sign standards and design requirements. With these concepts in mind, this section is adopted for the following purposes: 
(1)  To protect property values, the local economy, and the quality of life by preserving and enhancing the appearance of the streetscape which affects the image of the city. 
(2)  To promote the free flow of traffic and protect pedestrians, cyclists, and motorists from injury and property damage caused by, or which may be partially attributable to cluttered, distracting, and/or illegible signage. 
(3)  To promote the use of signs which are aesthetically pleasing, of appropriate scale, and integrated with the surrounding buildings and landscape, in order to meet the community's expressed desire for quality development. 
(4)  To promote and accomplish the goals, policies, and objectives of the comprehensive plan. 
(5)  To balance public and private objectives by allowing adequate signage for business identification. 
(6)  To provide design standards which are consistent with other applicable provisions of the city's zoning ordinance. 
(7)  To prevent property damage and personal injury from signs which are improperly constructed or poorly maintained. 
    To achieve these purposes, it is the intent of this section: 
(1)  To provide reasonably uniform standards while allowing functional flexibility, encourage variety, and create an incentive to relate signage to basic principles of good design. 
(2)  To assure that public benefits derived from expenditures of public funds for the improvement and beautification of streets, and other public structures and spaces, are protected by exercising reasonable control over the character and design of sign structures which are near the rights-of-way. 
(3)  To provide an improved visual environment for the citizens of, and visitors to, the city. 
(b)  Prohibited signs. The following signs are prohibited in all zoning districts: 
(1)  Flashing signs, rotating and moving signs structures, propellers, discs, pennants, streamers, and snipe signs. 
(2)  Any sign that uses the word "stop" or "danger" or otherwise presents or implies the need or requirement of stopping or caution or the existence of danger, or which is a copy or imitation of, or which for any reason is likely to be confused with any sign displayed or authorized by public authority. 
(3)  Any nonshielded illumination of a sign within 200 feet of a residential zoning district. 
(4)  Off-site signs except as otherwise permitted. 
(5)  Abandoned signs. 
(6)  Signs erected without the permission of the property owner, with the exception of those authorized or required by local, state, or federal government. 
(7)  Signs erected within the public right-of-way. 
(8)  Signs that create a visual obstruction or safety hazard. 
(9)  Any sign containing information which states or implies that a property may be used for any purpose not permitted under the provisions of the city's zoning ordinance. 
(10)  Signs that exhibit statements, words, or pictures of obscene or pornographic subjects as determined by the City of Emporia. 
(11)  Any sign that promotes illegal activity. 
(12)  Signs erected on City property with the exception of signs associated with permitted limited duration special events and signs permitted for civic and community activities and events. 
(c)  R districts. The following signs shall be permitted in R districts: 
(1)  Wall signs not to exceed two square feet each foot of building frontage per establishment for buildings other than dwellings. Such signs shall not project more than four feet from the building nor shall extend above the roofline more than four feet. 
(2)  One projecting sign per establishment not to exceed 15 square feet for buildings other than dwellings. Such signs shall not project more than four feet from the building and shall have a maximum height equal to the eaveline or the bottom of the second story window sill, whichever is lower. The lowest edge of a projecting sign shall be at least eight feet above the finished grade. 
(3)  One freestanding sign per lot not to exceed 32 square feet and six feet in height for buildings other than single family and two-family dwellings. Such sign shall not extend over the street right-of-way line. 
(4)  One temporary sign per lot not to exceed 40 square feet. One additional temporary sign per lot not to exceed 40 square feet shall be permitted for every 400 feet of street frontage. Such signs are allowed to be ether freestanding or directly attached to the primary building. 
(d)  C-1 districts. The following signs shall be permitted in C-1 districts: 
(1)  Wall signs not to exceed two square feet for each foot of building frontage per establishment. Such signs shall not project more than four feet therefrom nor shall extend above the roofline more than four feet. 
(2)  One projecting sign per establishment not to exceed 15 square feet. Such signs shall not project more than four feet from the building and shall have a maximum height equal to the eaveline or the bottom of the second story window sill, whichever is lower. The lowest edge of a projecting sign shall be at least eight feet above the finished grade. 
(3)  One freestanding sign not to exceed 50 square feet and 35 feet in height for each lot with a street frontage of 75 feet or more. In the case of shopping or business centers where more than one business resides within a single building, each establishment may have an additional ten square feet of sign area, so long as it is located on the same pole or poles of the freestanding sign. Such sign shall not extend over the street right-of-way line. 
(4)  One portable sign not to exceed 12 square feet for each establishment. Portable signs shall be removed from the exterior of the building during non-business hours. 
(5)  One temporary sign per lot not to exceed 40 square feet. One additional temporary sign per lot not to exceed 40 square feet shall be permitted for every 400 feet of street frontage. Such signs are allowed to be either freestanding or directly attached to the primary building. In the case of multi-tenant properties, one temporary sign shall also be permitted for each establishment located on the property provided such sign is directly attached to the primary building. 
(e)  C-2 districts. The following signs shall be permitted in C-2 districts: 
(1)  Wall signs not to exceed three square feet for each foot of building frontage per establishment. Such signs shall not project more than four feet therefrom nor shall extend above the roofline more than four feet. 
(2)  One projecting sign per establishment not to exceed 15 square feet. Such signs shall not project more than four feet from the building and shall have a maximum height equal to the eaveline or the bottom of the second story window sill, whichever is lower. The lowest edge of a projecting sign shall be at least eight feet above the finished grade. 
(3)  One freestanding sign not to exceed 175 square feet and 45 feet in height for each lot with a street frontage of 75 feet or more. In the case of shopping or business centers where more than one business resides within a single building, each establishment may have an additional 20 square feet of sign area, so long as it is located on the same pole or poles of the freestanding sign. Such sign shall not extend over the street right-of-way line. 
(4)  One portable sign not to exceed 12 square feet for each establishment. Portable signs shall be removed from the exterior of the building during non-business hours. 
(5)  Menu board signs not to exceed 48 square feet each. 
(6)  One temporary sign per lot not to exceed 40 square feet. One additional temporary sign per lot not to exceed 40 square feet shall be permitted for every 400 feet of street frontage. Such signs are allowed to be either freestanding or directly attached to the primary building. In the case of multi-tenant properties, one temporary sign shall also be permitted for each establishment located on the property provided such sign is directly attached to the primary building. 
(f)  I districts. The following signs shall be permitted in I districts: 
(1)  Wall signs not to exceed three square feet for each foot of building frontage per establishment. Such signs shall not project more than four feet therefrom nor shall extend above the roofline more than four feet. 
(2)  One projecting sign per establishment not to exceed 15 square feet. Such signs shall not project more than four feet from the building and shall have a maximum height equal to the eaveline or the bottom of the second story window sill, whichever is lower. The lowest edge of a projecting sign shall be at least eight feet above the finished grade. 
(3)  One freestanding sign not to exceed 175 square feet and 45 feet in height for each lot with a street frontage of 75 feet or more. Such sign shall not extend over the street right-of-way line. 
(4)  One general advertising sign per lot provided such lot has a minimum street frontage of 1,000 feet. Such sign shall not exceed 300 square feet and 45 feet in height. 
(5)  One temporary sign per lot not to exceed 40 square feet. One additional temporary sign per lot not to exceed 40 square feet shall be permitted for every 400 feet of street frontage. Such signs are allowed to be either freestanding or directly attached to the primary building. In the case of multi-tenant properties, one temporary sign shall also be permitted for each establishment located on the property provided such sign is directly attached to the primary building. 
(g)  DT Downtown district. The following signs shall be permitted in the DT district: 
(1)  Window signs, including signs painted on windows or doors restricted to the first floor of any building or structure, not to exceed a total area of two square feet for each foot of frontage of the business. 
(2)  Wall signs not to exceed a total area of two square feet for each foot of building frontage per establishment. Such signs shall not project more than four feet therefrom nor shall extend above the roofline. 
(3)  One projecting sign per ground floor establishment and one projecting sign per building entrance serving one or more upper floor establishments not to exceed a total area of 15 square feet for buildings other than dwellings. Such signs shall not project more than four feet from the building and shall have a maximum height equal to the eaveline or the bottom of the second story window sill, whichever is lower. The lowest edge of a projecting sign shall be at least eight feet above the finished grade. 
(4)  One freestanding sign not to exceed 50 square feet in area and six feet in height for each lot with a frontage of 75 feet or more, provided such signs do not create a visual obstruction or safety hazard. In the case of shopping or business centers where more than one business resides within a single building, each business may have an additional ten square feet of sign area, so long as it is located on the same pole or poles of the freestanding sign, but in no case shall such sign extend over the street right-of-way line. Freestanding signs shall not be permitted on lots where the building has a setback of 25 feet or less. 
(5)  One portable sign not to exceed twelve square feet for each establishment. Portable signs shall be removed from the exterior of the building during non-business hours. 
(6)  One temporary sign per lot not to exceed 40 square feet. One additional temporary sign per lot not to exceed 40 square feet shall be permitted for every 400 feet of street frontage. Such signs are allowed to be either freestanding or directly attached to the primary building. In the case of multi-tenant properties, one temporary sign shall also be permitted for each establishment located on the property provided such sign is directly attached to the primary building. 
(Ord. No. 18-01, 1-16-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 18-01, adopted Jan. 16, 2018, repealed the former § 90-149, and enacted a new § 90-149 as set out herein. The former § 90-149 pertained to permitted signs and derived from Code 1972, § 24-35; Ord. No. 03-19, § 2, adopted May 20, 2003; Ord. No. 04-06, § 1, adopted Feb. 3, 2004; Ord. No. 06-67, adopted Aug. 7, 2007; Ord. No. 09-29, adopted June 2, 2009; Ord. No. 10-09, adopted Jan. 19, 2010; and Ord. No. 11-19, adopted July 19, 2011. 
Sec. 90-150. - Permits and fees for signs. 
(a)  Unless specifically exempted from the provisions of this Code, no signs shall be erected, placed, constructed or modified, on any lot, without prior approval from the zoning administrator, and the owner of the property or designated agent has secured a sign permit from the office of the building official and paid all appropriate fees. 
(b)  The property owner or designated agent shall submit a completed application form along with all required documentation for review, which shall include, but is not limited to the following: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)  Name, address and telephone number of the property owner (if different from the applicant). 
(3)  Location of the building, structure and or lot which or upon which the proposed sign is to be attached or erected. 
(4)  Two sets of blueprints, site plans, specifications and construction documentation, including all existing signage, buildings or other improvements. 
(5)  Name of person, firm or corporation erecting the sign. 
(6)  Name of person, firm or corporation responsible for any electrical work associated with the installation or modification of the sign (if not the same as number (5) above). 
(7)  Written consent of the owner of the lot or building upon which the sign is to be erected. 
(c)  Each application submitted shall be accompanied by the applicable fees in accordance with section 14-39 of this Code. 
(d)  The following signs do not require a sign permit, however must comply with all applicable provisions of this Code: 
(1)  Window signs in residential, commercial, and industrial zoning districts. 
(2)  Incidental signs. 
(3)  Personal expression signs in residential zoning districts provided they do not exceed three square feet, are non-commercial in nature, and are not illuminated. 
(4)  Personal expression signs in commercial, industrial, and downtown zoning districts provided they do not exceed 40 square feet and are non-commercial in nature. 
(5)  On-premises yard sale signs provided they not exceed three square feet. 
(6)  On-premises real estate signs limited to six square feet and six feet in height in residential and downtown zoning districts. 
(7)  On-premises real estate signs limited to 32 square feet and eight feet in height in commercial and industrial zoning districts. 
(8)  One home occupation sign per dwelling not to exceed three square feet. Such sign may be freestanding or directly attached to the dwelling. 
(9)  Art and murals, provided no commercial messaging is included. 
(10)  Holiday and seasonal decorations. 
(11)  Security and warning signs limited to two square feet for residential and downtown zoning districts and five square feet for commercial and industrial zoning districts. 
(12)  On-premises construction signs limited to the duration of the construction period. 
(13)  Address signs. 
(14)  Flags, excluding (d). 
a.  Location. Flags and flagpoles shall not be located within any right-of-way. 
b.  Height. Flags shall have a maximum height of 30 feet in residential zoning districts and the DT Downtown District. Flags shall have a maximum height of 45 feet in commercial and industrial zoning districts. 
c.  Number. No more than two flags per lot in residential zoning districts and the DT Downtown District No more than three flags per lot in commercial and industrial zoning districts. 
d.  Size. Flags shall have a maximum square footage of 60 square feet in residential zoning districts and the DT Downtown District. Flags shall have a maximum square footage of 96 square feet in commercial and industrial zoning districts. 
e.  Flags containing commercial messages shall be considered freestanding or projecting signs limited to the number and size permitted for the applicable zoning district and shall require a permit. 
(15)  Directional signs limited to six square feet in area and a maximum height of five feet. 
(16)  Vending machine signs. 
(17)  Legal notices. 
(18)  Official traffic signs. 
(19)  Government/regulatory signs. 
(20)  Any signs, lighting, or displays authorized by city council. 
(Ord. No. 03-19, § 2, 5-20-03; Ord. No. 06-67, 8-7-07; Ord. No. 18-01, 1-16-18) 
Sec. 90-151. - Sign construction and inspection. 
(a)  All signs, permitted or exempt, shall conform to the applicable provisions of the Uniform Statewide Building Code and shall be constructed of materials capable of resisting corrosion, rot or deterioration and shall be adequately fastened to a building or the ground in accordance with approved construction documentation as approved by the building official, and in compliance with this Code. 
(b)  The zoning administrator and/or the building official shall cause any new or modified sign to be inspected for compliance with this Code. 
(Ord. No. 03-19, § 2, 5-20-03; Ord. No. 06-67, 8-7-07) 
Sec. 90-152. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Nonconforming signs existing August 7, 2007, shall not be enlarged or altered in any way, which would increase its nonconformity. 
(b)  Any such nonconforming sign damaged by any means to an extent of more than 50 percent of its replacement cost at the time of damage, shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 03-19, § 2, 5-20-03; Ord. No. 06-67, 8-7-07) 
Sec. 90-153. - Sign maintenance. 
(a)  Every sign, including those specifically exempt from this Code with respect to permits and permit fees, shall be maintained in a safe and presentable manner and in good structural, material condition at all times. All signs shall be maintained, including the replacement of defective parts, painting, repainting, cleaning, and other acts required for the maintenance of such signs. The zoning administrator or his authorized agent shall inspect and shall have the authority to order the painting, repair, alteration, or removal of a sign which shall constitute a hazard to safety, health, or public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, disrepair, dilapidation, or obsolescence. 
(b)  If the sign is not constructed to comply with adequate safety standards, the administrator shall require its removal in accordance with this section. 
(Code 1972, § 24-35.1; Ord. No. 03-19, § 2, 5-20-03; Ord. No. 06-67, 8-7-07) 
Sec. 90-154. - Abandoned signs. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article, any sign that is located on property which becomes vacant and is unoccupied for a period of three months or more, or any sign which pertains to a time, event, or purpose which no longer applies, shall be deemed to have been abandoned. Business signs applicable to a business temporarily suspended because of a change of ownership or management of such business shall not be deemed abandoned unless the property remains vacant for a period of 12 months or more. An abandoned sign is prohibited and shall be removed by the owner of the sign or the owner of the premises. 
(Code 1972, § 24-35.2; Ord. No. 03-19, § 2, 5-20-03; Ord. No. 06-67, 8-7-07) 
Sec. 90-155. - Dangerous or defective signs. 
    No person shall maintain, or permit to be maintained on any premises owned or controlled by him, any sign which is in a dangerous or defective condition. Any such sign shall be removed or repaired by the owner of the sign or the owner of the premises. 
(Code 1972, § 24-35.3; Ord. No. 03-19, § 2, 5-20-03; Ord. No. 06-67, 8-7-07) 
Sec. 90-156. - Removal of signs by administrator. 
(a)  The administrator shall remove any sign that endangers the public safety, such as an abandoned, dangerous, or materially, electrically, or structurally defective sign, or a sign for which no permit has been issued. The administrator shall prepare a notice which shall describe the sign and specify the violation involved, and which shall state that, if the sign is not removed or the violation is not corrected, the sign shall be removed in accordance with the provisions of this section and the owner will be charged an administrative fee of $50.00. The zoning administrator without notice may remove special event signage as permitted, in accordance with the time specified by the permit issued. Any fees or cost related to the removal of any permitted special event signage shall be charged to the responsible party, plus an administrative fee of $50.00. 
(b)  All notices mailed by the administrator shall be sent by certified mail to the owner of the property on which the sign is located, as shown on the last city assessment record. Any person having an interest in the sign or the property may appeal the determination of the administrator ordering removal or compliance by filing a written notice of appeal with the city board of zoning appeals within 30 days after the date of mailing the notice. 
(Code 1972, § 24-35.4; Ord. No. 03-19, § 2, 5-20-03; Ord. No. 06-67, 8-7-07) 
Sec. 90-157. - Determination of sign size. 
(a)  The size of any sign shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of this article and the following: 
(1)  When a sign consists of letters, numbers and/or logos and not a lettered board and such sign is erected on or attached to a building wall, pole, or other similar surface or support, the size of such sign shall be measured by the geometric shape formed by the extreme outside edge of the largest letters, numbers or logos contained in the sign. 
(2)  When a sign consists of a lettered board and such sign is erected on or attached to a building wall, pole, or other similar surface or support, the size of such sign shall be determined by calculating the area of the lettered board. 
(b)  Area of multi-faced signs. The sign area for a sign with more than one face shall be computed by adding together the area of all sign faces visible from any one point. When two identical sign faces part of the same sign structure are placed back to back so that both faces cannot be viewed from any point at the same time, and when such sign faces and are not more than 42 inches apart, the sign area shall be computed by the measurement of one of these faces. 
(Ord. No. 90-30, 6-2-09) 
Secs. 90-158-90-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FLOODPLAIN ZONING REGULATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 09-44, adopted July 21, 2009, amended Art. VI in its entirety, in effect deleting Art. VI and enacting a new Art. VI to read as set out herein Former Art. VI pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 09-16, adopted June 2, 2009. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; conformity of subdivision to floodplain regulations, § 66-110. 
State Law reference- Flood protection and dam safety, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-600 et seq. 

Sec. 90-181. - Authorization and purpose of article. 
    This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to localities by Va. Code § 10.1-600. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to prevent the loss of life and property, the creation of health and safety hazards, the disruption of commerce and governmental services, the extraordinary and unnecessary expenditure of public funds for flood protection and relief, and the impairment of the tax base by: 
(1)  Regulating uses, activities, and development which, alone or in combination with other existing or future uses, activities, and development, will cause unacceptable increases in flood heights, velocities and frequencies. 
(2)  Restricting or prohibiting certain uses, activities and development from locating within areas subject to flooding. 
(3)  Requiring all those uses, activities and developments that do occur in floodprone areas to be protected and/or floodproofed against flooding and flood damage. 
(4)  Protecting individuals from buying lands and structures which are unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazards. 
(b)  Definitions. 
    Appurtenant or accessory structure. Accessory structures not to exceed 200 square feet. 
    Base flood. The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Base flood elevation. The water surface elevations of the base flood, that is, the flood level that has a one percent or greater chance of occurrence in any given year. The water surface elevation of the base flood in relation to the datum specified on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map. For the purposes of this ordinance, the base flood is the 1% annual chance flood. 
    Basement. Any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Board of zoning appeals. The board appointed to review appeals made by individuals with regard to decisions of the zoning administrator in the interpretation of this article. 
    Development. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Elevated building. A non-basement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, or columns (posts and piers). 
    Encroachment. The advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
    Existing construction. Structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the city's initial FIRM, February 2, 1989. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Flood or flooding. 
(1)  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
a.  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or, 
b.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
(2)  The collapse or subsistence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in subsection (1)a of this definition. 
(3)  Mudflows which are proximately caused by flooding as defined in subsection (2) of this definition and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current. 
    Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has been made available digitally is called a digital flood insurance rate map (DFIRM). 
    Flood insurance study (FIS). An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudflow and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
    Floodplain or flood-prone area. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. 
    Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Freeboard. A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization in the watershed. 
    Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure. Any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or, 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis. Analyses performed by a licensed professional engineer, in accordance with standard engineering practices that are accepted by the Virginia Department of Conservation and Recreation and FEMA, used to determine the base flood, other frequency floods, flood elevations, floodway information and boundaries, and flood profiles. 
    Letters of map change (LOMC). A letter of map change is an official FEMA determination, by letter, that amends or revises an effective flood insurance rate map or flood insurance study. Letters of map change include: 
Letter of map amendment (LOMA). An amendment based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective flood insurance rate map and establishes that a land as defined by meets and bounds or structure is not located in a special flood hazard area. 
Letter of map revision (LOMR). A revision based on technical data that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations, and planimetric features. A letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F), is a determination that a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer exposed to flooding associated with the base flood. In order to qualify for this determination, the fill must have been permitted and placed in accordance with the community's floodplain management regulations. 
Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR). A formal review and comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project complies with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the effective flood insurance rate map or flood insurance study. 
    Lowest adjacent grade. The lowest natural elevation of the ground surface next to the walls of a structure. 
    Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of Federal Code 44 CFR § 60.3. 
    Manufactured home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes the term manufactured home also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed one a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    New construction. For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of February 2, 1989, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, new construction means structures for which start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Post-FIRM structures. A structure for which construction or substantial improvement occurred after February 2, 1989, whichever is later. 
    Pre-FIRM structures. A structure for which construction or substantial improvement occurred on or before February 2, 1989. 
    Recreational vehicle. A vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Repetitive loss structure. A building covered by a contract for flood insurance that has incurred flood-related damages on two occasions in which the cost of the repair, on the average, equated or exceeded 25 percent of the market value of the structure at the time of each such flood event and at the time of the second incidence of flood-related damage, the contract for flood insurance contains increased cost of compliance coverage. 
    Severe repetitive loss structure. A structure that: (a) Is covered under a contract for flood insurance made available under the NFIP; and (b) Has incurred flood related damage - (i) For which four or more separate claims payments have been made under flood insurance coverage with the amount of each such claim exceeding $5.000.00, and with the cumulative amount of such claims payments exceeding $20,000.00; or (ii) For which at least two separate claims payments have been made under such coverage, with the cumulative amount of such claims exceeding the market value of the insured structure. 
    Special flood hazard area. The land in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of being flooded in any given year as determined in section 90-186(2). 
    Start of construction. The date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, substantial improvement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of the construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure. For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
"Structure," for insurance rating purposes, means a walled and roofed building, other than a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground and affixed to a permanent site, as well as a manufactured home on a permanent foundation. For the latter purpose, the term includes a building while in the course of construction, alteration or repair, but does not include building materials or supplies intended for use in such construction, alteration or repair, unless such materials or supplies are within an enclosed building on the premises. 
    Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to it's before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or 
(2)  Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
(3)  Historic structures undergoing repair or rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvement as defined above, must comply with all ordinance requirements that do not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. Documentation that a specific ordinance requirement will cause removal of the structure from the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places must be obtained from the Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer. Any exemption from ordinance requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
    Violation. Means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications or other evidence of compliance required in this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Watercourse. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
(Ord. No. 09-44, 7-21-09; Ord. No. 15-29, 8-18-15) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 15-29, adopted Aug. 18, 2015, changed the title of § 90-181 from "Purpose of article" to read as set out herein. 
Sec. 90-182. - Applicability of article. 
    This article shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the city and identified as being in the Special Flood Hazard Area by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(Ord. No. 09-44, 7-21-09; Ord. No. 15-29, 8-18-15) 
Sec. 90-183. - Compliance with article and liability of city. 
(a)  After the effective date of this article, no land shall be developed, and no structure shall be located, relocated, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged or structurally altered except in full compliance with the terms and provisions of this article and any other applicable ordinances and regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this article. 
(b)  The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This article does not imply that areas outside the floodplain districts, or that land uses permitted within such districts, will be free from flooding or flood damages. 
(c)  This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made under this article. 
(d)  Records of actions associated with administering this article shall be kept on file and maintained by the City of Emporia. 
(Ord. No. 09-44, 7-21-09) 
Sec. 90-184. - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this article shall be declared invalid for any reason whatever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. The remaining portions shall remain in full force and effect; and for this purpose, the provisions of this article are hereby declared to be severable. 
(Ord. No. 09-44, 7-21-09) 
Sec. 90-185. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This article supersedes any ordinance currently in effect in one-percent annual chance floodplain areas. However, any underlying ordinance shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that its provisions are more restrictive than this article. 
(Ord. No. 09-44, 7-21-09; Ord. No. 15-29, 8-18-15) 
Sec. 90-186. - Description of districts. 
(a)  Basis of districts. The various floodplain districts shall include areas subject to inundation by waters of the one-percent annual chance flood. The basis for the delineation of these districts shall be the flood insurance study and flood insurance rate map for the City of Emporia, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, dated July 7, 2009, and any subsequent revisions or amendments thereto. On this map, the one-percent annual chance floodplain boundary corresponds to the boundary of the areas of special flood hazards (zones A and AE). 
    The city may identify and regulate local flood hazard or pending areas that are not delineated on the FIRM. These areas may be delineated on a "Local Flood Hazard Map" using best available topographic data and locally derived information such as flood of record historic high water marks or approximate study methodologies. 
    The boundaries of the SFHA districts are established as shown on the FIRM which is declared to be a part of this article and which shall be kept on file at the city offices. 
(1)  The floodway district is delineated, for purposes of this article, using the criterion that certain areas within the floodplain must be capable of carrying the waters of the one-percent annual chance flood without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one foot at any point. The areas included in this district are specifically defined in Table 1 of the above-referenced flood insurance study and shown on the accompanying flood insurance rate map. 
(2)  The special floodplain district shall be those areas identified as an AE zone on the maps accompanying the flood insurance study for which one-percent annual chance elevations have been provided. 
(3)  The approximated floodplain district shall be those areas identified as an A or A99 zone on the maps accompanying the flood insurance study. In these zones, no detailed flood profiles or elevations are provided, but the one-percent annual chance floodplain boundary has been approximated. 
(b)  Overlay concept. The overlay concept is as follows: 
(1)  The floodplain districts described above shall be overlays to the existing underlying districts as shown on the official zoning map, and, as such, the provisions for the floodplain district shall serve as a supplement to the underlying district provisions. 
(2)  If any conflict exists between the provisions or requirements of the floodplain districts and those of any underlying district, the more restrictive provisions and/or those pertaining to the floodplain districts shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 09-44, 7-21-09; Ord. No. 15-29, 8-18-15) 
Sec. 90-187. - District boundary changes. 
    The delineation of any floodplain districts may be revised by the city council where natural or manmade changes have occurred and/or where more detailed studies have been conducted or undertaken by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, or other qualified agency or individual documents the need or possibility for such change. However, prior to any such change, approval must be obtained from the Federal Insurance Administration. 
(Ord. No. 09-44, 7-21-09) 
Sec. 90-188. - Submitting technical data. 
    A community's base flood elevations may increase or decrease resulting from physical changes affecting flooding conditions. As soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the date such information becomes available, a community shall notify the Federal Insurance Administrator of the changes by submitting technical or scientific data. Such a submission is necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements will be based upon current data. 
(Ord. No. 09-44, 7-21-09) 
Sec. 90-189. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
    Initial interpretations of the boundaries of the floodplain districts shall be made by the zoning administrator. Should a dispute arise concerning the boundaries of any of the districts, the board of zoning appeals shall make the necessary determination. The person questioning or contesting the location of the district boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present his case to the board and to submit his own technical evidence if he so desires. 
(Ord. No. 09-44, 7-21-09) 
Sec. 90-190. - District provisions. 
(a)  All uses, activities and development occurring within any floodplain district shall be undertaken only with the issuance of a zoning permit. Such development shall be undertaken only in strict compliance with the provisions of this article and with all other applicable codes and ordinances, such as chapter 66 and the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. Prior to the issuance of any such permit, the zoning administrator shall require au applications to include compliance with all applicable state and federal laws and shall review all sites to assure they are reasonably safe from flooding. Under no circumstances shall any use, activity and/or development adversely affect the capacity of the channels or floodways of any watercourse, drainage ditch or any other drainage facility or system. 
(b)  Prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of any channels or of any watercourse, stream, etc., within this city, approval shall be obtained from the division of dam safety and floodplain management (department of conservation and recreation). A permit from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the Marine Resources Commission and certification from the state water control board may be necessary (a joint permit application is available from any one of these three organizations). Further notification of the proposal shall be given to all affected adjacent municipalities. Copies of such notification shall be provided to the division of dam safety and floodplain management (department of conservation and recreation) and the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(c)  All applications for development in the floodplain district and all building permits issued for the floodplain shall incorporate the following information: 
(1)  For structures that have been elevated, the elevation of the lowest floor, including the basement. 
(2)  For structures that have been floodproofed (nonresidential only), the elevation to which the structure has been floodproofed. 
(3)  The elevation of the base flood at the site. 
(4)  Topographic information showing existing and proposed ground elevations. 
(d)  All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within the floodplain district shall be placed on a permanent foundation and elevated and anchored in accordance with the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(e)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be according to this ordinance and the VA USBC, and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(f)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(g)  New construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(h)  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment and other service facilities, including duct work, shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(i)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. 
(j)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(k)  The flood carrying capacity within an altered or relocated portion of any watercourse shall be maintained. 
(Ord. No. 09-44, 7-21-09; Ord. No. 15-29, 8-18-15) 
State Law reference- State water control board, Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.7 et seq. 
Sec. 90-191. - Floodway district. 
(a)  Generally. In the floodway district, no development shall be permitted except where the effect of such development on flood heights is fully offset by accompanying improvements which have been approved by all appropriate local and/or state authorities, as required in this article. 
(b)  Permitted uses. In the floodway district, the following uses and activities are permitted, provided that they are in compliance with the provisions of the underlying district and are not prohibited by any other ordinance, and provided that they do not require structures, fill or storage of materials and equipment: 
(1)  Agricultural uses, such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor-plant nurseries, horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming and wild crop harvesting. 
(2)  Public and private recreational uses and activities, such as parks, day camps, picnic grounds, golf courses, boat launching and swimming area, horseback riding and hiking trails, wildlife and nature preserves and hunting and fishing areas. 
(3)  Accessory residential uses, such as yard areas, gardens, play areas and parking areas. 
(4)  Accessory industrial and commercial uses, such as yard areas, previous parking and loading areas, etc. 
(Ord. No. 09-44, 7-21-09) 
Sec. 90-192. - Standards for the special floodplain district. 
    The following provisions shall apply within the special floodplain district: 
(1)  Until a regulatory floodway is designated, no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within the areas of special flood hazard, designated as zones A and AE on the flood rate insurance map, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the city. 
(2)  Development activities in zones A and AE on the city's flood insurance rate map which increase the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot may be allowed, provided that the applicant first applies - with the city's endorsement - for a conditional flood insurance rate map revision, and receives the approval of the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(3)  The approximated floodplain district shall be that floodplain area for which no detailed flood profiles or elevations are provided, but where a one-percent annual chance floodplain boundary has been approximated. Such areas are shown as zone A on the maps accompanying the flood insurance study. For these areas, the one-percent annual chance flood elevations and floodway information from federal, state, and other acceptable sources shall be used, when available. Where the specific one-percent annual chance flood elevation cannot be determined for this area using other sources of data, such as the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers Floodplain Information Reports, U.S. Geological Survey Flood-Prone Quadrangles, etc., then the applicant for the proposed use, development and/or activity shall determine this elevation in accordance with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently-accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough review by the zoning administrator. 
(4)  When such base flood elevation data is utilized, the lowest floor shall be two feet above the base flood elevation. During the permitting process, the zoning administrator shall obtain: 
a.  The elevation of the lowest floor (including the basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; and, 
b.  If the structure has been flood-proofed in accordance with the requirements of this article, the elevation to which the structure has been floodproofed. All floodproofing must be certified by a professional engineer. 
(Ord. No. 09-44, 7-21-09; Ord. No. 15-29, 8-18-15) 
Sec. 90-193. - Design criteria for utilities and facilities. 
(a)  Sanitary sewer facilities. All new or replacement sanitary sewer facilities and private package sewage treatment plants (including all pumping stations and collector systems) shall be designed to minimize or eliminate the infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into the floodwaters. In addition, they shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage and impairment. 
(b)  Water facilities. All new or replacement water facilities shall be designed to minimize or eliminate the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages. 
(c)  Drainage facilities. All storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow or surface waters without damage to persons or property. The systems shall ensure drainage away from buildings and onsite waste disposal sites. The city council may require a primarily underground system to accommodate frequent floods and a secondary surface system to accommodate larger, less frequent floods. Drainage plans shall be consistent with local and regional drainage plans. The facilities shall be designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties. 
(d)  Utilities. All utilities, such as gas lines, electrical and telephone systems, being placed in one-percent annual chance floodplain areas shall be located, elevated (where possible), and constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood occurrence. 
(e)  Streets and sidewalks. Streets and sidewalks shall be designed to minimize their potential for increasing and aggravating the levels of flood flow. Drainage openings shall be required to sufficiently discharge flood flows without unduly increasing flood heights. 
(Ord. No. 09-44, 7-21-09; Ord. No. 15-29, 8-18-15) 
Sec. 90-194. - Base flood elevation determined. 
    In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevations have been provided in the flood insurance study or generated according to section 90-192(c), the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than two feet above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Non-residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or non-residential building (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than two feet above the base flood elevation. Buildings located in all A and AE zones may be floodproofed in lieu of being elevated provided that all areas of the building components below the elevation corresponding to the BFE plus one foot are water tight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and use structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. 
(3)  Elevated buildings. Enclosed areas, of new construction or substantially improved structures, which are below-the regulatory flood protection elevation shall: 
a.  Not be designed or used for human habitation, but shall only be used for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment (standard exterior door), or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). 
b.  Be constructed entirely of flood resistant materials below the regulatory flood protection elevation; 
c.  Include, in zones A and AE, measures to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the openings must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum design criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings on different sides of each enclosed area subject to flooding. 
2.  The total net area of all openings must be at least one square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. 
3.  If a building has more than one enclosed area, each area must have openings to allow floodwaters to automatically enter and exit. 
4.  The bottom of all required openings shall be no higher than one foot above the adjacent grade. 
5.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other opening coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions. 
6.  Foundation enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not require openings. Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is considered an enclosure and requires openings as outlined above. 
(Ord. No. 09-44, 7-21-09) 
Sec. 90-195. - Variances; factors to be considered. 
(a)  In passing upon applications for variances, the board of zoning appeals shall satisfy all relevant factors and procedures specified in other sections of this chapter and consider the following additional factors: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments. No variance shall be granted for any proposed use, development or activity within the floodway district that will cause any increase in flood levels during the one-percent annual chance flood. 
(2)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or downstream to the injury of others. 
(3)  The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions. 
(4)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage, and the effect of such damage on the individual owners. 
(5)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community. 
(6)  The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location. 
(7)  The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use. 
(8)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development, and development anticipated in the foreseeable future. 
(9)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan, and the floodplain management program for the area. 
(10)  The safety of access by ordinary and emergency vehicles to the property in time of flood. 
(11)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site. 
(12)  The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(13)  Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this article. 
(b)  The board of zoning appeals may refer any application and accompanying documentation pertaining to any request for a variance to any engineer or other qualified person or agency for technical assistance in evaluating the proposed project in relation to flood heights and velocities, and the adequacy of the plans for flood protection and other related matters. 
(c)  Variances shall be issued only after the board of zoning appeals has determined that the granting of such will not result in: 
(1)  Unacceptable or prohibited increases in flood heights; 
(2)  Additional threats to public safety; 
(3)  Extraordinary public expense; and will not: 
a.  Create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public; or 
b.  Conflict with local laws or ordinances. 
(d)  Variances shall be issued only after the board of zoning appeals has determined that the variance will be the minimum required to provide relief from hardship. 
(e)  The board of zoning appeals shall notify the applicant for a variance, in writing, that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood elevation: 
(1)  Increases the risks to life and property; and 
(2)  Will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance. 
(f)  A record shall be maintained of the notification contained in subsection (e) of this section, as well as all variance actions, including justification for the issuance of the variances. Any variances which are issued shall be stated in the annual or biennial report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration. 
(Ord. No. 09-44, 7-21-09; Ord. No. 15-29, 8-18-15) 
Sec. 90-196. - Existing structures in floodplain districts. 
    A structure or use of a structure or premises which lawfully existed before the enactment of this ordinance, but which is not in conformity with this article, may be continued, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Existing structures and/or uses located in the floodway district shall not be expanded or enlarged, unless the effect of the proposed expansion or enlargement on flood heights is fully offset by accompanying improvements. 
(2)  Any modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement of any kind to a structure, and/or use located in any floodplain district to an extent or amount of less than 50 percent of its market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest extent possible. 
(3)  The modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement of any kind to a structure and/or use, regardless of its location in a floodplain district, to an extent or amount of 50 percent or more of its market value shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(4)  Uses or adjuncts thereof which are or become nuisances shall not be permitted to continue. 
(Ord. No. 09-44, 7-21-09) 
Sec. 90-197. - Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. 
(a)  All manufactured homes placed, or substantially improved, on individual lots or parcels, in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, in a new manufactured home park or subdivision or in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, must meet all the requirements for new construction, including the elevation and anchoring requirements. 
(b)  All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision in which a manufactured home has not incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood shall be elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than two feet above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to the adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation collapse and lateral movement. 
(c)  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
(1)  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
(2)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions); or 
(3)  Meet all the requirements for manufactured homes. 
(Ord. No. 09-44, 7-21-09; Ord. No. 15-29, 8-18-15) 
Sec. 90-198. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(b)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(c)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(d)  Base flood elevation data shall be obtained from other sources or developed using detailed methodologies, hydraulic and hydrologic analysis, comparable to those contained in a flood insurance study for subdivision proposals and other proposed development proposals (including manufactured home parks and subdivisions that exceed 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser. 
(Ord. No. 09-44, 7-21-09; Ord. No. 15-29, 8-18-15) 
Sec. 90-199. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  Any person who fails to comply with any of the requirements or provisions of this article or directions of the director of planning or any authorized employee of the city shall be guilty of a violation in accordance with section 90-5. 
(b)  In addition to the above penalties, all other actions are hereby reserved, including an action in equity for the proper enforcement of this article. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of, or noncompliance with, this article shall not excuse the violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any structure constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered or relocated in noncompliance with this article may be declared by the city [to] be a public nuisance and abatable as such. Flood insurance may be withheld from structures constructed in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 09-44, 7-21-09) 
Sec. 90-200. - Administration. 
(a)  Designation of the floodplain administrator [44 CFR 59. 22( b)]. The zoning administrator is hereby appointed to administer and implement these regulations and is referred to herein as the floodplain administrator. The floodplain administrator may: 
(1)  Do the work themselves. 
(2)  Delegate duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations to qualified technical personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and other employees. 
(3)  Enter into a written agreement or written contract with another community or private sector entity to administer specific provisions of these regulations. Administration of any part of these regulations by another entity shall not relieve the community of its responsibilities pursuant to the participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program as set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations at 44 C.F.R. Section 59.22. 
(b)  Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator (44 CFR 60.3). The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include but are not limited to: 
(1)  Review applications for permits to determine whether proposed activities will be located in the special flood hazard area (SFHA). 
(2)  Interpret floodplain boundaries and provide available base flood elevation and flood hazard information. 
(3)  Review applications to determine whether proposed activities will be reasonably safe from flooding and require new construction and substantial improvements to meet the requirements of these regulations. 
(4)  Review applications to determine whether all necessary permits have been obtained from the federal, state or local agencies from which prior or concurrent approval is required, in particular, permits from state agencies for any construction, reconstruction, repair, or alteration of a dam, reservoir, or waterway obstruction (including bridges, culverts, structures), any alteration of a watercourse, or any change of the course, current, or cross section of a stream or body of water, including any change to the one-percent annual chance floodplain of free-flowing non-tidal waters of the state. 
(5)  Verify that applicants proposing an alteration of a watercourse have notified adjacent communities, the Department of Conservation and Recreation (Division of Dam Safety and Floodplain Management), and other appropriate agencies (VADEQ, USACE) and have submitted copies of such notifications to FEMA. 
(6)  Advise applicants for new construction or substantial improvement of structures that are located within an area of the Coastal Barrier Resources System established by the Coastal Barrier Resources Act that Federal flood insurance is not available on such structures; areas subject to this limitation are shown on flood insurance rate maps as Coastal Barrier Resource System Areas (CBRS) or Otherwise Protected Areas (OPA). 
(7)  Approve applications and issue permits to develop in flood hazard areas if the provisions of these regulations have been met, or disapprove applications if the provisions of these regulations have not been met. 
(8)  Inspect or cause to be inspected, buildings, structures, and other development for which permits have been issued to determine compliance with these regulations or to determine if non-compliance has occurred or violations have been committed. 
(9)  Review elevation certificates and require incomplete or deficient certificates to be corrected. 
(10)  Submit to FEMA or require applicants to submit to FEMA data and information necessary to maintain FIRMs, including hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses prepared by or for the city within six months after such data and information becomes available if the analyses indicate changes in base flood elevations. 
(11)  Maintain and permanently keep records that are necessary for the administration of these regulations including: 
a.  Flood insurance studies. Flood insurance rate maps (including historic studies and maps and current effective studies and maps) and letters of map change; and 
b.  Documentation supporting issuance and denial of permits. Elevation certificates, documentation of the elevation (in relation to the datum on the FIRM) to which structures have been floodproofed, other required design certifications, variances, and records of enforcement actions taken to correct violations of these regulations. 
(12)  Enforce the provisions of these regulations, investigate violations, issue notices of violations or stop work orders, and require permit holders to take corrective action. 
(13)  Advise the board of zoning appeals regarding the intent of these regulations and, for each application for a variance, prepare a staff report and recommendation. 
(14)  Administer the requirements related to proposed work on existing buildings. 
a.  Make determinations as to whether buildings and structures that are located in flood hazard areas and that are damaged by any cause have been substantially damaged. 
b.  Make reasonable efforts to notify owners of substantially damaged structures of the need to obtain a permit to repair, rehabilitate or reconstruct, and prohibit the non-compliant repair of substantially damaged buildings except for temporary emergency protective measures necessary to secure a property or stabilize a building or structure to prevent additional damage. 
(15)  Undertake, as determined appropriate by the floodplain administrator due to the circumstances, other actions which may include but are not limited to: issuing press releases, public service announcements, and other public information materials related to permit requests and repair of damaged structures, coordinating with other federal, state, and local agencies to assist with substantial damage determinations, providing owners of damaged structures information related to the proper repair of damaged structures in special flood hazard areas, and assisting property owners with documentation necessary to file claims for Increased Cost of Compliance coverage under NFIP flood insurance policies. 
(16)  Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency when the corporate boundaries of the city have been modified; and 
a.  Provide a map that clearly delineates the new corporate boundaries or the new area for which the authority to regulate pursuant to these regulations has either been assumed or relinquished through annexation; and 
b.  If the FIRM for any annexed area includes special flood hazard areas that have flood zones that have regulatory requirements that are not set forth in these regulations, prepare amendments to these regulations to adopt the FIRM and appropriate requirements, and submit the amendments to the governing body for adoption; such adoption shall take place at the same time as or prior to the date of annexation and a copy of the amended regulations shall be provided to Department of Conservation and Recreation (Division of Dam Safety and Floodplain Management) and FEMA. 
(17)  Upon the request of FEMA, complete and submit a report concerning a participation in the NFIP which may request information regarding the number of buildings in the SFHA, number of permits issued for development in the SFHA, and number of variances issued for development in the SFHA. 
(18)  It is the duty of the community floodplain administrator to take into account flood, mudslide and flood-related erosion hazards, to the extent that they are known, in all official actions relating to land management and use throughout the entire jurisdictional area of the community, whether or not those hazards have been specifically delineated geographically (e.g. via mapping or surveying). 
(c)  Use and Interpretation of FIRMs [44 CFR 60.3]. The floodplain administrator shall make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of special flood hazard areas, floodplain boundaries, and floodway boundaries. The following shall apply to the use and interpretation of FIRMs and data: 
(1)  Where field surveyed topography indicates that adjacent ground elevations: 
a.  Are below the base flood elevation, even in areas not delineated as a special flood hazard area on a FIRM, the area shall be considered as special flood hazard area and subject to the requirements of these regulations; 
b.  Are above the base flood elevation, the area shall be regulated as special flood hazard area unless the applicant obtains a letter of map change that removes the area from the SFHA. 
(2)  In FEMA-identified special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation and floodway data have not been identified and in areas where FEMA has not identified SFHAs, any other flood hazard data avail able from a federal, state, or other source shall be reviewed and reasonably used. 
(3)  Base flood elevations and designated floodway boundaries on FIRMs and in FISs shall take precedence over base flood elevations and floodway boundaries by any other sources if such sources show reduced floodway widths and/or lower base flood elevations. 
(4)  Other sources of data shall be reasonably used if such sources show increased base flood elevations and/or larger floodway areas than are shown on FIRMs and in FISs. 
(5)  If a preliminary flood insurance rate map and/or a preliminary flood insurance study has been provided by FEMA: 
a.  Upon the issuance of a letter of final determination by FEMA, the preliminary flood hazard data shall be used and shall replace the flood hazard data previously provided from FEMA for the purposes of administering these regulations. 
b.  Prior to the issuance of a letter of final determination by FEMA, the use of preliminary flood hazard data shall be deemed the best available data pursuant to Section 3.1.A.3, and used where no base flood elevations and/or floodway areas are provided on the effective FIRM. 
c.  Prior to issuance of a letter of final determination by FEMA, the use of preliminary flood hazard data is permitted where the preliminary base flood elevations or floodway areas exceed the base flood elevations and/or designated floodway widths in existing flood hazard data provided by FEMA. Such preliminary data may be subject to change and/or appeal to FEMA. 
(d)  Jurisdictional boundary changes [44 CFR 59.22, 65.3]. The county floodplain ordinance in effect on the date of annexation shall remain in effect and shall be enforced by the municipality for all annexed areas until the municipality adopts and enforces an ordinance which meets the requirements for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. Municipalities with existing floodplain ordinances shall pass a resolution acknowledging and accepting responsibility for enforcing floodplain ordinance standards prior to annexation of any area containing identified flood hazards. If the FIRM for any annexed area includes special flood hazard areas that have flood zones that have regulatory requirements that are not set forth in these regulations, prepare amendments to these regulations to adopt the FIRM and appropriate requirements, and submit the amendments to the governing body for adoption; such adoption shall take place at the same time as or prior to the date of annexation and a copy of the amended regulations shall be provided to Department of Conservation and Recreation (Division of Dam Safety and Floodplain Management) and FEMA. 
    In accordance with the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 44 Subpart (B) Section 59.22(a)(9)(v) all NFIP participating communities must notify the Federal Insurance Administration and optionally the State Coordinating Office in writing whenever the boundaries of the community have been modified by annexation or the community has otherwise assumed or no longer has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for a particular area. 
    In order that all flood insurance rate maps accurately represent the community's boundaries, a copy of a map of the community suitable for reproduction, clearly delineating the new corporate limits or new area for which the community has assumed or relinquished floodplain management regulatory authority must be included with the notification. 
(e)  Letters of map revision. When development in the floodplain will cause or causes a change in the base flood elevation, the applicant, including state agencies, must notify FEMA by applying for a conditional letter of map revision and then a letter of map revision. 
Example cases: 
  Any development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations within the floodway. 
  Any development occurring in Zones A1-30 and AE without a designated floodway, which will cause a rise of more than one foot on the base flood elevation. 
  Alteration or relocation of a stream (including, but not limited to, installing culverts and bridges) 44 Code of Federal Regulations § 65.3 and § 65.6(a)(12). 
(Ord. No. 15-29, 8-18-15) 
Secs. 90-201-90-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Board of zoning appeals, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-494 et seq. 

Sec. 90-221. - Composition; appointments; terms; removal; compensation. 
    There shall be a board of zoning appeals (the board) which shall consist of five members, each to be appointed in the manner prescribed by the Code of Virginia, as amended, for terms of five years. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term. A member may be removed for cause, upon written charges and after a public hearing. Each member may receive such compensation as the city council may authorize for attendance at each regular or called meeting of the board. 
(Code 1972, § 24-47) 
Sec. 90-222. - Organization. 
    The board shall elect one of its members as chairman who shall preside at all meetings of the board, and, in his absence, a member designated by the board shall act as chairman and shall preside. The board shall appoint a secretary whose duty it shall be to keep the minutes and other records of the actions and deliberations of the board and perform such other ministerial duties as the board shall direct. The secretary may be a salaried city employee and shall perform the duties of secretary of the board in addition to his other regular duties. 
(Code 1972, § 24-48) 
Sec. 90-223. - Procedure. 
    The board shall adopt such rules of procedure as it may deem necessary in order to carry into effect the provisions of this chapter. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may determine. The chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. 
(Code 1972, § 24-49) 
Sec. 90-224. - Powers and duties. 
    The board shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Administrative appeals. To hear and decide an appeal where it is alleged there is error to any order, requirement, decision or determination by the administrator in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Variances. To authorize upon appeal or original application in specific cases such variance, as defined in state law, from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest, when, owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions will result in unnecessary hardship (unnecessary to carry out the spirit of this chapter), and so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed and substantial justice done as follows: 
a.  When a property owner can show that his property was acquired in good faith and where by reason of the exceptional narrowness, shallowness, size or shape of a specific piece of property at the time of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives, or where by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary situation or condition of such piece of property, or of the condition, situation or development of property immediately adjacent thereto, the strict application of the terms of this chap-ter would effectively prohibit or unreasonably restrict the use of the property, or where the board is satisfied, upon the evidence heard by it, that the granting of such variance will alleviate a clearly demonstrable hardship approaching confiscation, as distinguished from a special privilege or convenience sought by the applicant, provided that all variances shall be in harmony with the intended spirit and purpose of this chapter. 
b.  No such variance shall be authorized by the board unless it finds, by preponderance of evidence that all of the following facts and conditions exist: 
1.  The strict application of this chapter would produce undue hardship. 
2.  Such hardship is not shared generally by other properties in the same zoning district and the same vicinity. 
3.  The authorization of such variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property, and the character of the district will not be changed by the granting of the variance. 
4.  The exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applying to the property in question, or to the intended use of the property do not apply generally to other properties or classes of uses in the same zoning district. 
5.  The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights possessed by other properties in the same zoning district and in the same vicinity. 
6.  The authorizing of such variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property, and will not materially impair the purpose of this chapter or the public interest. 
No such variance shall be authorized except after notice and hearing as required by state law. 
c.  No variance shall be authorized unless the board specifically finds that the condition or situation of the specific piece of property or the intended use of the property, for which variance is sought (one or the other or in combination) is not of such general or recurring a nature as to make reasonably practicable the formulation of a general regulation for such condition or situation, to be adopted as an amendment to this chapter in the manner prescribed herein for amendments. 
d.  In authorizing a variance, the board may attach thereto such conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed structure or use as it may deem necessary to further the purposes of this chapter and in the public interest, and may require a guarantee or bond to ensure that the conditions imposed are being and will continue to be complied with. 
(3)  Appeals. To hear and decide appeals from the decision of the administrator. No such appeal shall be heard except after notice and hearing as provided by state law. 
(4)  Interpretation. To vary the application of the terms of this chapter in harmony with its general purpose and intent, and in accordance with the rules prescribed in this section, in the following respects: To hear and decide applications for interpretation of the district map where there is any uncertainty as to the location of a district boundary. After notice to the owners of the property affected by any such question, and after public hearing with notice as required by state law, the board may interpret the map in such way as to carry out the intent and purpose of this chapter for the particular section or district in question. Where the actual street or lot layout differs from the layout indicated on such map, the board, after notice to the owners of the property and after public hearing, shall interpret the map in such a way as to carry out the intent and purpose of this chapter for the particular section or district in question. The board shall not have the power to change substantially the location of district boundaries as established by ordinance. 
(5)  Rezoning. No provision of this section shall be construed as granting any board the power to rezone property. 
(Code 1972, § 24-50; Ord. No. 10-10, 1-19-10) 
State Law reference- "Variance" defined, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-430(p); notice, hearings, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-431; powers and duties of board of zoning appeals, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-495. 
Sec. 90-225. - Applications and appeals generally. 
    An application to the board for a special use permit, variance or other action in which the board has original jurisdiction under this chapter may be made by any property owner, tenant, government official, department, board or bureau. Such application shall be made to the board on forms which shall be provided for the purpose, in accordance with rules which shall be adopted by the board. All information, including maps and plans required by such forms, or otherwise required by the board in order that it might be fully informed, shall be furnished by the applicant together with a fee established by resolution of the city council. The board shall place the matter on the agenda. Every application or appeal shall automatically be advertised for a public hearing as provided by the Code of Virginia. The board shall also transmit a copy of the application to the planning commission so that the latter, if it finds that the application is related in any way to any provisions or general policy or objective of the comprehensive plan or any of its components, or of the official land use plan, may send a recommendation to the board based upon such relationship or appear as a party at the hearing. Substantially the same application will not be considered by the board within one year. 
(Code 1972, § 24-51) 
State Law reference- Applications for special exceptions and variances, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-496. 
Sec. 90-226. - Appeals to board. 
(a)  An appeal to the board may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the city affected by any decision of the administrator or from any order, requirement, decision or determination made by any other administrative officer in the administration or enforcement of this chapter. Notwithstanding any Charter provision to the contrary, any written notice of a zoning violation or a written order of the administrator dated on or after July 1, 1993, shall include a statement informing the recipient that he may have a right to appeal the notice of a zoning violation or a written order within 30 days in accordance with this section, and that the decision shall be final and unappealable if not appealed within 30 days. The appeal period shall not commence until such statement is given. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days after the decision appealed from by filing with the administrator, and with the board, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The administrator shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(b)  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the administrator certifies to the board that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would in his opinion cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order granted by the board or by a court of record, on application and on notice to the administrator and for good cause shown. 
(c)  In no event shall a written order, requirement, decision or determination made by the administrator or other administrative officer be subject to change, modification or reversal by the administrator or other administrative officer after 60 days have elapsed from the date of the written order, requirement, decision or determination where the person aggrieved has materially changed his position in good faith reliance on the action of the administrator or other administrative officer unless it is proven that such written order, requirement, decision or determination was obtained through malfeasance of the administrator or other administrative officer or through fraud. The 60-day limitation period shall not apply in any case where, with the concurrence of the attorney for the city council, modification is required to correct clerical or other nondiscretionary errors. 
(Code 1972, § 24-52) 
State Law reference- Appeals to board, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-496.1. 
Sec. 90-227. - Hearings. 
    The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an application or appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest and decide the same within 90 days. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. In exercising its powers, the board may, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify an order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made and, to that end, shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. The concurring vote of three members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the administrative officer or to decide in favor of the applicant on any manner upon which it is required to pass under this chapter, or to effect any variance from this chapter. 
(Code 1972, § 24-53) 
State Law reference- Procedure on appeal, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-496.2. 
Sec. 90-228. - Appeals from board action. 
    Appeals from a decision from the board of zoning appeals may be taken as provided by law. 
(Code 1972, § 24-54) 
State Law reference- Certiorari to review decision of board, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-497. 
Secs. 90-229-90-255. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - AMENDMENT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Amendments to zoning ordinance, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-491(g). 

Sec. 90-256. - Procedure. 
(a)  The city council may, from time to time, on its own motion, on motion from the planning commission, or on petition from property owners, after public notice and hearings, as required by law, and after report by the city planning commission, amend, supplement, or change the district boundaries or regulations in this chapter or subsequently established. 
(b)  Pursuant to the provisions of section 15.2-2297 of the Code of Virginia, for a rezoning request, the property owner(s) may voluntarily proffer reasonable conditions on the use and development of the property that the owner(s) is seeking to rezone. If the property owner(s) voluntarily elects to submit such proffers, then the property owner(s) shall submit the same in writing to the zoning administrator within the time limits set forth in section 15.2-2297 of the Code of Virginia. If approved by the city council, then such proffered conditions shall be binding on the use and development of the property, and shall continue in full force and effect until a subsequent amendment changes the zoning on the property covered by such conditions. 
(c)  Every application by a property owner to amend, supplement or change the district boundaries or regulations of this chapter shall be filed in writing with the zoning administrator, on application forms supplied by the zoning administrator, and shall be accompanied by a fee of $300.00 to be paid to the city treasurer, which shall be applied to the cost of advertising and expense incidental to reviewing, publishing, and reporting the facts. 
(d)  The zoning administrator shall forward any applications for any proposed amendment, supplement or change of district boundaries or regulations to the city manager and city planning commission for recommendation and report and give notice to the affected property owners as prescribed by the Code of Virginia. 
(e)  In determining what, if any amendments to this chapter are to be adopted, the city council shall give due consideration to the proper relationship of such amendments to the entire zoning plan and ordinance for the city, it being the intent to retain the integrity and validity of the zoning districts described in this chapter, and to avoid any isolated spot zoning changes in the zoning map. Any amendments adopted by the city council may be modified from the form in which they are advertised within the limits necessary to relate properly such amendment or amendments to the zoning plan and ordinance. Final action on such modifications shall be subject to review and report of the planning commission prior to final passage by the city council. 
(f)  No application for a change of zoning of any lot, parcel or portion thereof, shall be considered by the city council within one year of the final action of the city council upon a prior application concerning any of the same described land. This subsection, however, shall not impair the right of the city council to propose any amendment or change in the boundaries of any of the districts in this chapter on its own motion. 
(Code 1972, § 24-55; Ord. No. 03-08, § 1, 3-18-03; Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 6-28-05) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1972 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1972 Code, as updated through May 17, 1994, which are included herein. Sections of the 1972 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1972 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1-8.1, 1-8.2 26-4, 26-5 1-9 26-6 1-10-1-13 46-46-46-49 2-11-2-13 38-1-38-3 2-17 38-4 2-86, 2-87 26-1 2-88, 2-89 26-2 2-90, 2-91 26-3 2-103-2-115 54-31-54-43 2-117-2-124 54-44-54-51 2-131-2-136 54-67-54-72 2-137 54-66 2-146 22-31, 22-32 2-147 22-33 3-1, 3-2 10-1, 10-2 3-5 10-3 3-8 10-4 3-20-3-27 10-51-10-58 3-28 10-31 
10-33 3-29 10-34 3-30-3-32 10-76-10-78 3-34 10-35 3-35 10-32 3-37(a)-(d) 10-131 3-37(f), 3-37(g) 10-131 3-38-3-41 10-132-10-135 5-2 14-31 5-3.0-5-3.2 14-32-14-34 5-3.3(1)-(10) 14-35 5-3.3(12)-(14) 14-35 5-3.4-5-3.11 14-36-14-43 5-4-5-6 14-44-14-46 5-16 14-76 5-19 14-77 5-21-5-27 14-78-14-84 5-36-5-39 14-111-14-114 5-46 14-141 5-50, 5-51 14-142, 14-143 5-56, 5-57 14-171, 14-172 5-61, 5-62 14-1, 14-2 6-21-6-26 30-31-30-36 8-13 70-31 8-13.1 70-51 8-14 70-52 8-15 70-1 8-16 70-32 8-17 70-76 8-18 70-53 8-18.1, 8-18.2 70-54, 70-55 8-19 70-77 8-19.1 70-78 8-20 70-33 8-21 70-2 8-21.1-8-21.3 70-151-70-153 8-21.5 70-154 8-22-8-24 70-3-70-5 8-35.1, 8-35.2 70-96, 70-97 8-35.2.1, 8-35.2.2 70-99, 70-100 8-35.3 70-98 8-35.4-8-35.7 70-101-70-104 8-35.8-8-35.15 70-126-70-133 8-36 70-105 8-58 70-181 8-59-8-64 70-183-70-188 8-65 70-182 8-71 70-216 8-72-8-78 70-218-70-224 8-79 70-217 8-80, 8-81 70-225, 70-226 8-86 70-256 8-87-8-95 70-258-70-266 8-96 70-257 8-100 70-296 81/2-21-81/2-28 38-31-38-38 9-1-9-3 42-2-42-4 9-4 42-1 9-5-9-7 42-5-42-7 9-7.1, 9-7.2 42-8, 42-9 9-8-9-11 42-10-42-13 10-2 42-41 10-3(a), (b) 42-42 10-4 42-43 10-5-10-11 42-86-42-92 10-12-10-17 42-61-42-66 10-18 42-45 10-19 42-44 13-1-13-5 18-1-18-5 13-5.1 18-6 13-6-13-14 18-7-18-15 14-1-14-6 50-151-50-156 14-7, 14-8 50-1, 50-2 14-10-14-15 50-3-50-8 14-16-14-18 50-10-50-12 14-19-14-21 50-14-50-16 14-22 50-13 14-23-14-27 50-17-50-21 14-28 50-29 14-30 50-22 14-30.1 50-23 14-31 50-9 14-32 50-25 14-33 50-24 14-34-14-36 38-66-38-68 14-38 50-36 14-39 58-1 14-40 50-26 14-41-14-44 34-86-34-89 14-44.1 34-90 14-48 50-29 14-49 50-372, 50-373 14-50-14-55 50-121-50-126 14-56 50-30 14-57 50-27 14-58, 14-59 46-1, 46-2 14-60 50-28 14-61, 14-62 46-3, 46-4 14-63-14-65 50-31-50-33 14-68, 14-69 50-34, 50-35 14-70.1 50-92 14-70.2 50-91 14-70.3-14-70.5 50-93-50-95 14-72-14-76 50-61-50-65 14-77, 14-78 18-246, 18-247 14-89-14-93 50-186-50-190 14-95 50-191 14-108-14-115 50-222-50-229 14-116 50-221 14-117-14-119 50-230-50-232 14-131-14-133 18-226-18-228 14-138 18-206 14-151, 14-152 34-31, 34-32 14-153-14-157 34-56-34-60 14-170-14-180 50-261-50-271 14-191-14-196 50-301-50-306 14-197-14-202 50-336-50-341 14-203 50-307 14-216-14-220 50-401-50-405 14-221-14-224 50-405-50-408 14-225 18-116 14-400 18-141 14-401-14-403 18-176-18-178 14-404-14-408 18-143-18-147 14-409 18-142 14-410-14-420 18-148-18-158 17-1 78-161 17-5-17-9 78-162-78-166 17-15-17-18 78-281-78-284 17-21-17-32 78-186-78-197 17-41-17-50 78-216-78-225 17-61 78-168 17-71-17-73 78-241-78-243 17-76 78-167 17-77, 17-78 78-261, 78-262 18-1 62-86 18-2, 18-3 62-1, 62-2 18-4 62-87 18-5 62-3 18-6 62-36 18-7-18-10 62-4-62-7 18-11 62-37 18-12 62-8 18-13-18-17 62-56-62-60 18-18-18-21 62-116-62-119 18-22-18-27 62-146-62-151 18-28-18-31 82-31-82-34 18-43-18-52 62-176-62-185 19-1, 19-2 66-2, 66-3 19-3 66-1 19-4 66-4 19-5, 19-6 66-6, 66-7 19-11-19-14 66-56-66-59 19-21, 19-22 66-76, 66-77 19-24, 19-25 66-78, 66-79 19-31-19-38 66-106-66-113 19-46-19-56 66-161-66-171 19-61-19-67 66-191-66-197 19-71-19-73 66-8-66-10 19-74 66-5 19-77 66-11 20-2-20-4 74-1-74-3 20-5 50-306 50-337 20-6-20-23 74-4-74-21 20-24 74-51 20-24.1 74-53 20-24.2 74-52 20-25-20-27 74-141-74-143 20-28-20-30 74-22-74-24 20-43 74-81 20-63-20-71 74-111-74-119 20-72 74-122 20-73, 20-74 74-120, 74-121 20-98 74-161 20-99-20-102 74-181-74-184 20-103(a)-(l) 74-185 20-104-20-111 74-186-74-193 20-112 74-5 20-112(a) 74-162 20-112(c) 74-162 20-113 74-194 20-125-20-131 74-221-74-227 22-1-22-3 74-256-74-258 22-16, 22-17 86-31, 86-32 22-18-22-22 86-34-86-38 22-22.1 86-39 22-23 86-40 86-61 22-24-22-26 86-41-86-43 22-34-22-40 86-62-86-68 22-48-22-60 86-86-86-98 22-76 86-126 22-77-22-80 86-146-86-149 22-81-22-83 86-127-86-129 23-1-23-14 78-33-78-46 23-14(b) 78-31 23-15-23-19 78-47-78-51 23-20 78-32 23-33-23-37 78-71-78-75 23-49-23-54 78-91-78-96 23-54.1 78-97 23-55-23-59 78-98-78-102 23-60-23-62 78-122-78-124 23-63 78-121 23-64-23-70 78-125-78-131 24-1, 24-2 90-2, 90-3 24-3 90-1 24-4-24-9 90-6-90-11 24-10(1)-(5) 90-12 24-10(7) 90-12 24-11 90-13 24-12-24-22 90-41-90-51 24-23-24-25 90-71-90-73 24-25.1 90-74 24-26-24-30 90-75-90-79 24-31 90-106 24-31.1-24-31.5 90-107-90-111 24-31.5.1-24-31.5.3 90-112-90-114 24-31.6-24-31.11 90-115-90-120 24-32-24-35 90-146-90-149 24-35.1-24-35.4 90-150-90-153 24-36-24-39 90-181-90-184 24-41 90-185 24-41.1 90-186 24-42, 24-43 90-187, 90-188 24-43.1, 24-43.2 90-189, 90-190 24-44-24-46 90-191-90-193 24-47-24-54 90-221-90-228 24-55 90-256 24-56, 24-57 90-4, 90-5  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1972 Code, as updated through May 17, 1994, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1972 Code, as supplemented. Ordinances adopted since May 17, 1994, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 273-91  9- 3-91 90-7 316-94  6-21-94 26-5 317-94  6-21-94 26-4 318-94  9- 6-94 26-4 319-94  9- 6-94 26-5 320-94 11-15-94 14-1, 14-2 14-31 14-76-14-78 14-80-14-82 14-111 14-171, 14-172 322-94 12- 6-94 14-77 324-95  7-18-95 78-261 325-95  7-18-95 78-91 326-95(A)  8-15-95 10-96 326-95(B)(1)  8-15-95 10-97 326-95(B)(2)  8-15-95 10-98 326-95(B)(3)  8-15-95 10-99 326-95(B)(4)  8-15-95 10-100 326-95(B)(5)  8-15-95 10-101 326-95(B)(6)-(8)  8-15-95 10-102 326-95(B)(9)  8-15-95 10-103 328-95  9-26-95 74-51 330-95 12- 5-95 34-116-34-123 332-95 12-19-95 18-52 13-21.1 18-47 13-21.2 18-46 13-21.3-13-21.6 18-48-18-51 333-96  3- 4-97       Rpld 70-53-70-55       Added 70-53-70-53.6 334-96  6- 4-96 Adopting Ordinance, p. xi 335-96  9-17-96 86-87 336-96  9-17-96 86-88 337-96  3- 4-97 70-56 97-3  6-17-97 78-261 97-4  6-17-97 78-91 97-5  6-17-97 78-72 97-6  6-17-97 78-188 97-7  7-15-97 34-116-34-123 97-8  7-15-97       Rpld 14-76-14-84       Added 14-76.1, 14-76.2 97-9  9- 2-97 90-1, 90-71, 90-76, 90-77 97-10 12- 2-97 70-53-70-53.5, 70-55 98-1  1-20-98 74-51, 74-52 98-2  3- 3-98 74-227(a) 98-3  3-17-98 70-2 98-6  6- 2-98 78-91(1)-(3), (5) 98-7  6- 2-98 78-94 98-8  6- 2-98 78-261 98-9  7- 7-98 18-46 98-10  7-21-98 90-1 98-11  8-18-98 2-211 98-12  8-18-98 2-164 98-13 10-20-98 74-51.1 98-14 10-20-98 70-51 98-15 11-17-98       Added 14-243-14-250 98-16 12-15-98       Added 90-52 98-17 12-15-98       Added 90-53 99-1  2-16-99       Rpld 14-33-14-43       Added 14-33-14-43 99-2  3- 2-99 74-227 99-3 4-6-99 86-31-86-40 86-61-86-72 99-4 5-18-99 42-9(a) 99-5 6-1-99 66-4(a) 66-59(a) 99-6 6-1-99 78-91(1)-(3) 99-7 6-1-99 78-261(1)-(3) 99-8 8-3-99 50-336.1 99-9 9-7-99 14-76.2(b) 99-10 9-21-99 90-1 90-52.1 90-71(f) 90-72(f) 90-73(f) 90-75(f) 90-76(b), (f) 90-77(b)-(j) 90-78(b), (f) 90-79(b), (f) 90-116 00-1 1-4-00 74-117 00-2 2-15-00 74-227 00-3 2-15-00 10-36 00-4 2-15-00 10-51(a) 00-05 5-2-00 38-1, 38-32, 38-35-38-38 38-68, 74-111(12)(a), (b) 74-190 78-38 00-06 5-16-00 78-98 00-07 6-20-00 70-216-70-226 00-08 8-22-00 Rpld 70-51 00-09 9-5-00 86-36       Deleted 86-37       Rnmb 86-38 as 86-37       Deleted 86-39, 86-40       Added 86-61       Rnmb 86-61 as 86-62       Added 86-63-86-66       Rnmb 86-62-86-64 as 86-67-86-9       Deleted 86-65       Rnmb 86-66-86-70 as 86-70-86-74 00-10 10- 3-00 70-183 00-11 10- 3-00 18-3, 18-14(a), 18-46 00-12 12- 5-00 70-298-70-308 01-13  1-16-01       Added 70-309-70-316 01-14  2-20-01 42-1, 42-2       Rpld 42-13 74-224 74-227(e) 01-15  6- 5-01 42-2 01-16  6-26-01 78-91 01-17  6-26-01 78-261 01-18  6-26-01 70-296 01-19  6-26-01 74-1, 74-81 01-20 10- 2-01 90-73 01-21 10- 2-01 66-193 01-22 10-30-01 1, 2 30-32 3 30-33 4 30-34 5 30-35 6 30-36 02-27 10-15-02 1 18-51 03-03  1-21-03 1 78-98 03-08  3-18-03 1 90-256 03-14  4-15-03 1 2-48 03-18  5-20-03 1, 2 90-76, 90-77 03-19  5-20-03 1 90-1 2 90-149       Added 90-150-90-152       Rnmb 90-150-90-153       As 90-153-90-156 03-20  5-20-03 1, 2 90-78, 90-79 03-21  5-20-03 1       Added 90-50.1 03-29  6-17-03 1 70-181-170-88 03-47 11-18-03 1 90-5 03-48 11-18-03 1 14-1 03-49 11-18-03 1 34-120 03-50 11-18-03 1 90-6 2       Added 90-80 03-53 12- 2-03 1 2-48 04-06  2- 3-04 1 90-149 04-11  3-16-04 1 18-116 04-12  3-16-04 1 90-146 04-19  6-30-04 78-94 04-20  6-30-04 78-261 04-22  6-30-04 78-91 04-36  9-21-04 1 50-62 04-48 12- 7-04 1 90-80 05-01  2-15-05 1 78-97 05-04  4- 6-05 1 74-117 05-05  4- 6-05 1 74-13 05-06  4-19-05 1 70-298-70-309 05-07  4-19-05 1       Rpld 70-309-70-316 05-08  4-19-05 1 70-99 05-12  5-17-05 1 10-36 05-13  5-17-05 1 90-1 05-17  6-21-05 78-91 05-18  6-21-05 78-261 05-19  6-21-05 70-258 05-20  6-21-05 2-211 05-21  6-21-05 78-102 05-22  6-21-05 42-8 05-23  6-21-05 18-51 05-24  6-21-05 1       Added 90-14 05-25  6-21-05 1 66-8 05-26  6-21-05 1 90-80 05-28  6-28-05 78-91 05-29  6-28-05 78-261 05-30  6-28-05 1 18-51 05-31  6-28-05 1 90-14 05-32  6-28-05 1 90-256 05-33  6-28-05 1       Added 2-2 05-34  6-28-05 1 2-132 05-38  7- 5-05 1 18-51 05-49  8-16-05 1 34-56 05-50  8-16-05 1 18-246 05-51  8-16-05 1 74-182 05-58 11- 1-05 1 2-266 05-59 11- 1-05 1 2-293 05-61 11- 1-05 1 2-165 05-62 11- 1-05 1 18-246 05-63 12- 6-05 1 90-76 05-64 12- 6-05 1 90-76 05-65 12-20-05 1 50-5 06-08  2-21-06 78-95 06-11  3-21-06 6-32 06-12  3-22-06 78-95 06-15  6-20-06 78-91 06-16  6-20-06 78-261 06-17  6-20-06 78-72 06-18  6-20-06 78-188 06-19  6-20-06 70-258 06-20  6-20-06 70-218 Ord. of 11-21-06 74-51, 74-51.1       Dltd 74-52 74-53 06-35 11-21-06 10-78 10-134 06-41 3-6-07 1 90-76 2 90-80 06-44 5-1-07 42-2 06-45 5-1-07 42-10 06-46 5-1-07 34-116-34-123 06-47 5-1-07 74-227 06-50 6-19-07 70-258 06-51 6-19-07 70-258 06-52 6-19-07 42-8 06-53  6-19-07 10-51 06-54  6-19-07 78-91 06-55  6-19-07 78-72 06-56  6-19-07 78-261 06-57  6-19-07 78-188 06-58  6-19-07       Added 26-7 06-63  7-17-07 90-76, 90-77 90-80 06-64  7-17-07 42-2 06-65  8- 7-07 90-80(a)-(k) 06-66  8- 7-07 90-1 06-67  8- 7-07 90-149-90-156 07-02  9- 4-07 50-5 07-03  9-18-07 90-76(a)-(j) 90-77(a)-(j) 90-80(a)-(k) 08-01  1-15-08 38-68 08-04  2- 5-08 50-26 08-05  2-19-08 2-293 08-07  3-18-08 Char. § 10(ref.) Ch. 2(ref.) 08-08  3-18-08 18-142, 18-145 18-177 08-16  7- 1-08 78-91(1)-(3) 08-17  7- 1-08 78-261(1)-(3) 08-18  7- 1-08 78-72(1), (5) 08-19  7- 1-08 78-188(1), (5) Min. of  7-17-08 90-1 90-77 08-22  2- 2-08       Added 74-25 09-13  3-17-09       Added 14-251-14-253 09-16  6- 2-09 90-181-90-193       Added 90-194-90-196 09-17  6- 2-09 42-1, 42-2 09-18  6- 2-09 90-5 09-19  6- 2-09 66-193 09-20  6- 2-09 90-1 09-21  6- 2-09 90-43 09-22  6- 2-09 90-48 09-23  6- 2-09 90-52 09-24  6- 2-09       Added 90-54 09-25  6- 2-09 90-76 09-26  6- 2-09 90-78 09-27  6- 2-09 90-80 09-28  6- 2-09 90-110       Added 90-121 09-29  6- 2-09 90-149 09-30  6- 2-09       Added 90-157 09-31  6-16-09 66-8 09-32  6-16-09 90-14 09-33  6-16-09 14-33 14-35-14-39       Added 14-40       Rnmb 14-40       As 14-41 09-36  6-16-09 42-8 09-37  6-16-09 70-258 09-38  6-16-09 78-91 09-39  6-16-09 78-261 09-40  6-16-09 78-72 09-41  6-16-09 78-188 09-42  6-16-09       Added 50-37 09-43  6-16-09 70-218 09-44  7-21-09       Dltd 90-181-90-196       Added 90-181-90-199 09-45  7-21-09 34-120 09-46  7-21-09 90-14 09-51  8-18-09       Added 78-300-78-341 09-52  8-18-09       Added 34-124-34-129 09-53  8-18-09       Rpld 34-31-34-60       Added 34-31-34-40 09-55  9- 1-09 78-72       Dltd 78-74 78-188 09-55.1  9-15-09       Added 26-8 10-2  1-19-10 66-112 10-3  1-19-10 90-1 10-4  1-19-10       Added 90-55 10-5  1-19-10 90-73 10-6  1-19-10 90-76 10-7  1-19-10 90-77 10-8  1-19-10 90-80 10-9  1-19-10 90-149 10-10  1-19-10 90-224 10-17  2-16-10 42-7 10-24  5-18-10 1       Added 6-60 10-26  6-15-10 78-91 10-27  6-15-10 78-261 10-41 10-19-10 90-1 10-42 10-19-10 90-77 10-47 11-16-10 66-9-66-11 11-08  5- 3-11 1 78-94 78-95 78-102 11-12  6-21-11 42-8 11-13  6-21-11 78-91 11-14  6-21-11 78-261 11-19  7-19-11 90-149(c)(8), 
(d)(8) 11-20  7-19-11       Added 38-5 11-21  7-19-11       Rpld 50-7 11-26  9- 6-11 1 2-293 11-31 12- 6-11 1-6 30-31-30-36 12-03  2-21-12 90-80(b) 12-11  6-19-12 42-8 12-12  6-19-12 78-91(1)-(3) 12-13  6-19-12 78-261(1)-(3) 12-31 12- 4-12 1 78-300-78-341 13-01  1-15-13 1 78-95 13-05  3-19-13 1 2-31 13-07  6- 4-13 1       Dltd 42-1-42-12       Added 42-1-42-11 13-08  6-18-13 1 70-298-70-308       Added 70-309-70-314 13-11  6-18-13 78-91(1)-(3) 13-15  9-17-13 1 78-94 78-95 42-9 13-24 12-17-13 90-77(b) 14-05  4- 1-14 1 74-13 14-08  6-17-14 90-1 90-51 90-77(b) 14-10  6-17-14 78-261(1)-(3) 14-11  6-17-14 78-91(1)-(3) 14-21 11-18-14 78-72 78-188 14-22 11-18-14 70-256 70-258 70-261 70-266 15-01  1- 6-15 78-72 78-188 15-09  3- 3-15 90-80(k) 15-15  6-16-15 70-258 15-16  6-16-15 70-218 15-18  6-16-15 78-91(1)-(3) 15-19  6-16-15 78-261(1)-(3) 15-20  6-16-15 90-77(b) 15-24  7-21-15 30-36(5) 15-29  8-18-15 90-181, 90-182 90-185 90-186(a) 90-190 90-192(3) 90-193(d) 90-195 90-197(b)       Added 90-198(d)       Added 90-200 15-30  8-18-15       Added 26-9 15-32  9- 1-15 22-31-22-33 15-33  9- 1-15 54-31 15-34  9-15-15 90-76(b) 15-39 12-15-15 1 74-13 16-29 11-15-16 1 90-1       Rpld 90-12       Added 90-12 16-30 11-15-16 1 74-13(d) 17-09  5- 2-17 78-91 17-10  5- 2-17 78-261 17-13  6- 6-17       Added 30-37 17-14  7-18-17       Added 70-79 17-15  7-18-17 90-80(b) 17-16  7-18-17       Rpld 78-216-78-225       Added 78-213-78-270       Rnbd 78-241-78-243       as 78-285-28-287       Rnbd 78-261, 78-262       as 78-296, 78-297       Rnbd 78-281-78-284       as 78-306-78-309       Rnbd 78-300-78-302       as 78-321-78-323       Rnbd 78-311       as 78-336       Rnbd 78-321-78-326       as 78-346-78-350       Rnbd 78-341       as 78-361 18-01  1-16-18 90-1 90-71-90-73 90-76-90-80       Rpld 90-149       Added 90-149 90-150(d) 14-39(1) 18-11  4-17-18 90-73 18-16  6-19-18 90-76(b)  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Code of Virginia. 
Code of 
Virginia 
Section Section  
this Code 2.1-21 74-118 2.1-344 Char. § 17 2.1-517 Ch. 14 2.2-4303 2-293 3.1-562.4 Ch. 18 3.1-796.66 et seq. Ch. 10 10-31 3.1-796.85 et seq. 10-51 3.1-796.86 10-53 3.1-796.88 10-52 3.1-796.90- 
3.1-796.92 10-54-10-56 3.1-796.93 10-31 10-33 3.1-796.93:1 Ch. 10, Art. II, 
Div. 4 3.1-796.96 10-76 3.1-796.97 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. II 3.1-796.105 10-76 10-103 3.1-796.119 10-97 3.1-796.127 10-58 3.1-796.128 Ch. 10 3.1-796.130 et seq. Ch. 74, Art. V tit. 4.1 86-68 9-153 et seq. 38-4 10.1-560 Ch. 34, Art. IV 34-117 10.1-560 et seq. Ch. 34 34-116 10.1-561.1 34-118 10.1-562 34-118 10.1-562(J) 34-122 10.1-563 34-119 10.1-563(D) 34-119 10.1-564, 
10.1-565 34-119, 34-120 10.1-569 34-122 10.1-600 et seq. Ch. 90, Art. VI 10.1-603.3 Ch. 34 10.1-604 et seq. 34-117 10.1-1100 et seq. 34-117 10.1-1127.1 Ch. 82 10.1-1163(B) 34-117 10.1-1321 Ch. 34 10.1-1400 42-1 10.1-1414 42-41 10.1-1414 et seq. Ch. 42, Art. II 10.1-1424 42-43 10.1-1425 Ch. 42 10.1-1700 et seq. Ch. 22 13.1-501 et seq. 18-46 14.1-133.2 26-5 tit. 15.1 Char. § 3.1 15.1-10 Ch. 22 15.1-11 Ch. 42 15.1-11.2 Ch. 14 15.1-11.03 Ch. 74 15.1-11.6 Ch. 18 15.1-13.2 Char. § 27 15.1-14(1) Ch. 62 15.1-14(5) Ch. 34 Ch. 34, Art. III 15.1-14(6) Ch. 38 15.1-14(9) Ch. 62 15.1-14.1, 
15.1-14.2 Ch. 82 15.1-15(1) Ch. 14 15.1-15(4) Ch. 38 15.1-16 Ch. 62 Ch. 74 15.1-16.2 Ch. 62 15.1-28 Ch. 58 15.1-28.3 Ch. 18 Ch. 18, Art. V 15.1-28.5 Ch. 10 10-131 15.1-29 Ch. 14 15.1-29.1:1 Ch. 10 15.1-29.9 Ch. 38 15.1-29.11 Ch. 14 15.1-29.12 Ch. 34, Art. II 15.1-29.13 Ch. 34, Art. II 15.1-29.21 Ch. 34 Ch. 34, Art. III 15.1-29.23 Char. § 22a Char. § 62 15.1-33.1 Ch. 90 15.1-33.4 Ch. 50, Art. III 50-26 15.1-37 et seq. Ch. 78 15.1-37.2:1 Ch. 78 15.1-37.3:1, 
15.1-37.3:2 Ch. 18 15.1-37.3:4 Ch. 78 15.1-37.3:9 Ch. 18 15.1-51 Char. § 62 15.1-131 et seq. Ch. 46 15.1-131.12 Ch. 42 15.1-159.8 et seq. Char. § 28 15.1-167 Char. § 31 15.1-236 et seq. Char. § 3.1 15.1-257 Ch. 46 15.1-257 et seq. Ch. 14 15.1-283 Ch. 34 15.1-291.4 et seq. Ch. 42 15.1-292 Ch. 34 15.1-292 et seq. Ch. 78 15.1-292.4 Ch. 34 15.1-307 et seq. Ch. 18 62-37 15.1-317 et seq. Ch. 78 15.1-318 Ch. 34 15.1-332.1 et seq. Ch. 78 15.1-363 et seq. Ch. 62 15.1-404 Ch. 46 15.1-427 et seq. Ch. 54 54-45 Ch. 90 15.1-427.1 et seq. Ch. 54 54-44 15.1-430 66-1 90-1 15.1-430(p) 90-224 15.1-431 54-67-54-69 90-224 15.1-437 54-31-54-34 15.1-437 et seq. Ch. 54 54-44 15.1-439, 
15.1-440 54-38, 54-39 15.1-442 54-35 54-37 15.1-444 54-44 15.1-446.1 54-67 15.1-446.1 et seq. Ch. 54, Art. II, 
Div. 2 15.1-452, 
15.1-453 54-67 15.1-456 54-69 15.1-458 et seq. Ch. 62 15.1-465 et seq. Ch. 66 66-2 66-4 15.1-466(B) 66-10 15.1-472 66-11 15.1-475 54-69 Ch. 66, Art. II 66-78 15.1-486 et seq. 54-51 Ch. 90 90-2 15.1-488 Ch. 90 15.1-491(e) 90-5 15.1-491(g) Ch. 90, Art. VIII 15.1-491(h) 54-69 15.1-494 et seq. Ch. 90, Art. VII 15.1-495, 
15.1-496 90-224, 90-225 15.1-496.1, 
15.1-496.2 90-226, 90-227 15.1-497 90-228 15.1-498 Ch. 90 15.1-504 14-76.2 15.1-525 50-64 15.1-812 Char. § 12 15.1-819 Char. § 12 15.1-836.2 Char. § 2 15.1-837-15.1-915 Char. § 3 15.1-839 Ch. 42 15.1-841 Ch. 70 15.1-846 Ch. 14 15.1-853 Ch. 42 15.1-854 et seq. Ch. 78 15.1-857 Ch. 42 15.1-865 Ch. 18 Ch. 38 38-68 15.1-866 Ch. 18 Ch. 58 15.1-867 Ch. 34 Ch. 34, Art. III 15.1-869 Ch. 14 15.1-870 Ch. 10 10-1 15.1-872 Ch. 38 15.1-875 et seq. Ch. 78 15.1-876 Ch. 78 15.1-888 et seq. Ch. 62 15.1-891 Ch. 74 15.1-892 Ch. 86 15.1-904 46-46 15.1-906 Ch. 18 15.1-908- 
15.1-915.1 Char. § 3 15.1-1373 et seq. Ch. 22 15.2-907 14-253 15.2-924 34-126 15.2-926 50-26 15.2-974 38-68 15.2-1522 Char. § 10 Ch. 2 15.2-1613.1 26-8 15.2-4902 22-31 15.2-4903 22-31 15.2-4904 22-33 16.1-69.8 Char. § 33 16.1-123.1 Ch. 26 16.1-226 et seq. Char. § 35 16.1-241 26-2 16.1-253 50-336 16.1-253.1 50-336 16.1-278.2- 
16.1-278.6 50-336 16.1-278.8 50-336 16.1-278.14 Ch. 26 50-336 16.1-278.15 50-336 16.1-279.1 50-336 16.1-331 et seq. 50-91 18.2-27 Ch. 50 50-4 18.2-57 50-3 18.2-59 et seq. Ch. 50 18.2-83 Ch. 50 18.2-87 50-8 18.2-95(iii) 50-302 18.2-96 Ch. 50 50-302 18.2-103 50-14 18.2-105, 
18.2-106 50-15, 50-16 18.2-108 50-307 18.2-119 50-336 18.2-120 50-338 18.2-121 50-341 18.2-125 50-10 18.2-127 50-11 18.2-128 50-340 18.2-130 50-339 18.2-132-18.2-136 50-336 18.2-137 50-303 18.2-139 et seq. Ch. 82 18.2-146 50-306 74-111 18.2-147 50-337 18.2-162 et seq. Ch. 78 18.2-174 46-3 Ch. 50 18.2-175 46-4 18.2-176 50-36 18.2-179 50-191 18.2-181 50-188 18.2-183 50-189 18.2-185 50-190 18.2-188 Ch. 50, 50-186 18.2-189 50-186, 50-187 18.2-209 50-24 18.2-212 Ch. 50 50-9 18.2-223 Ch. 18 18-226 18.2-224 Ch. 18 18-227, 18-228 18.2-266 et seq. 74-81 18.2-280 50-61 18.2-308 50-63 18.2-316, 
18.2-317 50-152, 50-153 18.2-318 Ch. 42 50-153 18.2-319 50-1 18.2-322 50-23 18.2-323 Ch. 10 18.2-324 74-10 18.2-325 et seq. Ch. 50, Art. VII 18.2-326 50-222 18.2-329 50-227 18.2-344-18.2-350 50-402-50-408 18.2-361 50-404 50-406 18.2-365 50-401 18.2-371.2 50-35 18.2-372 18-146 50-261 18.2-372 et seq. Ch. 50, Art. VIII 18.2-373 50-263 18.2-374 50-262 18.2-375-18.2-378 50-264-50-267 18.2-379 50-270 18.2-382 50-268 18.2-383 50-271 18.2-387 50-269 18.2-388 50-29 18.2-403.1 et seq. Ch. 10 18.2-415 Ch. 50 50-20, 50-21 50-31, 50-32 18.2-416 50-2 18.2-417 50-33 18.2-427 Ch. 50 50-372 18.2-431 50-373 18.2-440 50-6 18.2-460(A), 
18.2-460(B) 50-27, 50-28 18.2-461 50-25 18.2-462 50-13 18.2-463 46-2 18.2-473 50-22 18.2-510 Ch. 10 19.2-53 50-228 19.2-56 50-228 19.2-58 50-228 19.2-152.1 Ch. 18 19.2-354 et seq. 26-6 19.2-393 et seq. Ch. 42 20-103 50-336 tit. 24.2 Ch. 30 24.2-217 et seq. Char. § 59 24.2-304.1 30-31 24.2-305 30-31 24.2-305 et seq. Ch. 30 24.2-307 30-31 24.2-310 30-31 24.2-311 30-31 24.2-712 30-37 25-46.1 et seq. Char. § 3.1 25-233 Char. § 3.1 27-6.1 et seq. Ch. 38 27-30 et seq. Ch. 38 27-30-27-37.1 38-1 27-39 et seq. Ch. 38 27-94 et seq. Ch. 38, Art. II 27-97 Ch. 38 38-31 29.1-527 Ch. 10 32.1-148 86-126 32.1-148 et seq. Ch. 86, Art. III 32.1-153 86-127 32.1-163 et seq. Ch. 78 32.1-167 78-121 32.1-167 et seq. Ch. 78 32.1-202 Ch. 42 33.1-1 Char. § 3.1 33.1-1 et seq. Char. § 3.1 33.1-121-33.1-129 Char. § 3.1 33.1-224 et seq. Ch. 62 33.1-348 74-53 tit. 35.1 6-60 tit. 36 14-76.1 36-1 et seq. Ch. 22 36-55.24 et seq. Ch. 22 36-70 et seq. Ch. 14 36-85.2 et seq. 90-1 36-97 et seq. Ch. 14 36-99.11 Ch. 74 36-106 14-1 38.2-2200 et seq. 86-35 42.1-65 26-4 42.1-70 26-4 42.1-76 et seq. Ch. 66 43-32, 43-33 50-187 tit. 46.2 74-1 46.2-100 74-227 74-25 46.2-310 Ch. 86 46.2-472 et seq. 86-35 46.2-617 74-225 46.2-650-46.2-653 74-53 46.2-663-46.2-683 74-53 46.2-711 Ch. 86 46.2-723 74-53 46.2-750 74-53 46.2-752 et seq. Ch. 74 Ch. 74, Art. II 46.2-817 46-1 46.2-828 74-6 46.2-906 74-12 46.2-1000 et seq. 86-38 46.2-1010 74-25 46.2-1081 74-25 46.2-1157 et seq. 74-21 46.2-1176 et seq. 74-21 46.2-1200 et seq. Ch. 74 Ch. 74, Art. VI 74-141 46.2-1201- 
46.2-1203 74-223-74-225 46.2-1205 74-226 46.2-1212 Ch. 74 46.2-1213 74-141 46.2-1216 Ch. 74 Ch. 74, Art. IV 46.2-1220 Ch. 74 74-143 46.2-1231 74-143 46.2-1239 74-111 46.2-1300 et seq. Ch. 74 46.2-1313 74-1 74-81 46.2-2016 Ch. 86 46.2-2020 86-33 tit. 48 Ch. 34 ch. 49 22-32 49-1 Char. § 10 tit. 52 42-45 53.1-68 et seq. Ch. 46 53.1-128 Ch. 46 46-46 54.1-400 et seq. 34-117 54.1-1106 14-141 54.1-1117 Ch. 14 Ch. 14, Art. V 14-141 54.1-4002 Ch. 58 54.1-4100 18-81 54.1-4100 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. III 54.1-4101 18-82 54.1-4101.1 18-83 54.1-4102- 
54.1-4110 18-84-18-92 54.1-4111 Ch. 18 Ch. 18, Art. III 54.1-4200 et seq. Ch. 18 55-79.39 et seq. 90-74 55-202 et seq. Ch. 10 55-336 et seq. Ch. 66 56-257 et seq. Ch. 62 56-412.1 74-256 56-414 74-257 56-594 70-183 57-48 et seq. 50-12 57-63 50-5 tit. 58.1 18-46 tit. 58.1, ch. 39 14-76.2 58.1-6 et seq. Ch. 70 58.1-15 70-154 58.1-200 et seq. 70-96 58.1-520 et seq. Ch. 70 58.1-600 et seq. 70-3 58.1-603-58.1-605 70-3 58.1-605 et seq. Ch. 70 58.1-622 70-3 58.1-628 70-3 58.1-800 et seq. 70-4 58.1-1200 et seq. Ch. 70, Art. III 70-152, 70-153 58.1-1201 70-151 58.1-1204 70-152 58.1-1205 70-151 58.1-1207 70-153 58.1-1208 Ch. 70 58.1-1211 70-152, 70-153 58.1-1212 70-153 58.1-1216 70-154 58.1-1712 70-5 58.1-2901 70-183 58.1-3000 et seq. Ch. 70 58.1-3100 et seq. 18-7 58.1-3220 70-99 70-308 58.1-3221 70-99 70-308 58.1-3245.8 70-308 58.1-3250 70-97 58.1-3257 70-102, 70-103 58.1-3275 70-96 58.1-3292 70-100 58.1-3293 70-105 58.1-3300 70-103 58.1-3330 70-104 58.1-3370 et seq. Ch. 70, Art. II, 
Div. 3, Subdiv. III 58.1-3373 70-126 58.1-3376 70-127 58.1-3378 70-128 58.1-3380 70-129 58.1-3381 70-131 58.1-3384, 
58.1-3385 70-132, 70-133 58.1-3504 70-52 58.1-3518 70-53.1 58.1-3650 et seq. 70-183 58.1-3700 et seq. Ch. 18 18-46 58.1-3709 18-49 58.1-3714(B) 18-46 58.1-3715 18-46 18-48, 18-49 58.1-3717, 
58.1-3718 18-48 58.1-3719.1 18-51 58.1-3728 18-48 58.1-3731 18-48 58.1-3732 18-1 58.1-3800 et seq. 70-4, 70-5 58.1-3805 et seq. 70-4, 70-5 58.1-3812 et seq. Ch. 70, Art. IV 58.1-3813 Ch. 70, Art. VII 70-183 70-296 58.1-3814 70-183 58.1-3840 Ch. 70, Art. V, 
Ch. 70, Art. VI 58.1-3900 et seq. 18-49 Ch. 70 58.1-3906 70-217 58.1-3916 Char. § 3 18-5 18-14 18-48 70-77 58.1-3940 14-253 58.1-3958 70-55 70-78 58.1-3865 et seq. 14-253 58.1-3965(A) 70-79 58.1-3965.1 70-79 58.1-3980 18-49 58.1-4000 50-230 Tit. 59.1, ch. 22 70-298 Tit. 59.1, ch. 49 70-299 59.1-117, 
59.1-118 Ch. 58 59.1-121 Ch. 58 59.1-131 et seq. Ch. 58 59.1-137 et seq. Ch. 38 59.1-142 et seq. Ch. 38 59.1-148 38-68 59.1-538 et seq. 70-309 62.1-44.2 et seq. Ch. 78 62.1-44.7 et seq. 90-188 63.1-38 et seq. Char. § 50  
