TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE
200-1
Chapter 200
CHARTER
Front Royal, Town of
County of Warren
Current charter
Charter, 1937, c. 44.
Editor's note: Amendments are numerous. Please see amendment listing at the end of the document.
CHAPTER I.
§ 1. The inhabitants of the Town of Front Royal, Warren County, Virginia, as its limits now are, or hereafter may be established in the manner provided by law, shall continue to be a body corporate and politic by name the Town of Front Royal, and under that name shall have perpetual succession; may use a corporate seal of such kind as it may adopt; may sue and be sued; may acquire property within or without its boundaries for any municipal purpose, in fee simple or lesser interest or estate, by purchase, gift, devise, lease or condemnation, and may sell, lease, hold, manage and control such property as its interests may require; and, except as prohibited by the Constitution of Virginia or restricted by this charter, the Town of Front Royal shall have and may exercise all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities which are now, or may be hereafter, conferred upon or delegated to incorporated towns under the Constitution and laws of Virginia, as fully and completely as if herein enumerated in detail, and no enumeration of particular powers in this charter shall be held exclusive. (1937, c. 44)
§ 2. The corporate limits of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia, as heretofore established, are hereby re-established, as follows:
The boundaries of municipal corporations remain as now established unless changed as provided in Title 15.2 of the Code of Virginia. (1937, c. 44; 2018, cc. 328, 329)
§ 3. Except as may be otherwise provided in this charter, all powers of the town and the administration and government of the said town shall be vested in the council of the Town of Front Royal and in such boards and officers as are hereafter mentioned or may be by law otherwise provided. (1937, c. 44)
TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE
200-2
§ 4. The municipal officers of said town shall, beginning with the effective date of this act and thereafter, consist of a mayor, four councilmen, a town manager, a town treasurer, and a town clerk, who shall also serve as the clerk of town council, and such other officers as may be designated by ordinance duly enacted from time to time. The town treasurer may additionally, by ordinance duly enacted, serve as the town's finance director. Beginning July 1, 1994, and thereafter, the number of councilmen shall be six. The mayor and councilmen shall be elected by the qualified voters of said town. The town manager, town treasurer and town clerk shall be appointed by the council as is hereinafter provided.(1937, c. 44; 1993, c. 479; 2018, cc. 328, 329)
§ 5. The power and authority of the councilmen shall, in addition to those mentioned and authorized by this act, be such as are mentioned and prescribed by law. (1937, c. 44)
§ 6. A. The mayor and town council shall be elected on the Tuesday following the first Monday in November in even-numbered years in the manner provided by Virginia general election laws, except insofar as they are otherwise herein provided by this charter. The mayor and members of town council in office at the effective date of this charter amendment shall have their terms extended and shall continue in office until December 31 of the year in which their respective terms were to expire.
B. The terms of office for all town council members shall begin on the first day of January next following their election, and each shall serve for a term of four (4) years or until his or her successor shall have been elected and qualified. The term of office for the mayor shall begin on the first day of January next following his or her election, and the mayor shall serve for a term of two (2) years. The town council members and mayor may succeed themselves as often as the voters may choose.
C. Candidates for town council and mayor shall be nominated only by petition in the manner prescribed by general law. Candidates for town council and mayor shall not be nominated or identified on the ballot by political party affiliation or in any other manner that would disqualify them for candidacy under any law of the United States or the Commonwealth of Virginia.
D. The council may fill any vacancy that occurs in the membership of the council for the unexpired term, provided that such vacancy is taken within 45 days of the office becoming vacant; if a majority of the remaining members of the council cannot agree, or do not act, the judges of the circuit court having jurisdiction shall make the appointment. The person so appointed shall hold office only until the qualified voters of the town fill the vacancy by special election pursuant to § 24.2-682 of the Code of Virginia of 1950, as amended, or its
TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE
200-3
successor enactment(s), and the person so elected has qualified. Any person so appointed
shall hold office the same as an elected person and shall exercise all powers of the elected
office. If the majority of the seats on the council are vacant, the remaining members shall
not make interim appointments and the vacancies shall be filled as provided in § 24.2-227 of
the Code of Virginia of 1950, as amended, or its successor enactment(s).
E. Each member of council shall receive a salary in an amount established by council,
payable as the council may direct, provided that no increase in salary of a council member
shall take effect during the incumbent council member's term in office, but this restriction
shall not apply when the council members are elected for staggered terms.
F. The mayor shall receive a salary in an amount established by council, payable as the
council may direct, but no increase in the mayor's salary shall take effect during the
incumbent mayor's term in office. (1937, c. 44; 1940, c. 401; 1954, c. 405; 1975, c. 348;
1987, c. 235; 1993, c. 479; 2018, cc. 328, 329)
§ 7. All municipal officers of the town, before entering upon the duties of their respective
offices, shall be sworn in accordance with the laws of the State by anyone authorized to
administer oaths under the laws of the State. If any person elected or appointed to any office in
said town shall neglect to take such oath on or before the day on which he is to enter upon the
discharge of the duties of his office, or shall for twenty days after the beginning of his term of
office fail to give such bond as may be required of him by the council, a vacancy in said office
shall then exist. (1937, c. 44)
CHAPTER II. – THE MAYOR AND VICE MAYOR
§ 8. The mayor shall preside at the meetings of the council and perform such other duties as may
be prescribed by this charter and by general law, and such as may be imposed by the council,
consistent with his office. He shall be recognized as the official head of the town for all
ceremonial purposes, by the courts for the purpose of serving civil process, and by the Governor
for military purposes. In time of public danger or emergency, he may take command of the
police, maintain order and enforce the law. Such course of action shall be subject to review by
the council.
The mayor shall have no right to vote in the council except that in every case of a tie vote of the
council, the mayor shall be entitled to vote and his vote in case of a tie only shall have the same
weight and effect as the vote of a councilman.
TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE
200-4
The mayor shall have no power to suspend, remove or discharge any officer, agent or employee of the town nor shall he have any power or authority to appoint or employ any officer, agent or employee of the town nor to fix the term of office or employment, or the compensation, or to increase or decrease the power and authority of any officer, agent or employee of the town, but the mayor shall have such powers with respect to the chief of police, the policemen and employees of the police force when and if the mayor is given the control and supervision of the chief of police, the policemen and employees of the police force as provided in § 40 (a) hereof. (1937, c. 44)
§ 9. The council shall, at its first meeting in January following the regular municipal election, choose one of its members as vice-mayor. The vice-major shall perform the duties of the mayor during his absence or disability. In the event of the death, removal or resignation of the mayor, the council shall choose one of the councilmen or some other qualified voter of the Town of Front Royal who shall serve as mayor until the next succeeding municipal election, at which time a successor shall be elected by the qualified voters of the Town of Front Royal to fill the office of mayor for the remainder of the unexpired term.
Should a member of the council be chosen to serve as mayor until the next municipal election such councilman shall be deemed to have surrendered his office as councilman forthwith upon his qualification as mayor and his office of councilman shall thereupon be vacant. The vacancy thereby created in the council shall be filled by the council as provided in § 6 hereof.
The member of the council who shall be chosen vice-mayor shall continue to have all of the rights, privileges, powers, duties and obligations of councilman even when performing the duties of mayor during the absence or disability of the mayor of the town.(1937,c.44; 2018,cc.328, 329)
CHAPTER III. – THE COUNCIL
§ 10. The council of the town shall be composed of four members. Effective July 1, 1994, the council of the town shall be composed of six members. They shall be elected by the popular vote of the qualified voters of the town, as provided in § 6 hereof. (1937, c. 44; 1993, c. 479)
§ 11. The council shall, by ordinance, fix the time for their stated meetings. Special meetings shall be called by the clerk of the council upon the written request of the mayor, or any three members of the council. No business shall be transacted at a special meeting but that for which it shall be called, unless the council be unanimous. The meetings of the council shall be open to the public, except when the public welfare shall require closed meetings.
TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE
200-5
If any member of the said council shall be voluntarily absent from three regular meetings of the council consecutively, his seat may be deemed vacant by resolution of the council and thereupon his unexpired term shall be filled according to the provisions of this act. (1937, c. 44; 1993, c. 479; 2018, cc. 328, 329)
§ 11.1. The council, of the Town of Front Royal may appoint a civil and police justice for said town, whose term of office shall be two years from the date of his appointment, and whose powers, duties, authority and jurisdiction shall be as hereinafter provided for. Any such appointee shall serve for the said term of two years, and thereafter until his successor shall be appointed and qualified. The mayor, or any other qualified voter of the town, whom the council, or governing body, may deem qualified, may be appointed as such civil and police justice. In the event of the mayor being appointed as such civil and police justice, he shall discharge the duties pertaining to the office of civil and police justice, in his capacity as civil and police justice, and not as mayor, and he shall receive the salary provided for him by the council for his services as mayor, and also such salary, if any, as may be provided for him by the council for his services as civil and police justice.
Said civil and police justice is hereby vested with all the power, authority, and jurisdiction, and charged with all the duties within, and for, the Town of Front Royal, which are, or may hereafter be, imposed upon trial justices and juvenile and domestic relations courts by the laws of the State of Virginia, so far as the same may be applicable and not in conflict with the provisions of this section; and any amendments of the laws governing or relating to trial justices and juvenile and domestic relations courts, or either, of this State shall be considered as amendments, also, of this section, if the same are applicable hereto.
Fees and costs shall be assessed by the civil and police justice and shall be collected as provided by the laws of the State of Virginia, relating to trial justices and juvenile and domestic relations courts. All fees and costs collected by the said civil and police justice and all fines collected for violations of ordinances of the town shall be paid into the town treasury for the use and benefit of the town.
Removals may be had, and appeals from the decisions of the civil and police justice may be taken, to the circuit court of Warren County in the same manner, upon the same terms, and shall be tried in the same way as removals, or as appeals from the decision of trial justices or juvenile and domestic relations courts, as the case may be, are provided to be taken and tried by the laws of the State of Virginia, relating to trial justices and juvenile and domestic relations courts.
TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE
200-6
The council may also appoint for the civil and police justice such clerk or clerks as may in its discretion be necessary, provide for just compensation therefor, and provide necessary records.
The council shall provide a salary to compensate such civil and police justice in such amount and payable at such times as it shall deem proper, and may provide also for a vacation period, either with or without pay, and for such duration as in its judgment may be proper.
Like provisions may be made for a substitute civil and police justice, and when such substitute acts, he shall receive the compensation which would have been paid his principal if he had acted, and which compensation shall be deducted from the salary or allowance made to the principal.
Nothing contained herein shall prevent the Town of Front Royal from combining with the County of Warren for the use of one trial justice and one substitute trial justice for such combined town and county, in such manner as may be provided by the laws of the State of Virginia relating to trial justices, and if the Town of Front Royal and County of Warren shall at any time combine for the use of one trial justice and one substitute trial justice for the said town and the said county, the laws of the State of Virginia relating to trial justices, so far as applicable, shall control and not this section; but the combination of the said town with the said county for the use of one trial justice and one substitute trial justice shall not prevent the council if at any time thereafter it shall desire so to do, from withdrawing the Town of Front Royal from such combination, by a vote of the council, and appointing a civil and police justice and substitute civil and police justice for the Town of Front Royal under the provisions of this section, notwithstanding anything in the trial justice laws of Virginia to the contrary; and likewise nothing herein contained shall prevent the town, after withdrawing from such combination, from again adopting the combination with the county. (1940, c. 401)
§ 12. The council shall appoint a clerk to serve at the will of the council and shall have authority to adopt such rules and appoint such officers and committees as they may deem proper for the regulation of their proceedings and for the convenient transaction of business; to compel the attendance of absent members; and enforce orderly conduct at meetings.
The council may appoint one of the members of the council, other than the member appointed town treasurer, as town clerk, if in the judgment of a majority of the members of the council it is proper so to do, and the member appointed town clerk shall have all of the duties and powers of town clerk as herein provided and he shall continue to have all of the powers, duties, authority, jurisdiction, responsibilities and obligations of a councilman.
TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE
200-7
The council shall keep a minute book, or its electronic equivalent, in which the clerk shall note the proceedings of the council and shall record said proceedings at large on the record book and keep the same properly indexed. (1937, c. 44; 2018, cc. 328, 329)
§ 13. A majority of the members of the council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. No ordinance shall be passed, or resolution adopted having for its object the appropriation of money, or the levy of taxes and licenses, except by the concurrence of at least four members, one of whom may be the mayor in case of a tie vote as provided in section eight hereof. No vote or question decided at a stated meeting shall be reconsidered at a special meeting unless all members are present, and three of them concur.
No ordinance shall be passed, or resolution adopted having for its object the appropriation of money, or the levy of taxes and licenses, except by the concurrence of at least four members, one of whom may be the mayor in case of a tie vote as provided in section eight hereof. No vote or question decided at a stated meeting shall be reconsidered at a special meeting unless all members are present, and four of them concur. (1937, c. 44; 1993, c. 479; 2018, cc. 328, 329)
CHAPTER IV – TOWN MANAGER
§ 14. The council shall appoint a town manager who shall be the chief administrative officer of the town. The town manager shall be chosen by the council solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications and need not, when appointed, be a resident of the town or the State, but during his term of office he shall reside within the town. No member of the council shall, during the time for which elected, be chosen as town manager. The town manager shall be appointed for a term acceptable to the town council and the town manager. He shall be removable by the town council for cause. Before the town manager may be removed, he shall, if he so demands, be given a written statement of the reasons alleged for his removal and the right to be heard publicly thereon at a meeting of the council prior to the final vote on the question of his removal but pending and during such hearing the council may suspend him from office. The action of the council in suspending or removing the town manager shall be final, it being the intention of this charter to vest all authority and fix all responsibility for such suspension or removal in the council. In case of the absence or disability of the town manager the council may designate some qualified person to perform the duties of the office during such absence or disability. (1937, c. 44)
§ 15. It shall be the duty of the town manager to supervise the administration of the affairs of the town; to make such recommendations to the council concerning the affairs of the town as may seem to him desirable; to keep the council advised of the financial condition and future needs of
TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE
200-8
the town; to prepare and submit to the council the annual budget estimate; to prepare and submit to the council such reports as may be required by that body; and to perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this charter or required of him by order or resolution of the council, not inconsistent with this charter.
The council shall have power to appoint either the mayor or town manager as chief conservator of the peace within the town and to see that the ordinances of the town and the laws of the State are enforced. (1937, c. 44)
§ 16. Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the town manager, subject to the consent of the town council, may appoint or employ and he may remove or discharge such officers, employees and assistants as may be necessary to carry on the work in those departments of the town committed to him by ordinance, in all of their respective details, in an economical and satisfactory manner. The salaries and terms of office or employment of such officers, employees and assistants shall be fixed by the town manager subject to the approval of the town council. His action in all respects shall be subject to review by the council and he shall be accountable to the town council only. (1937, c. 44)
CHAPTER V – POWERS OF COUNCIL
§ 17. The council of the town shall have general power over all officers and employees of the town as provided in this charter. (1937, c. 44)
§ 18. The council of the town shall have, subject to the provisions of this act, the control and management of the fiscal and municipal affairs of the town and of all property, real and personal, belonging to said town and may make such ordinances and by-laws relating to the same as they shall deem proper. The council shall in addition to other powers given by law, have power to make such ordinances, orders, by-laws and regulations as they may deem proper and necessary to carry out the following powers, which are hereby vested in them:
First. To establish a market, or markets, in and for said town, provide for the appointment of proper officers therefor, prescribe the time and places for holding the market, provide suitable grounds and buildings therefor, and enforce such regulations as shall be necessary and proper to prevent illegal or unsanitary conditions or activity therein.
Second. To construct, maintain, regulate and operate public improvements of all kinds, including municipal and other buildings, armories, jails and all buildings and structures necessary or appropriate for the use and proper operation of the various departments of the town and the performance of its duties and functions.
TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE
200-9
Third. To establish, maintain, and operate waterworks and sewer systems within and without the town; to purchase water therefor; to contract and agree with the owners of any land, springs or water supplies for the use of or purchase thereof, or have same condemned according to law, for the location, extension, or enlargement of the said waterworks, or sewer system, either or both, the pipes connected therewith, and the fixtures or appurtenances thereof; and to protect from injury by ordinance, prescribing adequate penalties, the said waterworks, water supplies, sewer systems, pipes, fixtures, and land or anything connected therewith whether within or without the limits of the town. When the town furnishes water, gas, electric, sewer, or other utility services to users thereof located outside the town's corporate limits, notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the town may collect such compensation and service fees therefor as may be contracted for between the town and such user, and the town shall not thereby be obligated to provide such utility services to any other users outside its corporate boundaries. Any compensation and service fees received by the town for the furnishing of such utility services to users outside the town's corporate limits may, in the discretion of the town council, be paid into the town's general fund.
Fourth. To open, extend, widen, or narrow, lay out, graduate, curb, and pave and otherwise improve streets, sidewalks and public alleys in said town, and have them kept in good order and properly lighted; in order to properly light the streets of said town, the council may erect and operate such number of lamps and fixtures thereto belonging as they may deem necessary; they may build bridges in and culverts under said streets, and may prevent or remove any structure, obstruction, or encroachment over, or under, or in any street, sidewalk, or alley in said town, and may cause to be planted or permit shade trees or other plants to be planted along said streets; but no person shall occupy with his works, or any appurtenances thereof, the streets, side-walks, or alleys of the town, without the consent of the council, duly entered upon its records; provided that so long as the said town shall, at its own expense, maintain and keep its streets in good order and repair, it shall be exempt from all labor and tax for county road purposes.
Fifth. To prevent the cumbering or blockage of, or encroachment upon, streets, sidewalks, alleys, lanes, or bridges in the town in any manner whatever.
Sixth. To determine and designate the route and grade of any public utility laid out in said town.
Seventh. To make provisions for and regulate weights, measures and standards.
TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE
200-10
Eighth. To secure the inhabitants from contagious, infectious, or other dangerous diseases; to establish, erect, and regulate hospitals or other medical or health-related facilities; to provide for and enforce the removal of patients to said hospitals or other medical or health-related facilities; to appoint and organize a board of health for said town, with the necessary authority for the prompt and efficient performance of its duties.
Ninth. To require and compel the abatement and removal of all nuisances within the said town, at the expense of the person or persons causing the same or the owner or owners of the ground whereon the same shall be; to regulate the exercise of any dangerous, offensive or unhealthy activity, enterprise, business, trade or employment therein; and to regulate the transportation of coal, explosives, garbage and other articles through the streets of the town, and to restrain and regulate the speed of locomotive engines and cars upon the railroads within the town.
Tenth. If any ground in said town shall be subject to be covered with stagnant water, or if the owner or owners, occupier or occupiers thereof shall permit any offensive or unwholesome substance to remain or accumulate thereon, the council may cause such grounds to be filled, raised, or drained, or may cause such substance to be covered or to be removed therefrom, and may collect the expense of so doing from the owner or owners, occupier or occupiers, or any of them (except in cases where such nuisance is caused by the action of the town authorities or their agents, or by natural causes beyond the control of the owner or occupant, in which case the town shall pay the expense of abating the same), by distress and sale in the same manner in which taxes levied upon real estate for the benefit of said town are authorized to be collected; provided, that reasonable notice and an opportunity to be heard shall be first given to said owners or their agents. In case of nonresident owners who have no agent in said town, such notice shall be given by publication at least once a week for not less than four consecutive weeks in any newspaper having general circulation in the said town.
Eleventh. To regulate and direct the location and construction of all buildings for the storage of gunpowder, explosives and combustible substances; to regulate the sale and use of gunpowder, explosives, firecrackers, fireworks, kerosene oil, gasoline, or other combustible material; to regulate or prohibit the exhibition of fireworks, the discharge of firearms, the use of lights or candles in buildings and structures within the town, and to restrain the making of bonfires or other outdoor fires within the town.
Twelfth. To prevent hogs, cows, horses, dogs, and other animals from running at large in the said town, and to subject the same to such confiscation, regulations, licenses, fees, and
TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE
200-11
taxes as they may deem proper, and to prevent the keeping of hogs within the limits of the town.
Thirteenth. To regulate the riding and driving of horses and other animals and the operation of motor and other vehicles, but not in conflict with State law; to prevent the throwing of stones or other objects, or engaging in any employment or sport on the streets, sidewalks or public alleys, dangerous or annoying to persons; and to prohibit and punish the abuse or cruel treatment of horses and other animals in said town.
Fourteenth. To restrain and punish drunkards, vagrants, and street beggars; to prevent vice and immorality; to preserve the public peace and good order; to prevent and quell riots, disturbances and disorderly assemblages; to suppress houses of ill-fame and gambling houses, and to prevent and punish lewd, indecent, and disorderly conduct or exhibitions in said town.
Fifteenth. To prevent the coming into the town of persons having no ostensible means of support, and of persons who may be dangerous to the peace and safety of the town.
Sixteenth. To acquire, by condemnation, purchase or otherwise, provide for, maintain, operate and protect aircraft landing fields either within or without the corporate limits of the town.
Seventeenth. To own, operate and maintain electric light and/or gas works, either within or without the corporate limits of the said town for the generating of electricity and/or the manufacture of gas for illuminating, power and other purposes, and to supply the same, whether said gas and/or electricity be generated or purchased by said town, to its customers and consumers both within and without the corporate limits of the said town, at such price and upon such terms as it may prescribe, and to that end it may contract with owners of land and water power for the use thereof, or may have the same condemned, and to purchase such electricity and/or gas from the owners thereof, and to furnish the same to its customers and consumers, both within and without the corporate limits of the said city at such price and on such terms as it may prescribe.
Eighteenth. To establish, impose and enforce water, gas, electricity, and sewerage rates and rates and charges for public utilities or other service, products or conveniences, operated, rendered or furnished by the town; and to assess, or cause to be assessed, water, gas, electricity and sewerage rates and charges against the proper tenant or tenants or such persons, firms or corporations as may be legally liable therefor; and the council may by
TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE
200-12
ordinance require a deposit of such reasonable amount as it may by such ordinance prescribe, before furnishing any of said services to any person, firm or corporation.
Nineteenth. Subject to the provisions of the Constitution of Virginia and of this charter, to grant franchises for public utilities under terms and conditions to be fixed by the council.
Twentieth. To divert the channels of creeks and flowing streams and for that purpose to acquire property by condemnation.
Twenty-first. Subject to the provisions of the Constitution of Virginia and of this charter to contract debts, borrow money and make and issue bonds and other evidences of indebtedness.
Twenty-second. To expend the moneys of the town for all lawful purposes.
Twenty-third. To exercise the power of eminent domain within this State with respect to lands and improvements thereon, machinery and equipment for any lawful purpose of the said town.
Twenty-fourth. To provide by ordinance for a system of meat and milk inspection and to appoint meat and milk inspectors, agents or officers to carry the same into effect, within or without the corporate limits of the town; to license, regulate, control and locate slaughter houses within or without the corporate limits of the town; and for such services of inspection to make reasonable charges therefor; and to provide reasonable penalties for the violation of such ordinances.
Twenty-fifth. To do all things whatsoever necessary or expedient, and to pass all ordinances, resolutions and by-laws for promoting or maintaining the security, general welfare, comfort, education, morals, peace, government, health, trade, commerce and industries of the town or its inhabitants, not in conflict with the Constitution of the State, or the Constitution of the United States.
Twenty-sixth. The council shall have full control and regulation over the public utilities now owned or that may hereafter be acquired by the said town, and to this end it shall have full authority to employ from time to time such employees, agents, and consultants as it deems necessary to properly maintain, conduct and operate the same; and it shall have full authority to incur indebtedness, unless otherwise prohibited by law, whenever the said council may deem it necessary for the proper conduct, management and maintenance of the public utilities now owned by the said town, or such as may hereafter
TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE
200-13
be acquired by it; and the council is hereby authorized and empowered to supply electric current to persons, firms, associations and corporations not further distant than fifteen miles from the corporate limits of the town, and to charge therefor for which purpose the said council is specifically authorized and empowered to construct, purchase, lease or otherwise acquire necessary transmission lines, and to purchase, lease or otherwise acquire such rights of ways as may be necessary for such purposes.
The said council shall likewise have authority, by ordinance duly enacted, to compel all owners of real estate within the corporate limits of said town to connect with such sewerage pipes or connections as may hereafter be installed or constructed by the said town, upon such reasonable terms as may be prescribed by said council, together with all other authority necessary to a proper maintenance and operation of an effective sewerage system.
The said council, however, shall have no authority to sell its public utilities, without first submitting the question of such sale at a special election to be called for that purpose only, to the qualified voters of the Town of Front Royal, which election shall be conducted as now provided by general law governing special elections. The Circuit Court of Warren County shall order such special election upon the petition of two hundred qualified voters of the Town of Front Royal, or upon a resolution passed by a majority of the council of said town. For a period of not less than four weeks prior to said special election, the substantial terms of any proposed sale shall be published over the signature of the clerk of the said town, once a week for four successive weeks in some newspaper of general circulation within the County of Warren, or by publication for not less than once per week for four successive weeks in some other manner permitted by the general laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia for the publication of proposed ordinances of the town. The qualifications of voters in said special election shall be determined by existing statutes governing other special elections.
Twenty-seventh. The council shall have all powers and authority to remedy, remove, repair, and secure any blighted or derelict building or structure that are granted in the Code of Virginia to any other locality. (1937, c. 44; 2002, c. 705; 2018, cc. 328, 329)
§ 18.1. Town Council, through its employees and agents at its official visitors' center, shall have the power to sell and vend to the general public items and articles of merchandise obtained from local vendors and merchants and other items that help promote the Town, tourism therein, and access to and awareness of the identities, locations and wares of vendors and merchants within the Town and near vicinity. (2001, c. 245)
TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE
200-14
§ 19. The council is empowered to acquire, by purchase, gift, devise or condemnation or otherwise, lands to be used as a place for the burial of the dead. The said council shall have the power to prescribe and enforce all needful rules and regulations not inconsistent with the laws of the State for the use, protection, and ornamentation of the cemetery; to set aside, at their discretion, by metes and bounds, any portion thereof for the interment of strangers and the indigent poor; to divide the remainder into burial lots, and sell or lease the same, and to execute all proper deeds or other writings in evidence of such sale or lease, and to prescribe what class or conditions of persons shall be admitted to interment in the cemetery. The cemetery, when established and enclosed, with the property included in it, shall be exempt from all State, county, and municipal taxation. (1937, c. 44)
§ 20. The council shall set aside, or cause to be set aside, a sufficient portion of the revenues of the town, during each fiscal year to meet the sinking fund requirements for that year of the respective town ordinances, both those now in effect and such as may be passed in the future, authorizing the issuance of bonds by the town. Unless otherwise provided in the ordinances passed prior to the effective date of this charter authorizing the issuance of bonds, all sinking funds of the town shall be administered by the board of sinking fund commissioners created by section twenty-five of this charter, who shall collect, maintain, and handle the same in the manner provided by section twenty-five hereof. None of the sinking funds of the town shall be appropriated or used for any purpose other than the retirement of the bonded indebtedness of the town. (1937, c. 44)
§ 21. Where the council has authority to pass ordinances on any subject, it may prescribe (i) any penalty not exceeding twelve months in jail or (ii) a fine not exceeding $2,500, either or both, except that for a person convicted for a third or subsequent offense involving the same property committed within ten years of an offense under the Uniform Statewide Building Code's Property Maintenance Code, the fine shall not exceed $5,000, for a violation thereof, provided that such penalty shall not exceed the penalty prescribed by general law for a like offense. (1937, c. 44; 1985, c. 53; 2002, c. 705)
§ 22. The town council shall not take or use any private property for streets or other public purposes except by gift or by dedication as hereinafter is provided, without making the owner thereof just compensation for the same; but in cases where the council cannot by agreement obtain title to the ground for such purposes, the council may exercise the power of eminent domain, as provided by law. (1937, c. 44)
§ 23. In every case where a street in said town has been, or shall be, encroached upon by any fence, building or otherwise, the council may require the owner to remove the same, and if such
TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE
200-15
removal be not made within the time prescribed by the council, they may impose such penalty as they may deem proper for each and every day it is allowed to continue thereafter, and may cause the encroachment to be removed, and collect from the owner all reasonable charges therefor, with costs by the same process that they are hereinafter empowered to collect taxes.
Except, in any case where there is a bona fide dispute as to the true boundary line or the location of the true street line (and if passage over such street is not seriously impeded) the same shall first be established and determined by an adjudication of a court of competent jurisdiction in a proceeding instituted by either the town or the property owner for that purpose before the said town shall take any steps to remove the said obstruction or encroachment, or to impose any penalty therefor. No encroachment upon any street, however long continued, shall constitute any adverse possession to or confer any rights upon the persons claiming thereunder as against the said town. (1937, c. 44)
§ 24. Dedication of any street, alley or lane in said town may be made by plat or deed. Any street or alley reserved in the division or subdivision into lots of any portion of the territory within the corporate limits of said town, by a plan or plat of record, shall be deemed and held to be dedicated to public use, unless it appears by said record that the street or alley so reserved is designated for private use. The council shall have the right to elect, by resolution entered on its minutes whether it will, or will not accept the dedication of any street or alley. (1937, c. 44)
§ 25. Whenever by act of the Assembly or by ordinance of the council, the necessity of collecting, maintaining and handling a sinking fund for the retirement of town obligations may arise, the mayor, two members of the council, and the town treasurer, shall be, and the same are hereby, constituted a board of sinking fund commissioners, who are authorized to invest such sinking fund in bonds of the United States government, those of the Town of Front Royal, and such other municipal or county bonds issued by the cities or counties in Virginia as shall met the approval of the council, and to collect, care for, and reinvest the interest or income accruing from the same as may be directed by the town council by resolution or ordinance. Subject to the provisions of this charter and of the general law of the State, any action which the board of sinking fund commissioners shall take shall be controlled by the affirmative vote of at least two members thereof. No fees nor commission shall be paid to any officer for the handling and control of the sinking fund.
The board of sinking fund commissioners shall have complete charge of all insurance funds, pension and relief funds, and all other funds, which may be created under authority of the council. The sinking fund commissioners shall each give bond payable to the Town of Front Royal in such amount as the council shall prescribe and with sufficient security to be approved
TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE
200-16
by the council, for the faithful discharge of their duties as sinking fund commissioners before entering upon their duties. (1937, c. 44; 1975, c. 348)
§ 26. The council may appoint a duly licensed attorney as town attorney, whose compensation shall be fixed by the council and who shall serve during the pleasure of the council, and in addition to those herein provided for, such officers and clerks as they may deem necessary, and define their powers, prescribe their duties and fix their compensation. The council may take from any officer, whether elected or appointed by them, a bond, with surety, to be approved by the council, in such penalty as it may deem proper payable to the town, with condition for the faithful discharge by the said officer of the duties of his office. (1937, c. 44)
§ 27. The clerk of the council shall attend the meetings of the council, shall keep a record of its proceedings, and shall have the custody of the seal of the said town. He shall keep all papers that by the provisions of this act, or the direction of the council, are required to be filed with or kept by him. Immediately after the close of each session of the town council, he shall make and present to the mayor and town manager a transcript of every ordinance, resolution or order concerning any public improvement, or for the payment of money, and every ordinance, resolution, order and act of legislative character passed by the town council at such session. He shall, in like manner, give notice to all persons presenting communications or petitions to the town council of the final action of the council on such communications or petitions. He shall publish such reports and ordinances as the town council may direct and shall in general perform such other acts and duties as the council may from time to time require of him. (1937, c. 44)
§ 28. In addition to all the other powers mentioned in this charter, the town shall have power to raise annually, semiannually, or such other periods permitted by general law, by taxes and assessments in said town on all subjects the taxation of which by incorporated towns is not forbidden by general law, such sums of money as the council herein provided for shall deem necessary for the purposes of said town, and in such manner as said council shall deem expedient, in accordance with the Constitution and laws of this State and of the United States. (1937, c. 44; 2018, cc. 328, 329)
§ 29. The town council is hereby vested with power to impose special or local assessments for local improvements and enforce payment thereof, subject, however, to such limitations prescribed by the Constitution and laws of Virginia as may be in force at the time of the imposition of such special or local assessments. (1937, c. 44)
§ 30. The town council may levy a tax or a license on any person, firm or corporation pursuing or conducting any trade, business, profession, occupation, employment or calling whatsoever
TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE
200-17
within the boundaries of the town, whether a license may be required therefor by the State or not, and may exceed the State license, if any be required, except when prohibited by general law. (1937, c. 44)
§ 31. Any payment of delinquent taxes made by the tenant, unless under an expressed contract contained in his lease, shall be a credit against the person to whom he owes the rent.(1937, c. 44)
§ 32. The Council may require of owners of motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers licenses for the privilege of keeping and operating such vehicles in the town and may levy and assess taxes and charge license fees upon such vehicles. (1937, c. 44; 1968, c. 507)
§ 33. All goods and chattels wheresoever found, may be distrained and sold for taxes assessed and due thereon, and no deed of trust nor mortgage upon goods and chattels shall prevent the same from being distrained and sold for taxes. (1937, c. 44)
§ 34. No tax shall be levied or corporate debt in excess of one hundred dollars be contracted unless by a resolution passed by a recorded vote of a majority of the council, provided however that all expenditures provided for in the budget passed by the town council shall be excepted from this provision of this act. (1937, c. 44)
§ 35. There shall be a lien on real estate for the town taxes as assessed thereon from the commencement of the year for which they were assessed. The council may require real estate in the town delinquent for the non-payment of town taxes to be sold for said taxes, with interest thereon at the rate of six per centum per annum, and such per centum as the council may prescribe for charges. Such real estate may be sold and may be redeemed in the manner provided for by law; provided that at any such sale, where no person bids the amount chargeable on any such real estate, it shall be lawful for the treasurer to purchase the same for the benefit of the town upon the same terms and conditions prescribed by general law, for the purchase of delinquent real estate by the treasurer for the benefit of a city or town, respectively. (1937, c. 44)
§ 36. The town council may create and maintain a fire department for the town and it shall be the duty of the employees of this department to stand ready at all times to answer alarms of fire and make every effort to extinguish fires and protect lives and property. It shall also be the duty of the employees of the fire department to make periodic inspections of the buildings and premises in the town for fire hazards, and to have corrected any situation tending to create a fire hazard, when ordered so to do by the council or the town manager. The employees of the fire department shall have special police powers when responding to alarms of fire and when making inspection for fire hazards. The town council may provide and maintain all necessary fire-fighting apparatus, equipment, and alarm systems, and make such ordinances as it may deem proper and
TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE
200-18
necessary to extinguish and prevent fire, to regulate the operation of the fire department, and may require citizens to render assistance to the fire department in case of need. (1937, c. 44)
§ 37. For the purpose of guarding against the calamities of fire, and based upon the advice of a fire marshal or building official or other person with expertise in the prevention of fires or explosion, the town council may, from time to time, designate such portions and parts of the town as it deems proper within which buildings or other structures deemed by town council as unreasonably dangerous from or susceptible to fire or explosion, may or may not be erected. It may prohibit the erection of buildings, structures, or additions of inflammable material in any portion of the town without its permission, and may provide for the removal of such buildings or structures or additions which shall be erected contrary to such prohibition at the expense of the builder or owner thereof; or if any building in process of erection or already built appears clearly to be unsafe the council may cause such building to be taken down, after reasonable notice to the owner; and the council may, by proper ordinance, divide the town into zones; specify the kind and character of buildings which may be erected in the different zones; provide for the disposition of garbage and waste; provide precautionary measures against danger from fires; provide for the removal of buildings or structures of any kind, erected in violation of ordinances, at the expense of the builder or owner; and may do all other things lawful to be done, looking to the health and safety of the inhabitants of the town. (1937, c. 44; 2018, cc. 328, 329)
§ 38. Ordinances making the annual tax levy, appropriation ordinances, ordinances and resolutions pertaining to local improvements and assessments, ordinances and resolutions providing for or directing any investigation of town affairs, resolutions requesting information from administrative bodies, or directing administrative action and emergency measures shall take effect at the time indicated in such ordinances. Except as otherwise prescribed in this charter, all other ordinances and resolutions passed by the council shall take effect at the time indicated in such ordinances, but in event no effective date shall be set forth in any such ordinance, resolution or by-law passed by the council, the same shall become effective thirty days from the date of its passage.
An emergency measure is an ordinance or resolution to provide for immediate preservation of the public peace, property, health or safety, in which the emergency claimed is set forth and defined in a preamble thereto. The affirmative vote of at least three members of the council shall be required to pass any ordinance or resolution as an emergency measure. Effective July 1, 1994, the affirmative vote of at least four members of the Council shall be required to pass any ordinance or resolution as an emergency measure. In case there shall be a tie among the members of the council, the vote of the mayor, in event of such tie, shall be controlling(1937, c. 44; 1993, c. 479)
TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE
200-19
§ 39. All ordinances hereafter passed by the council for the violation of which any penalty is imposed, shall be published once, at least, in one of the newspapers of general circulation in said town, to be designated by the council, or shall be published in any other manner permitted by general law for the publication of proposed ordinances. A record or entry made by the clerk of said council, or a copy of said record or entry, duly certified to by him, shall be prima facie evidence of the publication of any such ordinance; and all laws, regulations and ordinances of the council may be read in evidence in all courts of justice, and in all proceedings before any officer, body or board in which it shall be necessary to refer thereto, from a copy thereof, certified by the clerk of said council, provided, however, that whenever the council of the Town of Front Royal shall codify, in whole or in part, and print at one time, or from time to time, in book or pamphlet form, the general ordinances of the Town of Front Royal, or any part thereof, it shall be unnecessary to publish any new or changed ordinances therein contained, or such codification, or codifications, in a newspaper or otherwise, provided that notice of such publication and the availability of such book or pamphlet at the town hall is published in a newspaper as hereinabove required. (1937, c. 44; 1964, c. 105; 2018, cc. 328, 329)
§ 40. A. The council may exercise full police powers and it may establish and maintain a police force for the Town of Front Royal with such number of policemen and employees as the council may deem necessary and with the head of such force to be known as the chief of police. The chief of police and the policemen and employees of the police force shall be under the control and supervision of the town manager or the mayor as the council may deem expedient. The compensation and terms of office or employment of the chief of police and such policemen and employees of the police force as the council shall deem proper shall be fixed and determined by the council.
B. Each member of the police force and the chief of police are hereby made and constituted a conservator of the peace and endowed with all the powers of a constable in criminal cases and all other powers which under the laws of the State of Virginia and the ordinances and resolutions of the town may be necessary to enable him to discharge the duties of his office. (1937, c. 44)
§ 41. A. The council may, in the name of and for the use of the town, contract debts and make and issue, or cause to be made and issued, as evidence thereof, bonds, notes or other obligations, upon the credit of the town, or solely upon the credit of specific property owned by the town, or solely upon the credit of income derived from property used in connection with any public utility owned and operated by the town.
TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE
200-20
B. Pending the issuance and sale of any bonds, notes or other obligations by this act authorized, or in anticipation of the receipt of taxes and revenues of the current fiscal year, it shall be lawful for the town to borrow money temporarily and to issue notes or other evidences of indebtedness therefor, and from time to time to renew such temporary loans or to use current funds to be ultimately repaid from the proceeds of the said bonds, notes or other obligations or from the town taxes and revenues, as the case may be.
C. The credit of the town shall not, directly or indirectly, under any device or pretense whatsoever, be granted to or in aid of any person, firm, association or corporation.
D. Every ordinance authorizing the issuance of bonds shall specify the purpose or purposes for which they are to be issued, the aggregate amount of the bonds, the term for which they shall be issued, and the maximum rate of interest to be paid thereon. Any such ordinance may be amended by ordinance at any time before the bonds to be affected by such amendment have been sold; provided, however, if there shall be omitted from this act any provision essential to the valid authorization, sale, execution and issuance of any of the bonds of said town, the provisions of general law with reference to similar bonds shall supply said omission.
E. Any bonds issued by the town under this act shall be signed by the mayor and attested by the clerk under the seal of the town and shall be made payable in the office of the town treasurer or such other place in or out of the State as the council may provide in the ordinance authorizing the issuance of the particular bonds. Such bonds shall be advertised by the mayor and sold by the town treasurer, or by the town manager as may be provided in such ordinance, under supervision of the mayor, town manager and clerk, and the sale reported to and approved by the council, and the proceeds from said sale shall be paid to the town treasurer. (1937, c. 44)
CHAPTER VI – TOWN OFFICERS
§ 42. The town council may combine offices when not expressly prohibited, except that the assessing and collecting officers shall not be the same person. (1937, c. 44)
§ 43. The town council shall grant and pay to all town officers and employees such salaries or compensation, if any, as the said council may from time to time deem just and proper, or which shall be fixed by this act, except as such salaries or compensation may be fixed by general law. (1937, c. 44)
TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE
200-21
§ 44. If any person, having been an officer of such town, shall not within ten days after he shall have vacated, or removed from office, and upon notification or request of the clerk of the council, or within such time thereafter as the town council shall allow, deliver over to his successor in office all property, books, and papers belonging to the town, or appertaining to such office in his possession or under his control, he shall forfeit and pay to the town the sum of five hundred dollars, and may be sued therefor in the name of the town and recovered with costs; and all, records and documents used in any such office by virtue of any provision of this act, or of any ordinance or order of the town council, or any superior officer of the said town, shall be deemed the property of the said town and appertaining to said office, and the chief officer thereof shall be responsible therefor. (1937, c. 44; 2018, cc. 328, 329)
§ 45. All officers, hereafter elected under this act, shall be elected at the times and for the terms, as hereinbefore provided, and shall enter upon the discharge of their duties, in accordance with the provisions of the general laws of this State concerning town officers. (1937, c. 44)
§ 46. The Town of Front Royal and the officers thereof, elected or appointed in accordance with the provisions of this act, shall be clothed with all the powers, and be subject to all the provisions of law not in express conflict with the provisions of this act. (1937, c. 44)
§ 47. No member of the council of the Town of Front Royal shall be appointed or elected to any office under the jurisdiction of the council while he is a member of the council, or for one year thereafter, except that the council may appoint one of the members of the council as town treasurer with all or any part of the duties, powers, obligations and responsibilities of the town treasurer provided by this act. (1937, c. 44)
§ 48. The mayor, the town councilmen, the town manager, the chief of police and the members of the police force of the town shall have jurisdiction, power and authority in criminal and police matters for one mile from the corporate limits of the said town. (1937, c. 44)
CHAPTER VII – TOWN TREASURER
§ 49. The town treasurer shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, give bond with sufficient surety to be approved by the council, in a penalty of such amount as may be fixed by the council from time to time, payable to the Town of Front Royal, conditioned for the true and faithful performance of the duties of his office. The treasurer shall be responsible for the collection of all taxes, licenses and levies except charges for services furnished by the public utilities of the town. The council shall have authority to place in the hands of a town collector to be appointed by it the collection of any taxes, licenses and other levies at any time before they become delinquent, if in the discretion of the council it shall be proper so to do. (1937, c. 44)
TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE
200-22
§ 50. The town treasurer shall receive all moneys belonging to the town which it is his duty to collect from persons owing the same to the town, or which it is the duty of other officers of the town to collect and pay over to him, and pay the same out as the ordinances of the town may prescribe; to keep such moneys safely and account therefor, and to pay all drafts or orders made on him in conformity with the ordinances of the town. (1937, c. 44)
§ 51. The funds of the town shall be deposited by the treasurer in such bank or banks as the council may direct, and such bank or banks shall give bond in such sum or sums as the council shall fix. He shall keep books showing accurately the state of his accounts and the money of the town shall be kept distinct and separate from his own money and he is hereby expressly prohibited from using directly or indirectly the town's money, checks or warrants in his custody and keeping for his own use and benefit, or that of any person or persons whomsoever, and any violation of this provision shall subject him to immediate removal from office. (1937, c. 44)
§ 52. The books and accounts of the town treasurer and all papers relating to the accounts and transactions of the town, shall be at all times subject to the inspection of the mayor, the town council, and such other persons as the council may appoint, to examine the same, and all such books and accounts, together with any balance or moneys on hand, shall be transferred by the treasurer to his successor at every new appointment, or delivered up as the council may at any time require. (1937, c. 44)
§ 53. The town treasurer shall, on the first day of each month, render an account to the council showing the state of the treasury on the day previous and the balance of money on hand. He shall also, if required so to do by the council, accompany such account with a statement of all money received by him and on what account, with a list of all checks paid by him during the month then closed, and shall furnish such other information, accounts and statements as the town council may direct. (1937, c. 44)
§ 54. The town treasurer shall annually submit to the town council, within fifteen days after the close of the fiscal year, a full and detailed account of all receipts and disbursements made during the fiscal year just closed. (1937, c. 44)
§ 55. All taxes, levies or other sums of money of whatever nature received by the town treasurer belonging to the Town of Front Royal, shall be credited by the treasurer on his books to the Town of Front Royal and shall be paid out by him only on a warrant of the clerk of the council, countersigned by the mayor. (1937, c. 44)
§ 56. The treasurer shall keep a separate account of each fund and appropriation and the debits and credits belonging thereto; provided, however, that the council shall have the right to require
TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE
200-23
all town funds to be deposited to the credit of the town and may prescribe by resolution or ordinance such other method of disbursement as it shall from time to time deem proper. (1937, c. 44)
§ 57. All moneys received on all special assessments shall be held by the treasurer as a special fund, to be applied to the payment of the matter for which the assessment was made and said moneys shall be used for no other purpose. (1937, c. 44)
§ 58. The treasurer shall perform such additional duties as may be required of him by the council not inconsistent with the laws of the State. (1937, c. 44)
§ 59. The town treasurer shall receive for his services such compensation, if any, as the council may deem proper. (1937, c. 44)
§ 60. The council may at any time in its discretion combine the duties of town treasurer, or any part of such duties, with those of the duties of town manager, or with the town's finance director, and if and when the council places the duties of the town treasurer, or any part of such duties, upon the town manager or with the finance director, the town manager, or the finance director, as the case may be, shall have all of the power, authority, duties, obligations and responsibilities which are set forth in this act for the town treasurer to the extent of the combination of the duties of town treasurer with the duties of town manager by the town council. (1937, c. 44; 2018, cc. 328, 329)
CHAPTER VIII – TOWN PLANNING
§ 61. The council may adopt a town plan, showing the streets, highways, and parks heretofore laid out, adopted, and established, and such town plan shall be final with respect to the location, length, and width of such streets and highways, and the location and dimensions of such parks. Such town plan is hereby declared to be established for the promotion of the health, safety, and general welfare. Upon the adoption of the town plan, or any amendment thereto, a certificate to that effect, together with a plat, shall be filed immediately with the clerk of every county affected by such town plan or amendment. (1937, c. 44)
§ 62. The council is hereby authorized to appoint a town planning commission, fix the number and terms of members, remove any member for cause, fill any vacancies, which may occur, and provide for the powers and duties of such commission, not in conflict with the provisions of this act. (1937, c. 44)
§ 63. The council may at any time, after a public hearing, amend the town plan, including, but not limited to, widening, relocating, or closing existing streets and highways, and by altering any existing park or by laying out new streets and highways and establishing new parks. Before
TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE
200-24
amending the town plan, the council shall refer the proposed amendment to the town planning
commission for a report thereon and shall not act on such amendment until a report has been
received from said commission, unless a period of thirty days has elapsed after the date of
reference to the commission. Any amendment of the town plan, upon its adoption by the council,
shall be final unless changed as herein provided as to the location, length, and width of any street
and highway, and the location and dimensions of any park. Any widening, relocating, closing or
laying out of streets and highways proposed under the provisions of law other than those
contained in this article shall be deemed an amendment of the town plan, and shall be subject in
all respects to the provisions of this chapter. (1937, c. 44; 2018, cc. 328, 329)
§ 64. No plat showing a new street or highway within the town, shall be filed or recorded in the
office of the clerk of the town or of any county until such plat has been approved by the council.
Before giving any approval, the council shall refer every such plat to the town planning
commission for a report and shall not act on any plat so referred until a report has been received
from the commission, unless a period of forty-five days has elapsed after the date of reference to
the commission. Before reporting to the council on any plat, the commission shall hold a public
hearing thereon. If any plat is disapproved by the commission, it shall report the reasons for such
disapproval to the council. The council shall not approve any plat unless the streets and highways
provided in such plats are of sufficient width, of proper grades, and suitably located to meet the
probable traffic needs; to afford adequate light, air, and access of fire apparatus to such buildings
as may be erected along the proposed streets and highways; and to insure healthful conditions on
the land adjacent to such streets and highways. The council may, in appropriate cases, require
that a plat, before being approved, shall provide adequate open spaces for parks, playgrounds or
other recreational uses; but the inclusion of such open spaces upon a plat does not require their
dedication to public use. After a plat has been approved by the council, the streets, highways,
parks and other open spaces shall be a part of the town plan. The council, after a pubic hearing,
may adopt general regulations in regard to the filing of plats. (1937, c. 44)
A. Before approving such plat, and thereby accepting the dedication of the streets, alleys,
parks and public places thereon, the council shall require that the streets and alleys thereon
shall be properly laid out and located with reference to the topography of the land so
platted and the adjoining lands, both as to connections and widths, which widths of such
streets and alleys shall be plainly marked in figures or written on such plat, and which
streets and alleys shall be laid out in harmony with the general plan of the town.
B. Before approving such plat, and thereby accepting the dedication of the streets and
alleys thereon, the council shall require the owner thereof to execute and deliver to the
TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE
200-25
Town of Front Royal a release and waiver of any claim or claims for damages which such owner, his heirs, successors or assigns may have or acquire against the Town of Front Royal by reason of establishing proper grade lines on and along such streets and alleys and by reason of doing necessary grading or filling for the purpose of placing such streets and alleys upon the proper grade and releasing the Town of Front Royal from building any retaining wall or walls along the streets and alleys and property lines; and the council may require such release and waiver to be written and executed on said plat and recorded therewith or by an instrument of writing to be executed and recorded in the clerk's office of the circuit court of Warren County
The council may, in its discretion, require the owner of such platted lands to submit profiles of such streets and alleys, showing the contour thereof, together with proper grade lines laid thereon, and if and when the council is satisfied that the proper grade lines are laid on such profiles, the profiles shall be approved by the council and recorded by the owner or at his expense in the record of the profiles of the streets and alleys of the town, and the council may, in its discretion, require such release and waiver to be made with reference thereto.
C. Before approving any such plat of any subdivision of lots or lands the town council may, at its discretion, require the owner of such lot or lands to grade the streets and alleys therein, according to grade lines approved and established by the council. (1937, c. 44; 2018, cc. 328, 329)
§ 65. For the purpose of preserving the integrity of the plan, no permit shall hereafter be issued for the construction of any building within the street lines of any mapped street or highway, as laid down in the town plan, within the town. (1937, c. 44; 2018, cc. 328, 329)
§ 66. If such town plan is adopted, no public sewer, water pipe, or other public utility shall be laid and no grading or paving shall be done by the town in any street or highway in the town, unless such street or highway has been placed upon the town plan by the council. No permit shall be issued for any building in the town unless such building is located adjacent to a street or highway which has been placed upon the town plan by the council. Provided, however, where the literal enforcement of the provisions of this section would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, or where the nature or use of the proposed building does not require its location to be adjacent to a street or highway, the board of appeals, by a majority vote of all its members, may issue a permit for a building, upon such condition as the board may deem necessary to preserve the integrity of the town plan and to insure the proper location of future streets and highways in the town and the surrounding area. Any decisions of the board of
TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE
200-26
appeals, rendered under the provisions of this section, shall be subject to the same court review as provided for zoning decisions of the board. (1937, c. 44)
CHAPTER IX - ZONING
§ 67. For the purpose stated in chapter one hundred and ninety-seven of the Acts of Assembly, approved March 18, 1926, the town council is hereby empowered to pass zoning ordinances in conformity with the said act, as amended, subject, however, to the following modifications thereto:
A. The council shall not adopt any zoning ordinance or map until it shall have appointed a town planning commission, as provided for in chapter eight hereof and shall have received from said commission its recommendations as to a zoning ordinance and map and shall have held a public hearing thereon.
B. Any zoning ordinance, regulations, restrictions, and boundaries of districts may be changed from time to time by the council, either upon its own motion or upon petition, under such conditions as the council may prescribe, after a public hearing and adequate notice to all owners and parties affected. No change shall be made by the council in any zoning ordinance or map until such change has been referred to the town planning commission for a report thereon, and no action shall be taken by the council until a report has been received from the commission, unless a period of thirty days has elapsed after the date of reference to the commission. (1937, c. 44; 2018, cc. 328, 329)
CHAPTER X – GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 68. The mayor, town clerk, town treasurer, and town manager shall have power to administer oaths, and to take and sign affidavits in the discharge of their respective official duties. (1937, c. 44)
§ 69. The council, mayor, and any officer, board or commission authorized by the council, shall have power to make investigations as to town affairs and for that purpose to subpoena witnesses, administer oaths and compel the production of books and papers.
Any person refusing or failing to attend or to testify or to produce such books and papers may, by summons issued by such officer or board or the town council, be summoned before the mayor of said town by the board, official or council making such investigation and upon his failure to give satisfactory explanation of such failure or refusal, may be fined by the mayor not exceeding one hundred dollars or imprisoned not exceeding thirty days, and such person shall have the right
TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE
200-27
to appeal to the circuit court of Warren County. Any person who shall give false testimony under oath at any such investigation shall be liable to prosecution for perjury. (1937, c. 44)
§ 70. The plan of government provided by this charter may be changed to any other plan provided for the government of incorporated towns in the manner provided by general law therefor; and if and when the Town of Front Royal shall become a city of the second class in the manner provided by general law, the plan of government provided by this charter shall continue so far as applicable, but such plan of government may be changed to any other plan provided for the government of cities of the second class at any time in the manner provided by general law. (1937, c. 44)
In the event the Town of Front Royal is established as a city, it is hereby authorized to enter into contract with the County School Board of Warren County, Virginia, for furnishing public school facilities for the city, in which event, with the approval of the State Board of Education, the county and city shall be constituted as one school system for the establishment, operation, maintenance and management of the public schools within the county and city; and provided further that representation on the County School Board of Warren County for the City of Front Royal shall consist of one representative from each magisterial district (or ward) of the city of Front Royal to be appointed as provided in section six hundred fifty-three-a one and six hundred fifty-three-a two, Acts 1942, chapter four hundred twenty-two. (1944, c. 209)
§ 71. Nothing in this act shall authorize any ordinance in conflict with any provisions of the Virginia Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. (1937, c. 44)
§ 72. The town shall not levy any tax which is prohibited by the Constitution of Virginia or by general law. (1937, c. 44)
§ 73. If any clause, sentence, paragraph or part of this act shall, for any reason, be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of said act, but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph or part thereof which is so held invalid. (1937, c. 44)
§ 74. All acts and parts of acts in conflict with any of the provisions of this act are hereby repealed. (1937, c. 44)
§ 75. It being desirable to put into operation certain provisions of this charter without delay, an emergency is declared to exist and this act shall be in force and effect from and after the date of its passage. (1937, c. 44)
TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE
200-28
Amendments to current charter
1940, c. 401 (§§ 6, 11-a [added])
1944, c. 209 (§ 70-a [added])
1954, c. 405 (§ 6)
1964, c. 105 (§ 39)
1968, c. 507 (§ 32)
1975, c. 348 (§§ 6, 25)
1985, c. 53 (§ 21)
1987, c. 235 (§ 6)
1993, c. 479 (§§ 4, 6, 10, 11, 13, 38)
2001, c. 245 (§ 18.1 [added])
2002, c. 705 (§§ 18, 21)
2018, cc. 328, 329 (§§ 2, 4, 6, 9, 11, 12, 13, 18, 28, 37, 39, 44, 60, 63, 64 (a), 65, 67)
Chapter 1 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 1
1-1
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:
1-1 CODE ADOPTED
1-2 WHEN EFFECTIVE
1-3 REPEALER
1-4 PROVISIONS SAVED FROM REPEAL
1-5 SEVERABILITY
1-6 DELECTIONS FROM PRINTED VOLUMES
1-7 EFFECT ON ORDINANCES ADOPTED BY SUBSEQUENT TO CERTAIN DATE
1-8 FILING OF COPIES
1-9 THROUGH 14 (RESERVED)
1-15 GENERAL PENALTY
1-16 DESIGNATION OF CODE
1-17 DEFINITIONS
1-18 CONTINUATION OF EXISTING PROVISIONS
1-19 SEVERABILITY OF CODE PROVISIONS
1-20 CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS
1-21 CORPORATE SEAL
1-22 SALE OF TOWN PROPERTY
Revised/Re-codified 3-11-85. (Chapter 1 of the 1965 Code; Section 1-7”Sale of Property” was added 1-25-71; Section 1-15”General Penalty” was added 5-26-80). Other amendments noted where applicable.
1-1 CODE ADOPTED
Be it ordained and enacted by the Council of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia as follows:
There is hereby adopted by the Council of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia, that certain Code entitled the "Code of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia," containing certain ordinances of a general and permanent nature as revised, compiled, consolidated and codified in the chapters therein, as follows: Chapters 1 through 180, inclusive.
1-2 WHEN EFFECTIVE
The provisions of the Code of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia, as revised and recodified, shall be in force and effect immediately upon the adoption of this ordinance.
1-3 REPEALER
All ordinances of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia, which were enacted on or before October 8, 1984, which are not contained in the revised and recodified Code of the Town of Front Royal,
Chapter 1 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 1
1-2
Virginia, hereby adopted, and which are not excepted herein, are hereby expressly repealed effective immediately upon the adoption of this ordinance.
1-4 PROVISIONS SAVED FROM REPEAL
The repeal provided for in the preceding section of this ordinance shall not affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the adoption of this ordinance; nor shall it affect any prosecution, suit or proceeding pending or any judgment rendered prior to the adoption of this ordinance; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing payment of money by or for the Town or authorizing the issue of any bonds of the Town or any evidence of indebtedness or any contract or obligation assumed by the Town; nor shall it affect any right or franchise conferred by ordinance or resolution of the Town on any person or corporation; nor shall it affect any ordinance adopted for purposes which have been consummated or any ordinance which is temporary, although general in effect, or special, although permanent in effect; nor shall it affect any of the following ordinances or any amendment thereto;
A. Any appropriation ordinance.
B. Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes.
C. Any ordinance providing for any public improvement.
D. Any ordinance making any assessment.
E. Any ordinance opening, relocating, closing, altering, or naming any streets or alleys.
F. Any ordinance relative to salaries, wages or compensation or bonds of Town employees and officials or members of Town boards or commissions.
G. Any ordinance establishing, extending or contracting the corporate limits of the Town.
H. Any ordinance relative to changes in the Zoning Map.
I. Any ordinance relative to electrical connection charges for connection with the electrical lines or system.
J. Any ordinance relative to rates charged by the Town for electricity supplied by the Town.
K. Any ordinance designating parking meter zones.
L. Chapter 23, Sections 23-1, 23-2, 23-3 and 23-4 of the 1965 Code of the Town of Front Royal, pertaining to voting precincts. (These sections will be renumbered and included in Chapter 34 of the Code adopted herein.)
Chapter 1 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 1
1-3
M. Chapter 1, Sections 1-1, 1-2, 1-3, 1-4, 1-5, 1-6 and 1-7 of the 1965 Code of the Town of Front Royal, pertaining to General Provisions. (These sections will be renumbered and included in a chapter of the Code adopted herein.)
N. Chapter 2, Article III, Section 2-43, of the 1965 Code of the Town of Front Royal, pertaining to the Industrial Development Authority. (This section will be renumbered and included in a chapter of the Code adopted herein.)
1-5 SEVERABILITY
If any part, section, subsection, sentence, clause, word or phrase of this ordinance or of the Code of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia, is for any reason declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, it shall be severed from the body of this ordinance or Code, and such decision shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this ordinance or of such Code.
1-6 DELETIONS FROM PRINTED VOLUMES
A. The following ordinances as printed in the revised edition of the Code of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia, are surplusage and are not to be included as part of the newly adopted Code:
1. Section 110-27, Slander and liable.
2. Section 134-14, Petition by property owners for extension of sewer service.
3. Section 134-15, Report to petitioners.
4. Chapter 31, pertaining to the Police Department.
5. Chapter 16, Sections 16-1, 16-2, 16-3, 16-4, 16-5, 16-6, 16-7, 16-8, 16-9 and 16-10, pertaining to the Industrial Development Authority.
6. Chapter 43, Sections 43-1, 43-2, 43-3, 43-4, 43-5, 43-6, 43-7, 43-8, pertaining to air pollution.
7. Chapter 51, pertaining to abandoned bicycles.
B. The aforementioned sections and chapters are hereby declared to be reserved for future use.
1-7 EFFECT ON ORDINANCES ADOPTED SUBSEQUENT TO CERTAIN DATE
Neither the repeal provided for in Section 1-3 of this ordinance, nor the provisions of the Code of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia, shall be construed to affect any ordinance passed after October 8, 1984.
Chapter 1 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 1
1-4
1-8 FILING OF COPIES
A copy of the Code of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk, and shall be made available to persons desiring to examine the same.
1-9 THROUGH 14 (RESERVED)
1-15 GENERAL PENALTY
A. Whenever a provision in this Code or other ordinance of the Town prescribes punishment by stating that the act or offense or the failure to do any act is a misdemeanor or unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefore, the act or offense or failure to do any act shall be punished by a fine not exceeding two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) or by imprisonment in jail for a period of not exceeding twelve (12) months, either or both, except that acts or offenses or the failure to do any act considered Class II Misdemeanors in any similar statute of the Commonwealth of Virginia shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or confinement in jail for not more than six (6) months, either or both, and that acts or offenses or the failure to do any act considered Class III Misdemeanors in any similar statute of the Commonwealth of Virginia shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and that acts or offenses or the failure to do any act considered Class IV Misdemeanors in any similar statute of the Commonwealth of Virginia shall be punished by a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
(Ord. No. 12-02 Amended 8-12-02-Effective Upon Passage)
B. In no case shall the penalty of any Town ordinance exceed the penalty imposed in a similar statute of the Commonwealth of Virginia. In the event that any Town ordinance should provide a penalty exceeding that imposed in a similar statute of the Commonwealth of Virginia, the Town penalty shall be considered null and void, and said penalty provision shall be severed from the ordinance, and the lesser penalty of the similar statute of the Commonwealth of Virginia shall be thereupon incorporated by reference, to be employed in lieu of the severed penalty provision of the Town ordinance.
C. All acts, offenses or the failure to do any acts punishable under Section 17-28 of the Town Code (since repealed) shall be punishable under the provisions of this section. All references to "Section 17-28 of the Town Code" shall be taken as references to this section.
D. Except where otherwise provided, each day any violation of this Code or of any such ordinance, rule or regulation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
1-16 DESIGNATION OF CODE
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia", and may be so cited. Such ordinances may also be cited as the "Front Royal Town Code".
Chapter 1 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 1
1-5
1-17 DEFINITIONS
A. In the interpretation and construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the Town, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless they are inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council or the context clearly requires otherwise:
BOND - When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient.
CHIEF OF THE FIRE DEPARTMENT; FIRE CHIEF - The Chief of the Volunteer Fire Department.
CODE; THIS CODE - The Code of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia.
COMPUTATION OF TIME - When a notice is required to be given or any other act to be done a certain time before any proceeding, there must be that time, exclusive of the day for such proceeding, but the day on which such notice is given, or such act is done, may be counted as part of the time; but when a notice is required to be given or any other act to be done within a certain time after any event, that time shall be allowed in addition to the day on which the event occurred.
COUNCIL - The Council of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia.
COUNTY - The County of Warren in the State of Virginia.
FOLLOWING - When used by way of reference to any section or sections in the Code, next following that in which such reference is made.
HEALTH OFFICER - The State Health Officer of Warren County or his authorized agent or representative.
MONTH - A calendar month.
OATH - Includes an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD - Whenever particular hours are specified in this Code relating to the time within which any act shall be performed by any person, the time applicable shall be the official standard time or daylight savings time, whichever may be in current use in the Town.
OWNER - As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or part of such building or land.
PERSON - Includes a firm, partnership, association of persons, corporation, organization or any other group acting as a unit.
Chapter 1 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 1
1-6
PRECEDING - When used by way of reference to any section or sections in this Code, shall be construed to mean next preceding that in which such reference is made.
PROPERTY - Real, personal or mixed property.
PUBLIC GROUNDS - The parks and all public lands owned or leased by the Town, and those parts of public places which do not form traveled parts of streets as defined in this section.
SHALL - Shall be mandatory.
SIDEWALK - Any portion of a street between the curbline, or the lateral lines of a roadway where there is no curb, and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
SIGNATURE; SUBSCRIPTION - Includes a mark when the person cannot write, his name being written near it, and being witnessed by a person who writes his own name as a witness.
STATE - The Commonwealth of Virginia.
STREET - Includes avenues, boulevards, highways, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, bridges and the approaches thereto and all other public thoroughfares in the Town, and shall mean the entire width thereof between abutting property lines; it shall be construed to include a sidewalk or footpath, unless the contrary is expressed or unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Town Council.
SWEAR; SWORN - Equivalent to the word "affirm" or "affirmed" in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath.
TOWN - The Town of Front Royal, in the County of Warren and Commonwealth of Virginia.
WRITTEN; IN WRITING - Includes typewriting, printing on paper and any other mode of representing words and letters.
YEAR - A calendar year, unless a fiscal year is indicated.
B. Gender. Words importing the masculine gender only may extend and be applied to females and to corporations as well as males.
C. Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things, as well as to one (1) person or thing; and a word importing the plural number only may extend and be applied to one (1) person or thing, as well as to several persons or things.
Chapter 1 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 1
1-7
1-18 CONTINUATION OF EXISTING PROVISIONS
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those in the Code of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia, 1965, and all ordinances adopted subsequent to such Code and included herein, shall be considered as a continuation thereof and not as new enactments.
1-19 SEVERABILITY OF CODE PROVISIONS
If any part, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is for any reason declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this Code.
1-20 CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS
The catchlines of the sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of any section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any section, including its catchline, is amended or reenacted.
1-21 CORPORATE SEAL
A. The Corporate Seal of the Town shall be a design within a circle one and one-half (1 1/2) inches in diameter, with "Corporate Seal" therein. Around the edge shall be this inscription: "Front Royal, Warren County, Virginia".
B. No other seal shall be used for the Town, and no paper issued by municipal authority, which requires the Seal of the town, shall be valid unless the Seal prescribed above shall be duly affixed thereto.
1-22 SALE OF TOWN PROPERTY
A. No real estate owned by the Town shall be sold unless the following requirements have been complied with:
1. The Town Council shall hold a public hearing upon the question of the sale after two (2) publications in a newspaper published or having general circulation in the Town.
2. The Town Council shall authorize by resolution the terms of the sale.
3. Bids shall be accepted by the Purchasing Agent on the date such property is advertised for sale.
4. The Town Council shall authorize the acceptance, or rejection, of the best bid at the first available regular Town Council meeting.
Chapter 1 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 1
1-8
B. No personal property owned by the Town shall be sold unless the following requirements have been complied with:
1. The Town Manager, or his designated agent, shall cause to be published in a newspaper having general circulation in the Town, an advertisement arranging the sale including the date, time and place of the sale.
2. The sale shall be held by public auction and/or online public auction to the highest bidder, and such shall be conducted at the place, date and time such property is advertised for sale.
(Amended B.2. to add online auction 6-24-13-Effective Upon Passage)
C. Any deviation from the foregoing procedures shall be authorized by resolution adopted by the Town Council, with the reasons therefore stated therein.
(Ord. No. 13-95 Amended Entire Section 11-27-95-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 4 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 4
4-1
Chapter 4
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
Sections:
TOWN COUNCIL
4-1 TIME OF MEETINGS
4-1.1 INDIVIDUAL MEMBER REMOTE PARTICIPATION BY ELECTRONIC MEANS
4-2 STANDING COMMITTEES
4-3 PROPOSED ORDINANCES OR RESOLUTIONS TO BE IN WRITING
4-4 READING/PUBLICATION OF ORDINANCES & EMERGENCY ORDINANCES
4-5 ATTENDANCE OF WITNESSES & PRODUCTION OF BOOKS AND PAPERS
RULES OF ORDER
4-6 APPLICABILITY OF ROBERT'S RULES OF ORDER, 10TH EDITION
4-7 SUSPENSION OF RULES
4-8 MAYOR AS PRESIDING OFFICER
4-9 QUESTIONS OF ORDER
4-10 STATEMENT OF QUESTION AND DECLARATION OF RESULT; RECORDED VOTE
4-11 WITHDRAWAL FROM MEETING
4-12 CONDUCT IN ADDRESSING COUNCIL
4-13 PRIORITY IN SPEAKING
4-14 COMMUNICATIONS TO BE IN WRITING
4-15 MOTIONS
4-16 MEETINGS AND ORGANIZATION OF COMMITTEES
4-17 COMMITTEE REPORTS
4-18 ACTIONS UPON CLAIMS AND FOR REMISSION OF TAXES
4-19 ORDER OF BUSINESS; PLACEMENT OF ITEMS ON THE AGENDA
OFFICERS
4-20 RIGHT OF ENTRY
MAYOR
4-21 EXECUTIVE HEAD
4-22 CONTRACTING DEBT
4-23 RECOMMENDATIONS TO COUNCIL
TOWN MANAGER
4-24 (RESERVED)
4-25 BOND
4-26 POSITION TO BE FULL-TIME; REMOVAL
4-27 GENERAL RESPONSIBILITIES AND DUTIES
4-28 DUTIES AS TOWN TREASURER
Chapter 4 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 4
4-2
4-29 BUDGET AND FINANCIAL ADVICE
4-30 ATTENDANCE AT COUNCIL MEETINGS; RECOMMENDATIONS TO COUNCIL
4-31 EMPLOYMENT AND DISCHARGE OF TOWN EMPLOYEES
4-32 MONTHLY FINANCIAL REPORT
4-33 SINKING FUND; INTEREST ON OUTSTANDING BONDS
4-34 CONTROL OF TOWN-OWNED REAL PROPERTY
4-35 BILLS
4-36 DISPOSITION OF TOWN FUNDS
TOWN ATTORNEY
4-37 ELECTION
4-38 COMPENSATION
4-39 GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES
4-40 SUITS, PROSECUTIONS AND DEFENSE DUTIES
4-41 REPORTS TO COUNCIL
4-42 ACCOUNTING FOR FUNDS
TOWN ENGINEER
4-43 APPOINTMENT; DUTIES
DISCLOSURE BY CERTAIN EMPLOYEES
4-44 FILING REQUIRED
4-45 APPLICABILITY
PUBLIC RECORDS
4-46 TOWN RECORDS - DEFINITION
4-47 TOWN RECORDS DECLARED PUBLIC PROPERTY
4-48 CUSTODY AND PRESERVATION OF TOWN COUNCIL RECORDS
4-49 RECORDS MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
4-50 RECORDS MANAGER
4-51 DEPARTMENT RECORDS OFFICERS
AUXILIARY POLICE OFFICERS
4-52 APPOINTMENT; POWER AND DUTIES
4-53 RESIDENCY OF TOWN EMPLOYEES
Revised/Re-codified 3-11-85. (Chapter 2 of the 1965 Code. Section 2-39 “Compensation of Town Attorney” amended 6-14-54; Section 2-4 “Ordinances” amended 6-13-60; Section 2-2 “Appointment of Standing Committees” amended 8-8-60; Section 2A “Regulate Emissions” was amended 11-9-64; 12-14-64; 8-23-65; Section 2-43 “Industrial Development Authority” was added 12-11-67; Section 2-27.1 “Duties include those of Town Treasurer” amended 8-9-71;) General Provisions regarding Town Council and Town Manager are located in the Town Charter; Chapters I – VI. Other amendments noted where applicable.
Chapter 4 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 4
4-3
TOWN COUNCIL
4-1 TIME OF MEETINGS
A. The Council shall hold its regular meetings in the Warren County Board of Supervisors Chambers on the second and fourth Mondays of each month at 7:00 p.m.; provided however, that there shall be only one (1) such regular meeting in the month of December of each year, and it shall be on the second Monday of that month, held as the same time and in the same place.
(Ord. No. 10-04 Amended Time/Place 8-27-04-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 2-10 Amended to Second Monday in December 3-22-10-Effective Upon Passage)
B. In the event that a regular Town Council meeting shall fall on a date designated as a Town holiday, then the regular Council meeting shall be held on the following day (Tuesday) at 7:00 p.m.
C. In the event that a regular Town Council meeting cannot be conducted at the regular time or location due to circumstances beyond the Town’s control, the alternative meeting date shall be the following Monday at 7:00 p.m. in Town Administrative Offices.
(Ord. No. 7-92 Amended Entire Section (A-C) 7-27-92 –Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 1-95 Amended (C) 2-27-95-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 2-10 Repealed (C) 3-22-10-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. Added (C) 7-23-12-Effective Upon Passage)
4-1.1 INDIVIDUAL MEMBER REMOTE PARTICIPATION BY ELECTRONIC MEANS
A. Individual members of Town Council may participate in meetings of Town Council by electronic communication means from a remote location that is not open to the public, as permitted by Virginia Code § 2.2-3708.1., as that Section may from time to time be amended, or by other future applicable law. This policy shall apply to the entire membership of Town Council and without regard to the identity of the Town Council Member requesting remote participation or the matters that will be considered or voted on at the meeting.
B. Whenever an individual Town Council Member wishes to participate from a remote location, a quorum of Town Council shall be physically assembled at the primary or central Town Council Meeting location, and arrangements will be made for the voice of the remote Town Council Member to be heard by all persons at the primary or central Town Council Meeting location. The reason that the remote Town Council Member is unable to attend the Town Council Meeting and the remote location from which the Town Council Member participates will be recorded in the Town Council Meeting Minutes.
C. When such remote individual Town Council participation is due to an emergency or personal matter, such participation is limited by the Code of Virginia to two (2) meetings or 25 percent of the meetings of the Town Council per Town Council Member each calendar year, whichever is fewer.
Chapter 4 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 4
4-4
D. Individual Town Council Member participation from a remote location shall be approved unless such participation would violate this ordinance or other applicable provisions of the Virginia Freedom of Information Act.
E. If a Town Council Member's participation from a remote location is challenged, then the Council shall vote whether to allow such participation. If Town Council votes to disapprove of the Town Council Member's remote participation because such participation would violate this ordinance or the provisions of the Virginia Freedom of Information Act, such disapproval will be recorded in the Town Council Meeting Minutes with specificity.
F. This policy applies to all Meetings, Work Sessions, and committees of Town Council.
(Added (A-F) 1-23-17-Effective Upon Passage)
4-2 STANDING COMMITTEES
The Council, as soon as practicable after the qualification of the newly elected members of each Council, may appoint the following standing Committees:
A. A Street Committee with which the Town Manager may consult on all matters with regard to streets.
B. A Water Committee with which the Town Manager may consult on all matters with regard to water.
C. An Electric Committee with which the Town Manager may consult on all electric matters.
D. A Sewer Committee with which the Town Manager may consult on all matters concerning sewers.
4-3 PROPOSED ORDINANCES OR RESOLUTIONS TO BE IN WRITING
No proposed ordinance or proposed resolution having the effect of an ordinance shall be considered or passed by the Council unless it shall be submitted in writing.
4-4 READING AND PUBLICATION OF ORDINANCES; AND EMERGENCY ORDINANCES
A. The Clerk of Council shall, upon receipt of ordinances requiring a public hearing, cause such publication as legally prescribed. The public hearing shall be scheduled for the first available meeting after the completion of the publication requirements.
B. Ordinances, except routine or emergency measures, shall be read at two (2) separate meetings of the Council and may be enacted at the second reading. Ordinances may be read by title only and not verbatim.
Chapter 4 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 4
4-5
C. Ordinances which receive an affirmative vote following the first reading shall be read at a separate meeting of Council. The affirmative vote following the first reading shall be a non-binding vote.
D. Ordinances which fail to pass during the first reading of Council, shall fail at that time and shall not be placed on a subsequent meeting agenda for twelve months unless one of the following occurs: (1) there is a change in the membership of Council, (2) one councilmember who initially voted against the ordinance concurs with its placement on the agenda, (3) an ordinance that was defeated for the lack of a second is again placed on the agenda with the concurrence of any councilman who did not make the initial motion for approval.
E. Ordinances which Council has deemed are of a routine or emergency nature may be adopted at the first reading provided upon the concurrence of four (4) members of the Town Council, who vote to waive the second reading requirement and pass the item on its first and final reading.
(Ord. No. 22-99 Amended 11-22-99-Effective Upon Passage)
F. Emergency ordinances shall take effect immediately upon their passage. An emergency ordinance is an ordinance passed by the Council for the immediate preservation of the public peace, property, health, welfare, safety or morals. No ordinance granting, enlarging or affecting any franchise or amending or repealing any ordinance fixing any property tax rate or assessment shall be an emergency ordinance. Ordinances pertaining to the appropriating of money or levying taxes or licenses, or reconsideration of matters at special meetings shall be considered as provided in Town Charter Section 13.
(Ord. No. 9-95 Amended Entire Section 6-26-95-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 22-99 Amended 11-22-99-Effective Upon Passage)
4-5 ATTENDANCE OF WITNESSES & PRODUCTION OF BOOKS AND PAPERS
The Council or any Committee thereof when especially authorized, shall have the power to require the attendance of any person as a witness and the production by any person of all proper books and papers when, in the opinion of such body, such attendance or such production is necessary and proper. Summons to attend as witnesses or produce books or papers shall be in writing signed by the presiding officer of the Council or committee thereof and shall be served by the Chief of Police in the same manner as a process to commence an action at law. Such witnesses shall be sworn by the officer presiding at such investigation and shall be liable for perjury or false testimony given at any such investigation. Any person failing or refusing to testify or produce such books or papers may be summoned before the County Court and, upon failure to give a satisfactory excuse, shall be fined a sum not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100) or imprisoned not exceeding thirty (30) days. A right of appeal shall lie to the Circuit Court of the county as in cases of a misdemeanor.
Chapter 4 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 4
4-6
RULES OF ORDER
4-6 APPLICABILITY OF ROBERT’S RULES OF ORDER, 10TH EDITION
The proceedings of the Council, except as its own rules may otherwise provide, shall be governed by the rules of procedure described in Robert’s Rules of Order, 10th Edition.
(Ord. No. 13-07 Amended 9-24-07-Effective Upon Passage)
4-7 SUSPENSION OF RULES
No rule adopted by the Council shall be suspended without the concurrence of two-thirds (2/3) of the members elected to the Council.
4-8 MAYOR AS PRESIDING OFFICER
The Mayor, as the presiding officer of the Council, shall enforce the rules of procedure, preserve order and decorum and appoint all Committees.
4-9 QUESTIONS OF ORDER
At Council meetings, the Mayor shall decide questions of order and may, without vacating the chair, give his reasons for his decision. From any decision of the chair, an appeal may be made to the body in session, the question being “Shall the decision of the chair be sustained?” Upon such appeal no debate shall be allowed if it refers to a question of decorum, but if it relates to the priority of business or to the relevancy or applicability of propositions, the appeal may be debated.
4-10 STATEMENT OF QUESTION AND DECLARATION OF RESULT; RECORDED VOTE
At Council meetings, the Mayor shall state the question and shall declare the result of the vote. He may direct, or any member may demand, a recorded vote, which shall be taken by a call of the roll.
4-11 WITHDRAWAL FROM MEETING
After a member of the Council, at any meeting thereof, has been recorded as present, he shall not, without permission of the Mayor or the presiding officer, absent himself from such meeting until its adjournment.
4-12 CONDUCT IN ADDRESSING COUNCIL
Every member of the Council shall address the presiding officer before speaking, confine himself to the question before the body and avoid all personal or indecorous language. No such member
Chapter 4 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 4
4-7
shall interrupt another while speaking except to rise to a point of order, the point to be briefly stated to the presiding officer.
4-13 PRIORITY IN SPEAKING
At Council meetings, the person first to address the chair shall speak first. When two (2) or more members speak at the same time, the presiding officer shall name the one to speak.
4-14 COMMUNICATIONS TO BE IN WRITING
No communication to the Council shall be entertained unless such communication is in writing.
4-15 MOTIONS
Every motion or proposition at a Council meeting, except such as a subsidiary or incidental, shall be in writing. When a motion is made and seconded, it shall be stated by the presiding officer before being debated. A motion or proposition may be withdrawn by the mover at any time before it is decided, amended or otherwise acted upon.
4-16 MEETINGS AND ORGANIZATION OF COMMITTEES
The members of a Committee of the City Council shall meet on the call of the Chairman, who shall be the first-named person on the Committee. A majority of the Committee shall constitute a quorum to do business.
4-17 COMMITTEE REPORTS
Every Committee of the City Council shall, unless otherwise directed, report at the next succeeding regular meeting upon the subject matter referred to it or shall show good cause why such report is not made. Every such Committee shall have authority to report on any matter proper for its consideration, though not specially referred to it. The reports of Committees shall be in writing and shall be signed by a majority of its members. The papers referred to therein as well as all written opinions in reference thereto obtained from the attorney for the town shall be returned with the report.
4-18 ACTIONS UPON CLAIMS AND FOR REMISSION OF TAXES
No claims against the Town shall be acted upon at any Council meeting, except by unanimous consent, unless the same has been considered and laid on the table for one (1) meeting. Every application for a remission of taxes shall be verified by the oath of the applicant and, without special order, shall stand referred to the next meeting.
Chapter 4 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 4
4-8
4-19 ORDER OF BUSINESS; PLACEMENT AND APPROVAL OF ITEMS ON AGENDAS
A. ORDER OF BUSINESS
1. At every regular meeting of the Council, the order of business shall be as follows:
Pledge of Allegiance
Moment of Silence
Roll Call
Approval of the Minutes of previous meetings
Receipt of Petitions and/or correspondence from the public
Reports
a. Report of Special Committees or Town Officials and Town Manager.
b. Requests and Inquiries of Council members.
c. Report of the Mayor
d. Proposals for addition/deletion of items to the Agenda.
Consent Agenda Items.
Items for Approval.
Closed Meeting items (if applicable)
(Amended the Order of Items/Added One 4-13-09-Effective Upon Passage)
2. The order of business shall not be departed from except by the consent of two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the Council present and voting.
3. Items which appear under the heading “Consent Agenda items” are intended to be routine business items which are not subject to individual debate or discussion, but are, instead, voted on as a group. However, at the time the presiding officer announces that the Consent Agenda portion of the order of business has been reached, any member of Council may request that any individual items or items may be removed from the Consent Agenda, and such item or items shall, thereafter, become the first item or items considered under the “Items for Approval” portion of the order of business.
4. At every work session meeting of the Council, the order of business shall be determined by the Mayor, or in his absence, the Vice Mayor.
(Added (4) 8-26-19-Effective Upon Passage)
B. THE PLACEMENT OF ITEMS ON AGENDAS
1. The following items shall be placed on a Council Agenda for a regular meeting or work session provided they are delivered to the office of the Town Manager
a. Items from members of Town Boards or Commissions whose membership is appointed by the Council.
Chapter 4 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 4
4-9
b. Items required for decision by the Town Manager, to include citizen requests placed in
writing by the citizen or by the Town Manager.
c. Items requested by the Mayor to include citizen requests placed in writing.
d. Items requested by at least two (2) members of Council
(Added (d) 8-26-19-Effective Upon Passage)
e. Items requested from citizens who have appeared at a previous meeting of Council, and who have placed their requests in writing and asked for the matter to be considered at an upcoming meeting of Council.
C. APPROVAL OF PLACEMENT OF ITEMS ON THE AGENDAS
1. The Mayor, or in his absence, the Vice Mayor approves the final regular meeting and work session agendas before publication and shall not remove any item on said agendas placed by at least (2) council members.
2. No items may be placed on regular meeting or work session agendas after publication without unanimous vote from all members of Council present and voting.
(Amended/Added Entire Section by Placing Policy into the Code 11-10-08-Effective Upon Passage
(Amended Entire Section 8-26-19-Effective Upon Passage)
OFFICERS
4-20 RIGHT OF ENTRY
Whenever any officer or employee of the Town is required or authorized by statute, the provisions of this Code or any ordinance or resolution or rules and regulations or orders issued thereunder, in order to carry out his duties thereunder, to enter any premises or vehicle for the purpose of making an inspection thereof or of anything therein contained, such officer or employee shall have the right to enter any such premises or vehicle at any reasonable time in pursuance of such duties.
MAYOR
4-21 EXECUTIVE HEAD
The Mayor of the Town shall be the executive head of its municipal government.
4-22 CONTRACTING DEBT
The Mayor shall not at any time contract any debt or liability for the Town, but he may, as agent of the Town, after being duly authorized by the recorded vote of the majority of the Council at any regular or special meeting, contract such debt or liability.
Chapter 4 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 4
4-10
4-23 RECOMMENDATIONS TO COUNCIL
From time to time, the Mayor shall recommend to the Council such measures as he may deem needful for the welfare of the Town.
TOWN MANAGER
4-24 (RESERVED)
(Ord. No. 6-09 Repealed “Appointment; Term” 6-22-09-Effective Upon Passage)
4-25 BOND
The Town Manager shall give bond in such sum as the Council may deem with corporate surety to be approved by the Council; provided that such sum shall not be less than $500,000.00; and further provided that such bond shall be for the faithful performance of the duties of the Town Manager and the Town Treasurer, provided such duties remain combined in one (1) office.
(Ord. No. 13-01 Amended 9-24-01-Effective Upon Passage)
4-26 POSITION TO BE FULL-TIME; REMOVAL
The Town Manager shall devote his entire time to the business of the Town and shall be subject at all times to removal by the Council on proven charges of malfeasance, misfeasance, neglect of duty or incompetency.
4-27 GENERAL RESPONSIBILITIES AND DUTIES
A. The Town Manager shall be responsible to the Council for the proper administration of all affairs of the Town coming within the ordinances and resolutions of the Council.
B. It shall be the duty of the Town Manager to exercise supervision and control over all departments of the city government and to have general supervision over all public improvements, works and undertakings.
C. SOCIAL MEDIA - The Town Manager shall oversee all communication commonly referred to as “Social Media” given the following regulations:
1. The Town’s Facebook, Twitter, or other “Social Media” communications are operated by the Town under the direction of the Town Manager.
2. The Town reserves the right, at the sole discretion of the Town Manager, to change, modify, add or delete comments, photos or videos at any time. The following is a list of justifications for deletion of comments, photos or videos by the Town Manager or designee, but is not exhaustive:
a. Comments, photos, or videos associated with unlawful activity
Chapter 4 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 4
4-11
b. Comments, photos, or videos that contain offensive or vulgar language
c. Comments, photos, or videos that contain personal attacks on staff, Town Council or members of the public
d. Comments, photos, or videos that contain commercial solicitation or advertisement.
3. The Town has the right to reproduce any pictures or videos to this site in any of its publications or websites or any other media outlets.
4. The Town shall not share information gathered through its “Social Media” with third parties for promotional purposes.
5. The views, postings, or opinions expressed through “Social Media” do not necessarily reflect those of the Town of Front Royal
(Ord. No. 5-12 Added (C) 2-13-12-Effective Upon Passage)
4-28 DUTIES AS TOWN TREASURER
The duties of the Town Treasurer shall be combined with those of the duties of the Town Manager, effective September 1, 1971, and from that day forward the Town Manager shall have all of the power, authority, duties, obligations and responsibilities which are set forth in the Charter of the Town Treasurer.
4-29 BUDGET AND FINANCIAL ADVICE
The Town Manager shall prepare the annual budget and keep the Town Council fully advised as to its financial conditions and needs of the Town.
4-30 ATTENDANCE AT COUNCIL MEETINGS; RECOMMENDATIONS TO COUNCIL
The Town Manager shall attend all meetings of the Council and recommend to the Council for adoption such measures as he may deem expedient or necessary.
4-31 EMPLOYMENT AND DISCHARGE OF TOWN EMPLOYEES
The Town Manager shall be authorized and empowered, except as otherwise specifically provided, to employ and discharge such employees as the Council shall determine are necessary for the proper administration and conduct of the Town and its utilities.
4-32 MONTHLY FINANCIAL REPORT
The Town Manager shall make a monthly report to the Council at its regular monthly meeting of all moneys collected, the amount then due and any sums paid out.
Chapter 4 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 4
4-12
4-33 SINKING FUND; INTEREST ON OUTSTANDING BONDS
A. The Town Manager shall, in preparing budgets for the future years for the consideration of the Council of the Town, set up a sufficient sum per year to be covered in the sinking fund of the Town to create sufficient funds in the sinking fund of the Town to retire outstanding bonds as they mature or become callable.
B. An additional amount sufficient to pay interest on outstanding bonds shall be also set up each year in the budget when made up for the consideration of the Town Council.
4-34 CONTROL OF TOWN-OWNED REAL PROPERTY
All real property owned in whole or in part by the Town shall be under the general control and supervision of the Town Council. No private person or other entity shall use or occupy any of the real property owned in whole or in part by the Town except upon the express consent of the Town Council or its designated agent, who shall be the Town Manager. Any person or entity using or occupying any real property owned by the Town without first having obtained consent therefor shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in Section 1-15 of the Town Code.
(Ord. No. 17-05 Amended 7-25-05-Effective Upon Passage)
4-35 BILLS
The Town Manager shall prepare and make prompt collection of all bills for taxes, water and sewer service and electricity and shall keep separate accounts and records of the same.
4-36 DISPOSITION OF TOWN FUNDS
The Town Manager shall deposit daily to the credit of the Town, in the depositories designated in Section 75-1 of this Code, all money collected through his office or other funds coming into his hands.
TOWN ATTORNEY
4-37 ELECTION
The Council shall elect a Town Attorney biennially, which Attorney shall be elected at the first regular meeting in September 1932, or as soon thereafter as practicable, for a term of two (2) years, beginning September 1, 1932. Such Attorney shall have been admitted to practice law in the courts of the state.
Chapter 4 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 4
4-13
4-38 COMPENSATION
The salary of the Town Attorney shall be in such amount as may be fixed by the Council. When the duties of his office require his presence out of Town, his reasonable expenses shall be allowed him.
4-39 GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES
A. The Town Attorney shall have charge, management and control of all legal matters affecting the Town and, in regard to all municipal affairs, shall be the legal advisor of the Mayor, Town Manager and Council or any Committee thereof, and when requested, he shall furnish written or verbal opinions upon any subjects involving questions of law in which the Town is interested.
B. It shall be the duty of the Town Attorney to draft all bonds, deeds, obligations, contracts, leases, conveyances, agreements and other legal instruments, of whatever nature, which may be required of him by any ordinance or order of the Council, or which, by law, usage or agreement, should be drawn by the Town. The Town Attorney shall perform such other duties as are or may be required of him for the Town by any ordinance or resolution of the Council.
4-40 SUITS, PROSECUTIONS AND DEFENSE DUTIES
It shall also be the duty of the Town Attorney to commence and prosecute all actions and suits to be brought by the Town before any tribunal in this state and to appear, defend and advocate the rights and interests of the town or any officer of the town in any suit or prosecution for any act in the discharge of his official duties or wherein any estate, right, privilege, ordinance or acts of the Town government may be brought in question. He shall appear before the County Court and prosecute on behalf of the Town any person or persons charged with violation of any ordinance of the Town when requested so to do by the Mayor or Town Manager. He shall also prosecute or assist in the prosecution before the Circuit Court of all appeals of criminal cases from the County Court to the Circuit Court of the county.
4-41 REPORTS TO COUNCIL
Whenever requested by the Council, the Town Attorney shall prepare and duly deliver to the Council a report showing the conditions of all cases handled by him and the conditions of all cases pending in which the Town is interested.
4-42 ACCOUNTING FOR FUNDS
The Town Attorney shall promptly account for and pay over to the Town Collector any and all funds belonging to the Town, collected or received by him, together with an itemized statement showing from whom received and for what accounts such money was received.
Chapter 4 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 4
4-14
TOWN ENGINEER
4-43 APPOINTMENT; DUTIES
The Town Manager may appoint a Town Engineer who shall hold office at the pleasure of the Town Manager. He shall have control and supervision, under the direction of the Town Manager, over all public works of the town. He shall perform such other duties as may be required of him by the Town Manager or the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the Town.
DISCLOSURE BY CERTAIN EMPLOYEES
(Adopted 12-12-83)
4-44 FILING REQUIRED
Commencing January 15, 2009, and annually thereafter, on or before the 15th of each January, the employees and nonsalaried citizen members of boards, commission, etc., of the Town specified in Section 4-45 of this Code, shall file, as a condition of employment or of assuming office, a disclosure statement of their personal interests and other information as is specified on the form provided by the Secretary of the Commonwealth and set forth in Section 2.2-3117 of the Code of Virginia for employees and Section 2.2-3118 of the said Code for such nonsalaried citizen members. Such disclosure forms shall be filed and maintained as public records for five (5) years in the office of the Town Clerk. The requirements of disclosure shall be governed by the provisions of Article 5 of Chapter 31 of Title 2.2 of the Code of Virginia. Any individual who has met the requirement for filing the statement required by this Section shall not be required to file an additional statement upon such individual’s reappointment to the same office or position provided such reappointment occurs within 12 months after the initial filing and provided there have been no significant changes in the initial filing.
(Ord. No. 15-09 Amended 7-27-09-Effective Upon Passage)
4-45 APPLICABILITY
A. The Town Manager, the Town Attorney, the Finance Director and the Town Clerk shall be required to comply with the applicable requirements of Section 4-44 of this Code.
B. The Members of the Planning Commission, the Board of Zoning Appeals, and the Board of Architectural Review shall be required to comply with the applicable provisions of Section 4-44 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 15-09 Amended Entire Section (Added A & B) 7-27-09-Effective Upon Passage)
PUBLIC RECORDS
(Adopted 11-26-90)
4-46 TOWN RECORDS - DEFINITION
The term "Town records" shall include all written books, papers, letters, documents, photographs, tapes, microfiche, microfilm, photostats, sound recordings, maps and other
Chapter 4 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 4
4-15
documentary materials or information in any recording medium, regardless of physical form or characteristics, including data-processing devices and computers, which are made or received in connection with the transaction of any public business by any office or department of the Town of Front Royal.
The following described material shall not be included in the definition of "Town records": "Nonrecord" materials shall mean reference books and exhibit materials made or acquired and preserved solely for reference use or exhibition purposes, extra copies of documents preserved only for convenience or reference and stocks of publications.
(Ord. No. 2-91 Added 11-26-90-Effective Upon Passage)
4-47 TOWN RECORDS DECLARED PUBLIC PROPERTY
All Town records as defined in this Article are hereby declared to be the property of the Town of Front Royal. No Town official or employee shall have by virtue of his/her position any personal or property rights to such records. All custodians of Town records shall, at the expiration of his/her term of office, appointment or employment, deliver to his/her successor or, if there be none, to the Town Records Manager, all books, writings, letters, documents and other Town records in his/her possession or otherwise entrusted to his/her care.
(Ord. No. 2-91 Added 11-26-90-Effective Upon Passage)
4-48 CUSTODY AND PRESERVATION OF TOWN COUNCIL RECORDS
The Clerk of the Front Royal Town Council shall be responsible for the retention and preservation of the records of that body. The Clerk shall see to it that all such records, to include the minutes of its meetings, are accurately recorded on a durable medium and preserved in a manner which meets the requirements of Section 15.2-1412.
(Ord. No. 2-91 Added 11-26-90-Effective Upon Passage ; Ord. No. 7-11 Amended 4-11-11-Eff. Upon Passage)
4-49 RECORDS MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
The Front Royal Town Manager shall develop a comprehensive records management program which establishes and provides procedures for the management of Town records from their creation to their ultimate disposition. The records management program shall provide for the efficient and economical creation, distribution, maintenance, use, preservation and disposition of all Town records.
(Ord. No. 2-91 Added 11-26-90-Effective Upon Passage)
4-50 RECORDS MANAGER
The Front Royal Town Manager shall designate a Records Manager for all Town records. The Records Manager shall be responsible for administering the Records Management Program and for implementing the policies and procedures established thereby.
(Ord. No. 2-91 Added 11-26-90-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 4 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 4
4-16
4-51 DEPARTMENT RECORDS OFFICERS
Each department head shall designate from his/her staff personnel a Records Officer. The departmental Records Officer shall report directly to the department and shall be responsible for coordinating and implementing the Records Management Program for his/her office or department. Each Records Officer shall cooperate and work with the Town Records Manager to ensure that the provisions of Part 4 are complied with by his/her respective department. Each department Records Officer shall monitor compliance within his/her department with all provisions for the retention and disposition of Town records
(Ord. No. 2-91 Added 11-26-90-Effective Upon Passage)
AUXILIARY POLICE OFFICERS
(Adopted 11-14-94)
4-52 APPOINTMENT; POWER AND DUTIES
A. The Director of Public Safety is hereby authorized to appoint auxiliary police officers as he deems necessary, not to exceed the number of ten (10).
B. The Director of Public Safety, with the approval of the Town Manager, shall establish rules and regulations concerning the operation of the auxiliary police officers, including their uniforms, arms and equipment and training.
C. Persons appointed as auxiliary police officers shall be of good character. Their appointment shall be revocable at any time by the Director of Public Safety or the Town Manager.
D. The auxiliary police officers may be called into service as deemed necessary by the Director of Public Safety or, in times of public emergencies, by the Town Manager. Said auxiliary may also be called into service at such times as there are insufficient numbers of regular police officers to preserve the peace, safety and good order of the Town and at any time for the purpose of training.
E. When called into service, the auxiliary police officers shall wear the prescribed uniform and shall have all the powers and authority and all the immunities of constables at common law and shall have all of the power and authority and all of the immunities of full-time law enforcement officers if all work forces have met the training requirements established by the Department of Criminal Justice Services under Section 9-170 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, or its successor statute.
F. Persons appointed as auxiliary police officers shall serve without compensation.
G. Persons appointed as auxiliary police officers may not engage in employment which may occasionally require the use of their police powers in the performance of such employment unless such employment is specifically approved by the Town Manager.
(Ord. No. 10-94 Added Entire Section (A-G) 11-14-94-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 4 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 4
4-17
4-53 RESIDENCY OF TOWN EMPLOYEES
A. As a condition of the acceptance of employment with the Town of Front Royal, and as a condition of the continuance of such employment with the Town of Front Royal, persons holding the following positions in the Town government shall be required to become residents within the Town's corporate limits as soon as practical upon the commencement of employment and to remain residents within the Town corporate limits during the duration of their employment in such offices:
1. Town Manager;
(Ord. No.18-05 Amended 7-25-05-Effective Upon Passage)
B. As a condition of the acceptance of employment with the Town of Front Royal, and as a condition of the continuance of such employment with the Town of Front Royal, persons holding the following positions in the Town government shall be required to become residents within the boundaries of Warren County as soon as practical upon the commencement of employment and to remain residents within the County during the duration of their employment in such offices:
1. Clerk of Council;
2. Chief of Police;
3. Director of Electrical Services;
4. Director of Public Works/Utilities.
(Ord. No. 18-05 Added 7-25-05-Effective Upon Passage)
C. As a condition of the acceptance of employment with the Town of Front Royal, and as a condition of the continuance of such employment with the Town of Front Royal, persons holding the following positions in the Town government shall be required to become residents within a thirty (30) mile radius of Town Hall as soon as practical upon the commencement of employment and to remain residents within the thirty (30) mile radius of Town Hall during the duration of their employment in such offices:
1. Director of Finance;
2. Director of Planning;
3. Director of Human Resources;
4. Town Engineer.
(Ord. No. 18-05 Added 7-25-05-Effective Upon Passage)
D. If any such employee required to meet such residency described above shall, after having established such bona fide residence, cease to be a bona fide resident as required above, or if any such employee fail to become a bona fide resident as required above within the twelve month period following the commencement of such employment, the individual's employment shall be deemed to have been voluntarily vacated.
(Ord. No. 18-05 Amended 7-25-05-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 4 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 4
4-18
E. The residency requirements set forth in paragraphs B and C above may be waived or modified by Town Council in its sole discretion, for good and acceptable cause, on a case by case basis, for an identifiable candidate or employee in any of the designated positions.
(Ord. No. 2-01 Added Entire Section 4-9-01; Ord. No. 18-05 Added (E) 7-25-05-Effective Upon Passage)
F. Any person occupying a position to which the aforesaid residence requirements apply, but who prior to March 1, 2001, was not required to maintain a residence as required above, shall not, by the adoption of this section, be required to establish such a residence. Such person shall, however, be subject to the residence requirements contained herein upon promotion or re-assignment to another of the positions enumerated herein, or upon establishment of a residence, as required above subsequent to July 1, 2005.
(Ord. No. 18-05 Amended (F) 7-25-05-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 9 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 9
9-1
Chapter 9
BUILDING AND MAINTENANCE CODES
Sections:
ARTICLE 1: BUILDING CODE REGULATIONS
9-100 BUILDING CODE
ARTICLE 2: MAINTENANCE CODE REGULATIONS
9-200 ADOPTION OF MAINTENANCE CODE
ARTICLE 3: GENERAL
9-300 NONLIABILITY OF PERSONNEL ENFORCING CHAPTER
9-301 VIOLATIONS
9-302 PERMIT FEES
9-303 SPOT BLIGHT ABATEMENT
9-304 THROUGH 9-309 (RESERVED)
9-310 DEFINITIONS
Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal 3-11-85 (Chapter 5, Article II of the 1965 Code). Repealed “Building Inspector” and amended entire Chapter 11-26-07 to BUILDINGS. Amended Entire Chapter 10-22-18 to “Building and Maintenance Codes” including adding Articles 1 – 3; and, moved 9-2 “Removal, Repair, ETC., of Buildings and Other Structures Harboring Illegal Drug Use” to Chapter 145-5. Amendments noted where applicable.
ARTICLE 1: BUILDING CODE REGULATIONS
9-100 BUILDING CODE
A. In accordance with the Code of Virginia § 36-105, the Town of Front Royal hereby reserves its authority to establish a Town Building Department, and a Local Board of Building Code Appeals (LBBCA), herein referred to generally as the “Board of Appeals,” to administer and enforce the mandatory provisions of the Virginia Uniform Building Code, including Part I, Construction Code, and Part II, Rehabilitation Code, and including future amendments thereto, and all codes incorporated by reference therein. Such codes shall generally be referred to herein generally as the “Building Code.”
B. Under the provisions of this Chapter, Town Council may elect to pass a resolution to officially establish a Town Building Department to administer and enforce the Building Code. Such resolution shall also include the establishment of a Board of Appeals, as described further herein. Upon adoption of such resolution of Town Council the Town hereby adopts the Building Code, and all such duties and requirements specified therein.
C. Until such time that the Town elects to establish a Town Building Department and Town Board of Appeals, the Town shall enter into an agreement with the local governing body of
Chapter 9 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 9
9-2
another county or municipality or with some other agency, or an approved state agency for such administration, enforcement and appeals resulting therefrom.
1. The February 8, 1983 agreement with Warren County shall remain in effect at the passing of this ordinance until such time that the agreement is terminated, renewed or amended. This agreement establishes Warren County as the Building Department for the Town, including the Warren County Board of Building Code Appeals as the appeals board for the Town.
D. At such time that Town Council may establish a Building Department and Board of Appeals, the Town Manager shall appoint a Building Official to administer and enforce the Building Code. Such Building Official shall meet the required qualification and certification requirements and shall maintain all permanent records of the Building Department, including applications received, permits, certificates, notices and orders issued, fees collected and reports of inspection in accordance with the Library of Virginia’s General Schedule Number Six. The Building Official shall administer and enforce the Building Code and may establish procedures and policies as may be necessary for such administration and enforcement. All codes and procedures shall be made available for the public to view and/or obtain copies from the office of the Building Official during established normal business hours.
E. As specified under Subsection B, Town Council shall appoint five (5) members to a Board of Appeals upon adoption of a Town Building Department. The membership of the Board shall be established in compliance with the following requirements, unless more stringent requirements are required by the Building Code.
1. All members of the Board of Appeals shall live within Warren County, Virginia, and at least three (3) members shall reside within the Town.
2. Town Council may appoint two (2) alternate members who shall be called by the board chair to hear appeals during the absence or disqualification of a member. Alternate members shall possess the qualifications required for board membership.
3. At least three (3) members shall have no less than five (5) years knowledge and experience in the construction industry. Members that do not have knowledge and experience in the construction industry shall have an equivalent experience in the real estate, law, architecture, or engineering professions.
4. No employee or official of the Town may serve as a Board Member.
5. Compensation, meeting dates, voting procedures, officers, term limits and other procedures of the Board of Appeals shall be established in by-laws that are approved by Town Council.
6. The Board of Appeals shall be used as the appeals board for the Virginia Maintenance Code.
Chapter 9 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 9
9-3
7. The Board of Appeals shall be reviewed by the Virginia Department of Housing and Community Development
(Repealed/Added Entire Section 11-26-07-Eff. 7-1-08; Amended Entire Section 10-22-18-Eff. Upon Passage)
ARICLE 2: MAINTENANCE CODE REGULATIONS
9-200 ADOPTION OF MAINTENANCE CODE
A. To ensure the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, the Town hereby adopts the optional provisions of the Virginia Uniform Building Code, including Part III, Virginia Maintenance Code, future amendments thereto, and including codes incorporated by reference therein, herein also generally referred to generally as the “Maintenance Code,” as related to building regulations that facilitate the maintenance, rehabilitation, development and reuse of existing buildings at the least possible cost to ensure the protection of the public health, safety and welfare of Town residents. Furthermore, in accordance with §36-99 of the Code of Virginia, the purpose of this code is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Commonwealth of Virginia, provided that buildings and structures should be permitted to be maintained at the least possible cost consistent with recognized standards of health, safety, energy conservation and water conservation, including provision necessary to prevent overcrowding, rodent or insect infestation, and garbage accumulation; and barrier-free provisions for the physically handicapped and aged.
B. The Town Manager shall appoint a Maintenance Code Official to administer and enforce the Virginia Maintenance Code. The Maintenance Code Official shall meet the required qualifications, certification requirements, and training requirements of the Maintenance Code. All codes, policies and procedures shall be made available for the public to view and/or obtain copies from the office of the Maintenance Code Official during established normal business hours.
C. The Town shall appoint a Board of Appeals to consider all appeals that may arise from the provisions of this Article. Such Board of Appeals shall be established under the criteria found within Chapter 9, Section 100, Subsection E. Alternatively, the Town may elect to use the Board of Appeals used by another county or municipality, or with some other agency, provided that an agreement is entered into with the appropriate local government board, or an approved state agency.
(Repealed/Added Entire Section 11-26-07-Eff. 7-1-08; Amended Entire Section 10-22-18-Eff. Upon Passage)
ARICLE 3: GENERAL
9-300 NONLIABILITY OF PERSONNEL ENFORCING CHAPTER
Nothing in this chapter or in any code adopted by this chapter shall be construed as imposing upon any Town officer or employee duly authorized to administer or enforce the provisions of this chapter any liability or responsibility for damages to any person injured by a defect in any
Chapter 9 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 9
9-4
building construction or other work mentioned herein, or by the installation thereof, nor shall the Town government or any official or employee thereof be held as assuming any such liability or responsibility by reason of inspections authorized by this chapter or certificates of approval issued by the building official or property maintenance code official.
(Added Entire Section 10-22-18-Effective Upon Passage)
9-301 VIOLATIONS
A. It shall be unlawful for any owner or any other person, firm or corporation to violate any provision of this chapter. Any violation shall be deemed a misdemeanor and any owner or any other person, firm or corporation convicted of a violation shall be punished by a fine of not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). In addition, each day the violation continues after conviction or the expiration of the court-ordered abatement period shall constitute a separate offence. If the violation remains uncorrected at the time of conviction, the court shall order the violator to abate or remedy the violation in order to comply with the applicable Code. Except as otherwise provided by the court for good cause shown, any such violator shall abate or remedy the violation within six (6) months of the date of conviction. Each day during which the violation continues after the court-ordered abatement period has ended shall constitute as separate offence. Any person convicted of a second offense, committed within less than five (5) years after a first offence under this chapter shall be punished by confinement in jail for not more than five (5) days and a fine of not less than $1,000 nor more than $2,500, either or both. Provided, however, that the provision for confinement in jail shall not be applicable to any person, firm or corporation, when such violation involves a multiple-family dwelling unit. Any person convicted of a second offense committed within a period of five (5) to ten (10) years of a first offense under this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than $500 nor more than $2,500. Any person convicted of a third or subsequent offense involving the same property committed within ten (10) years of an offense under this chapter after having been at least twice previously convicted, shall be punished by confinement in jail for not more than ten (10) days and a fine of not less than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) nor more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), either or both. No portion of the fine imposed for such third or subsequent offense committed within ten (10) years of an offense under this chapter shall be suspended.
B. Any prosecution under this section shall be commenced within the time specifications provided under Virginia Code § 19.2-8.
(Added Entire Section 10-22-18-Effective Upon Passage)
9-302 PERMIT FEES
A. Town Council reserves the right to adopt and publish a schedule of fees for services rendered by either the Building Code Official and/or Maintenance Code Official, and to amend the schedule by separate resolution. Such schedule of fees and any amendment shall be in lieu of any permit fees set forth in any technical code adopted by the Town.
Chapter 9 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 9
9-5
B. No permit as required by the Town by ordinance or regulation shall be issued unless the fee prescribed for the service shall have been paid, nor shall any amendment to such a permit be approved until any additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building or structure, shall also have been paid.
(Added Entire Section 10-22-18-Effective Upon Passage)
9-303 SPOT BLIGHT ABATEMENT
A. PURPOSE. The purpose of this Section is to provide for the abatement of blighted property that threatens the public's health, safety, and/or welfare.
B. DEFINITIONS. As used in this chapter, unless otherwise required by the context:
1. Blighted property means any individual commercial, industrial, or residential structure or improvement that endangers the public's health, safety, or welfare because the structure or improvement upon the property is dilapidated, deteriorated, or violates minimum health and safety standards.
2. Town means the Town of Front Royal, Virginia.
3. Farm building or structure means a legally established building or structure, primarily used for agricultural, as defined by the Zoning Ordinance.
4. Spot blight means a structure or improvement that is a blighted property as defined in this chapter.
5. Spot blight abatement plan means the written plan prepared by the owner(s) of record of any blighted property to address spot blight, or if the owner(s) of record of such blighted property fail to respond as provided for in this chapter, the written plan prepared by the Town Manager, or designee, to abate, raze, or remove the blighted property.
C. SPOT BLIGHT ABATEMENT AUTHORIZED. Town Council is authorized under Code of Virginia §§ 36-49.1:1.G and 15.2-900, as amended, to declare any blighted property to constitute a nuisance, which declaration shall be made by ordinance adopted by Town Council specific to such blighted property, and thereupon abate, raze, or remove such blighted property.
D. INSPECTIONS. Upon receipt of a complaint that any individual commercial, industrial, or residential structure or improvement is spot blight, the Town Manager, or designee, shall be authorized to inspect such structure or improvement and make a preliminary determination that such structure or improvement is blighted property.
E. EXEMPTIONS. The following structures and improvements shall be exempt from this chapter:
1. Farm buildings or structures.
Chapter 9 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 9
9-6
F. PROCEDURE FOR DECLARATION OF BLIGHTED PROPERTY.
1. Should the Town Manager, or designee, make a preliminary determination of blighted property in accordance with this chapter, notice shall be sent to the owner(s) of record of the blighted property at the last known address of such owner(s) as shown on the current real estate tax assessment records, specifying the reasons why the property is a blighted property. Such notice shall be sent by Certified Mail and First-Class Mail to said owner(s), and also shall be posted on the blighted property. The owner(s) of record shall have thirty (30) days from the date such notice is sent in which to respond in writing with a spot blight abatement plan to address the blighted property within a reasonable time.
2. If the owner(s) of record fail to respond within the thirty (30) day period with a written spot blight abatement plan that is acceptable to the Town Manager, or designee, the Town Manager, or designee, shall prepare a proposed spot blight abatement plan for the blighted property, and shall request that Town Council direct the Town Manager, or designee, to prepare an proposed ordinance to declare that said blighted property constitutes a nuisance.
3. If directed to prepare such proposed ordinance by Town Council, the Town Manager, or designee, shall provide notice of such ordinance and Town’s proposed spot abatement plan in accordance with Code of Virginia § 15.2-1427, as amended, and bring such ordinance forward for public hearing, Town Council’s consideration, and passage. In addition to the notice required by Code of Virginia § 15.2-1427, as amended, written notice of such ordinance and public hearing, together with a copy of the Town’s proposed spot blight abatement plan, shall be sent to the owner(s) of record of the blighted property at the last known address of such owner(s) as shown on the current real estate tax assessment records and shall be posted on the blighted property.
4. If Town Council adopts the ordinance and the Town’s proposed spot abatement plan or some variation thereof, the Town’s spot blight abatement plan shall become effective and the Town Manager, or designee, may implement the Town’s spot blight abatement plan.
G. PROPERTY LIENS. If the ordinance is adopted by Town Council, any costs incurred by the Town under the Town’s spot blight abatement plan for the removal or abatement of the blighted property shall be a lien on the blighted property and such lien shall bear interest at the legal rate of interest established in Code of Virginia § 6.2-301, as amended, beginning on the date that such removal or abatement is completed through the date on which the lien is paid. Said lien may be recorded as a lien among the land records of the Circuit Court of Warren County, which lien shall be treated in all respects as a tax lien and enforceable in the same manner as provided in Code of Virginia Articles 3 (§ 58.1-3940 et seq.) and 4 (§ 58.103965 et seq.) of Chapter 39 of Title 58.1. as amended.
(Added Entire Section “Auth Require Removal, Repair of Building/Structures” 10-22-18-Eff. Upon Passage)
(Amended Entire Section to “Spot Blight Abatement” 3-9-20-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 9 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 9
9-7
9-304 THROUGH 9-309 (RESERVED)
9-310 DEFINITIONS
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Building Code means the applicable provisions of the Virginia Uniform Building Code, Part I, Construction Code, and Part II, Rehabilitation Code, including future amendments thereto, and all codes incorporated by reference therein.
Building Code Official means the person that is employed, contracted, or designated with an agreement from another county, municipality or other agency, that has been appointed by the Town to administer and enforce the applicable provisions of the Building Code, as defined herein.
Day means a calendar day.
Maintenance Code means the applicable provisions of the Virginia Uniform Building Code, Part III, Maintenance Code, and all codes incorporated by reference therein.
Maintenance Code Official means the person that is employed, contracted, or designated with an agreement from another county, municipality or other agency, that has been appointed by the Town to administer and enforce the applicable provisions of the Maintenance Code, as defined herein.
Owner means the person or entity shown on the current real estate assessment books or current real estate assessment records of the Town or the fee simple owner of the property if ownership has changed since such tax assessment records were last updated.
Premises, a single lot of record under ownership, or multiple contiguous lots of record that are under the same ownership.
Violations. As applicable to the Maintenance Code, means conditions which affect safe, decent and sanitary living conditions of persons occupying a residential rental dwelling unit include items that violate fire safety; lack of or poor condition of sanitary facilities; absence of adequate heating systems or equipment; items which affect the safe operation of electrical and mechanical systems; items which affect structural integrity of the building and/or the ability of the building envelope to keep out weather, or one or more other conditions that, if not corrected, would be reasonably expected to become conditions that affect the safe, decent and sanitary living conditions of the occupants, or other conditions that violate the provisions of the Maintenance Code, or multiple Maintenance Code violations that indicate, in their totality, the dwelling unit is not being properly maintained. As applicable to the Building Code, means conditions which are in violation of the Building Code, as defined herein.
(Added Entire Section and Amended Entire Chapter 10-22-18-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 12 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 12
12-1
Chapter 12
FEES
Sections:
12-1 ENERGY SERVICES FEES
12-2 PUBLIC WORKS FEES
12-3 FINANCE FEES
12-4 PLANNING AND ZONING FEES
12-5 POLICE DEPARTMENT FEES
12-6 MISCELLANEOUS FEES
Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal 4-25-83 as “Checks, Fraudulent”- “Fees for Returned Checks” by Ord. No. 2-83. Amendments to ”FEES” by Resolutions 1-26-04 and 9-13-04. Added New Section 12-5 “Police Department Fees” 6-25-12 and 6-27-16. Removed 12-5 “Police Department Fees” 6-8-15 and 6-12-17. Other amendments noted where applicable.
12-1 ENERGY SERVICES FEES
Electric Meter Inspections (two within 12 mo.)
No Charge
Electric Meter Inspection
(third and subsequent within 12 months)
$50.00 per inspection
Installation of Pole for Dusk-to-Dawn Light
$150.00
Temporary Electrical Service not to exceed 100 amperes in capacity and requiring one service drop
$65.00
Temporary Electrical Service for larger residential and commercial services
See Chapter 70-23(F) in Town Code
Underground Utility Inspection
$50.00 per inspection
(Codified Electric Fees 6-23-08-Eff Upon Passage ; Amended Title to Energy Services 6-25-12-Eff 7-1-12)
(Amended/Added Temp Electric Info 6-9-14-Effective 7-1-14)
12-2 PUBLIC WORKS FEES
After hours shut-off calls (water)
$30.00
Data Log Obtained from Water Meter within 12 mo
$25.00 for the 3rd and subsequent
Excavation for Sewer Clean Out Installation
$150.00 per hour
Freon Removal (white goods commercial or residential)
$15.00
Grease Trap Inspection (3rd and all subsequent)
$50.00 per inspection
On-Call Refuse Collection
found in §85-3(E) of the Town Code
Recreational Vehicle Septic Tank Dump
$17.50 each
Right-of-Way Utilization Fee
$25.00 plus bond and insurance
Septic Tank Waste
$50.00 per 1,000 gallons
Temporary Hydrant Meter Deposit
(agreement for reading of water must be signed)
$400.00 5/8” and smaller
$2,350 greater than 5/8”
Tires with or without Rim
$5.00 per tire
Water Meter Test (2nd or subsequent test)
$25.00 each
Chapter 12 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 12
12-2
White Goods Disposal, Commercial
$15.00 per item + $15.00 per Freon item
White Goods Disposal, Residential
No Charge plus $15.00 per Freon item
Yard Waste Disposal, Commercial, Lg. Truck
$50.00
Yard Waste Disposal, Commercial, Pickup Tk
$25.00
Yard Waste Disposal, Residential
(Town OR County Decal Required)
No Charge
(Codified Public Works & Public Utilities Fees 6-23-08-Effective Upon Passage)
(Removed Fees for Sale of Mulch 7-13-09-Effective Upon Passage)
(Increased Tire Fees 7-13-09-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended Title/Fee for On-Call Refuse Collection 6-25-12-Effective 7-1-12)
(Amended Sewer Clean Out/Temporary Hydrant Fees 6-8-15-Effective 7-1-15)
(Amended Tire Charges 6-12-17-Effective 7-1-17; Amended Title/Added Data Log 4-22-19-Eff July 1, 2019)
(Removed “Construction Specifications and Tire Requirements 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
12-3 FINANCE FEES
A. FEE FOR RETURNED CHECK: If any check or other means of payment tendered to the Town in the course of its duties is not paid by the financial institution on which it is drawn, because of insufficient funds in the account of the drawer, no account is in the name of the drawer, or the account of the drawer is closed, and the check or other means of payment is returned to the Town unpaid, the amount thereof shall be charged to the person on whose account it was received, and his liability and that of his sureties shall be as if he had never offered any such payment. A penalty of $35.00 or the amount of any costs, whichever is greater, shall be added to such amount, and said penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty provided by law.
There is hereby added to any amount due to the Town a fee of 2.35% when payment of such amount is tendered by either credit card or debit card or any other means of payment by which the Town incurs a charge.
(Amended “Fee for Returned Check” 8-12-02-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended Entire “Fee for Returned Check” 6-23-08-Effective Upon Passage)
B. ADDITIONAL FINANCE FEES:
Penalty on Utility Bill after Original Due Date
2%
Late Fee on Utility Bill after 2nd Due Date
$10.00
Reconnection Fee (non-payment)
$20.00/1st; $30.00/2nd; $40.00/3rd;
$50.00 for all other times
Work Order Fee
$5.00
Tampering with Electric or Water Meter Fee
$1,000.00
Copies
$0.15 per page
(Added “B” & Added Tier Reconnection & Tampering Fees 6-25-12-Effective 7-1-12)
Chapter 12 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 12
12-3
12-4 PLANNING AND ZONING FEES
Can be found in §148-1100 and §175-137 of the Front Royal Town Code.
(Amended Chapter Section for 148 6-8-15-Effective Upon Adoption of Chapter 148)
12-5 POLICE DEPARTMENT FEES
Effective July 1, 2018, and thereafter, there is hereby imposed, in addition to any other fees prescribed by law, the sum of five dollars ($5.00) as part of the costs in each criminal or traffic case in the District or Circuit Courts of Warren County, Virginia, in which the defendant is charged with and convicted of a violation of any statute or ordinance, the violation of which arose within the Town of Front Royal, Virginia. The clerk of court in which the action is filed shall collect the assessment and remit it to the Town of Front Royal, Virginia Finance Director. The Town Finance Director, subject to appropriation by Town Council, shall disburse such funds in accordance with Virginia Code § 17.1-279.1. The assessment shall be used the Front Royal Police Department solely to fund software, hardware, and associated equipment costs for the implementation and maintenance of an electronic summons system.
(Removed “Police Department Fees” 6-12-17-Effective 7-1-17)
(Added “Police Department Fees” 8-27-18-Effective 7-1-18)
12-6 MISCELLANEOUS FEES
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests for available information shall be submitted to the appropriate department that maintains the records sought for processing. Any request for records or documents from the Town is considered a FOIA request. All FOIA requests shall be communicated by the Department of the Town Manager and Town Attorney. FOIA regulations allow the Town to assess a reasonable charge for the costs to access, search, duplicate, and supply the requested materials if they exist. The Town shall not assess fees if staff time is less than thirty (30) minutes and ten pages of 8 ½ x 11 paper. An individual requesting materials through a FOIA request will be notified as soon as practicably possible. The Town shall conform to all FOIA regulations established by the Commonwealth of Virginia to ensure access to all available Town documents.
(Codified Fees 6-23-08-Effective Upon Passage ; Added FOIA Information 6-25-12-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended FOIA Information 1-28-13-Effective Upon Passage)
(Removed “Update Town Code, hardcopy” 6-12-17-Effective 7-1-17)
(Removed “Town Code Hardcopy” & “Right of Way Vacation Application”6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
Chapter 16 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 16
16-1
Chapter 16
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
Sections:
16-1 (RESERVED)
16-2 (RESERVED)
16-3 ESTABLISHMENT
16-4 BOARD OF DIRECTORS; TERMS AND QUALIFICATIONS OF OFFICE
16-5 OFFICERS
16-6 POWERS, DUTIES, AND LIMITATIONS; DEVELOPMENT AREAS
Revised/Re-codified 3-11-85. (Chapter 2-43 of the 1965 Code; adopted 12-11-67). Other amendments noted where applicable. The Entire Chapter was repealed and re-enacted on July 13, 2020.
16-1 (RESERVED)
16-2 (RESERVED)
16-3 ESTABLISHMENT
There is hereby created, pursuant to Title 15.2, Chapter 49, the Industrial Development and Revenue Bond Act, of the Code of Virginia, by the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia, a political subdivision of the Commonwealth of Virginia (“Town Council”) to be known as the Economic Development Authority of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia, also to be known as the “Front Royal EDA”.
16-4 BOARD OF DIRECTORS: TERMS AND QUALIFICATIONS OF OFFICE
A. The Front Royal EDA created in this Chapter shall be governed by a Board of Directors composed of seven (7) Directors to be appointed by Town Council. Appointments shall be for terms of four (4) years, except appointments to fill vacancies which shall be for the unexpired portion of such term. If, at the end of any term of office of any Director, a successor shall not have been appointed or qualified, the Director whose term of office shall have expired shall continue to hold office until his successor shall be appointed and qualified.
B. The seven (7) Directors of the Front Royal EDA shall be appointed initially for terms of one (1) , two (2), three (3) and four (4) years, two (2) being appointed for one-year terms; two (2) being appointed for two-year terms; two (2) being appointed for three-year terms and one (1) being appointed for a four (4)-year term. Subsequent appointments shall be for terms of four (4) years, except appointments to fill vacancies, which shall be for the unexpired terms.
Chapter 16 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 16
16-2
C. Each Director shall, before entering upon his duties, take and subscribe the oath prescribed by Va. Code § 49-1, or its successor provision.
D. No Director shall be an officer or employee of the Town of Front Royal or the County of Warren.
E. Each Director shall be a resident of the Town of Front Royal when appointed as a Director the Front Royal EDA. When a Director ceases to be a resident of the Town of Front Royal, that Director's office shall become immediately vacant and a new Director may be appointed for the remainder of the term.
F. The Directors shall receive no salary but may be compensated such amount per regular, special, or committee meeting or per each official representation as may be approved by Town Council, not to exceed $200.00 per meeting or official representation, or such other amount as may from time to time be set by the Code of Virginia, and shall be reimbursed for necessary traveling and other expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.
G. Four (4) members of the Board of Directors of the Front Royal EDA shall constitute a quorum of the Board of Directors for the purposes of conducting its business and exercising its powers and for all other purposes, except that no facilities owned by the Front Royal EDA shall be leased or disposed of in any manner without a majority vote of all members of the Board of Directors. No vacancy in the membership of the Board of Directors shall impair the right of a quorum to exercise all the powers and perform all the duties of the board.
H. The Board of Directors of the Front Royal EDA shall keep detailed minutes of its proceedings, which shall be open to public inspection at all times. It shall keep suitable records of its financial transactions and, unless exempted by Va. Code § 30-140 or its successors provision, it shall arrange to have the same audited annually. Copies of such audit shall be furnished to Town Council annually and shall be open to public inspection.
I. As a condition to service of office, each Director of the Front Royal EDA shall timely complete and file, in accordance with all requirements of the Code of Virginia, the Statement of Economic Disclosure and comply with all requirements of the State and Local Government Conflicts of Interests Act as provided in Title 2.2, Chapter 31, of the Code of Virginia, or its successor provisions.
J. The Board of Directors of the Town EDA shall, upon its formation, promptly promulgate and execute Bylaws, which shall not become effective until ratified by Town Council; and upon ratification by Town Council, shall be binding upon the Town EDA and its Board of Directors and each of its Directors in each Director’s official position as such.
16-5 OFFICERS
The Board of Directors of the Front Royal EDA shall elect from its membership a Chairman, a Vice-Chairman, and from its membership or not, as they desire, a Secretary and a Treasurer, or a
Chapter 16 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 16
16-3
Secretary-Treasurer, who shall continue to hold such office until their respective successors are elected.
16-5 POWERS, DUTIES, AND LIMITATIONS: DEVELOPMENT AREAS
A. In general and except as expressly set forth in this Chapter, the Front Royal EDA, its Board of Directors, and its individual Directors shall have and exercise all powers and duties and be subject to all duties and responsibilities and shall enjoy all exemptions from liability, as shall be set forth in the Industrial Development and Revenue Bond Act, Code of Virginia, 1950, §§ 15.2-4900 et seq., as amended, or its successor provisions.
B. Town Council hereby exercises its power and discretion, under the Industrial Development and Revenue Bond Act of the Code of Virginia and under this Chapter, to limit the type and number of facilities that the Front Royal EDA may finance or assist with financing or facilitate for development under this Chapter. Within any development or redevelopment area or facility the Front Royal EDA or Town Council or a developer proposes for promotion, development, redevelopment, financing, or assist with financing using the Front Royal EDA as a development or redevelopment promoter or facilitator, it may do so only (i) under the authority of this Chapter and under the authority of the Industrial Development and Revenue Bond Act; and further, (ii) the Front Royal EDA may only cause, promote, finance, assist with financing, or facilitate such development or redevelopment such facilities as may be provided for in an economic development, redevelopment, financing, financing assistance, and/or or performance agreement or other similar agreement or agreements as may from time to time be jointly agreed in writing upon between the Front Royal EDA’s Board of Directors and Town Council prior to the Front Royal EDA entering into any agreement or memorandum of understanding or similar type agreement or arrangement with any third party. Any Town EDA development, redevelopment, promotional, or financing or similar type agreement or arrangement not in conformity with this provision shall be null and void.
C. All agreements, arrangements, and instruments which purports to be legally binding and to which the Town EDA is a party shall be reviewed by a qualified and licensed attorney-at-law selected by Town Council and shall have affixed there to the signature and date of such signing by such attorney with the notation “Approved as to Legal Form” prior to execution thereof by the Town EDA. Any Town EDA agreement, arrangement, or instrument development, redevelopment or financing agreement or arrangement not in conformity with this provision shall be null and void.
D. The Front Royal EDA and its Board of Directors shall have all powers, duties, liabilities, immunities from liabilities, and shall have such limitations upon its authority as set forth in the Industrial Development and Revenue Bond Act of the Code of Virginia and as set forth in in this Chapter, particularly 16-6 (A) and (B) herein.
Chapter 28 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 28
28-1
Chapter 28
PLANNING COMMISSION
Sections:
28-1 ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERSHIP
28-2 TERMS OF OFFICE
28-3 COMPENSATION
28-4 REMOVAL OF MEMBERS
28-5 POWERS AND DUTIES
28-6 CERTIFICATION
Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal 3-11-85. (Chapter 20 of the 1965 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.
28-1 ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERSHIP
A. A Municipal Planning Commission for the Town is hereby created, in accordance with the provisions of applicable state law.
B. There shall be seven (7) members of such Planning Commission, appointed by the Town Council, all of whom shall be residents of the Town, and who shall be freeholders qualified by knowledge and experience to make decisions on questions of community growth and development. One (1) member of the Commission may be a member of the Town Council, and one (1) member may be a member of the administrative branch of the government of the Town. The councilmanic member and the administrative official shall be ex officio members without voting power.
28-2 TERMS OF OFFICE
The terms of office of the members of the Planning Commission shall be as follows:
A. The terms of office of the councilmanic member and the administrative official who is a member shall expire August 31, 1960. Thereafter, the terms of the councilmanic member and the administrative official who is a member shall be coextensive with the terms of office to which they have been elected or appointed, unless the Town Council, at the first meeting each year, appoints others to serve as their representatives.
B. The terms of office of three (3) of the remaining members shall expire August 31, 1960, and the terms of office of two (2) of the remaining members shall expire August 31, 1962. Thereafter, these members shall be appointed for periods of four (4) years each, following the date of appointment.
Chapter 28 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 28
28-2
28-3 COMPENSATION
Members of the Planning Commission shall each be compensated in an amount determined by the Town Council.
(Ord. No. Z-2-98 Amended 7-13-98-Effective Upon Passage)
28-4 REMOVAL OF MEMBERS
Any member of the Planning Commission shall be removed from office for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office, after a public hearing, and when removed, his office shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor.
28-5 POWERS AND DUTIES
The functions, powers and duties of the Planning Commission shall be such as are provided for by applicable state law.
28-6 CERTIFICATION
A. Each member of the Planning Commission, as it exists on April 1, 2004, shall become a certified planning commissioner, through the Virginia Certified Planning Commissions Program operated by the Virginia Institute for Planning Commissioners, no later than April 1, 2005.
B. Any member of the Planning Commission who is appointed after April 1, 2004 shall become a certified planning commissioner, through the Virginia Certified Planning Commissions Program operated by the Virginia Institute for Planning Commissioners, within one year of appointment; provided, however, that Town Council, by motion, may grant a six (6) month extension of the certification requirement in the event a commissioner is unable to complete the certification program within one year due to circumstances beyond the reasonable control of the commissioner and is enrolled to complete the certification by the end of the said extension.
(Ord. No. 10-05 Amended (B) 6-27-05-Effective Upon Passage)
C. Failure to meet the requirements outlined in this section shall result in the automatic forfeiture and vacation of said individual from office. When removed from office, the seat shall be filled by appointment of the Town Council.
(Ord. No. 4-04 Added Entire Section 1-26-04-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 34 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 34
34-1
Chapter 34
ELECTION PRECINCTS
Sections:
34-1 DIVISION OF TOWN; DESIGNATIONS
34-2 FORK PRECINCT
34-3 HAPPY CREEK PRECINCT
34-4 NORTH RIVER PRECINCT
34-5 SHENANDOAH PRECINCT
34-6 SOUTH RIVER PRECINCT
34-7 POLLING PLACES
Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal 3-11-85 (Chapter 23 of the 1965 Code). Amended in its entirety 2-24-92. Amended in its entirety and removed Riverton Precinct 10-27-14. Other amendments noted where applicable.
34-1 DIVISION OF TOWN; DESIGNATIONS
There shall be five (5) voting precincts in the Town, which shall be known as the (1) “Town -Fork Precinct”, the (2) "Town of Front Royal - Happy Creek Precinct", (3) the "Town - North River Precinct", (4) the "Town – West Shenandoah Precinct" and (5) the "Town - South River Precinct".
34-2 TOWN - FORK PRECINCT
The Town Fork Precinct shall include all that portion of the Fork Election District, as described in Section 16-7.1A.(1) of the Warren County, Virginia, Code, wherein it is called the Town – Fork Precinct, located within the corporate limits of the Town of Front Royal as follows:
Beginning at the point of intersection of Manassas Avenue and 6th Street, such point being at the point of intersection of the Fork Election District, the North River Election District and the Shenandoah Election District, thence with the Shenandoah Election District and the center line of Manassas Avenue due south to the center of Happy Creek Road, thence west with the center of Happy Creek Road to its intersection with Commerce Avenue, thence south along the center line of Commerce Avenue to its intersection with East Main Street, thence westerly along the center line of East Main Street to its intersection with Royal Avenue, thence with the center of South Royal Avenue and the South River Election District south-southwest to a point in the Town Boundary at the intersection of South Royal Avenue and Criser Road, thence with the Town Boundary and the center of West Criser Road west-northwest to the intersection of Luray Avenue and West Criser Road, thence with the South River Election District and the center line of Luray Avenue and Luray Avenue extended west to the center of the South Fork of the Shenandoah River, thence north with the center of the South Fork of the Shenandoah River along the Town Boundary to a point in the center line of Kendrick Lane extended, thence southeasterly with the center line of Kendrick Lane extended and then with the center line of Kendrick Lane
Chapter 34 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 34
34-2
southeasterly to its intersection with 6th Street, thence with 6th Street easterly to its intersection with Manassas Avenue, the point of beginning.
(Amended to change boundaries 2-25-02-Effective Upon Passage)
34-3 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL - HAPPY CREEK PRECINCT
The Town of Front Royal Happy Creek Precinct shall include all that portion of the Happy Creek Election District, as defined by Section 16-7.1.B.(1) of the Warren County, Virginia, Code, wherein it is called the Town of Front Royal – Happy Creek Precinct, located within the corporate limits of the Town of Front Royal, as follows:
Beginning at a point in the center of Commerce Avenue at its intersection with East Stonewall Drive, thence with the South River Election District south with the center line of Commerce Avenue to its intersection with John Marshall Highway, thence east along the center line of John Marshall Highway to its intersection with the Town Boundary, near ESA Lane, thence north along the Town Boundary to the center of Happy Creek Road, thence westerly with the center of Happy Creek Road to its intersection with Polk Avenue, thence southerly with the center of Polk Avenue to its intersection with Braxton Road, thence easterly with the center line of Braxton Road to its intersection with Leach Street, thence southerly with the center line of Leach Street to its intersection with Horseshoe Drive, thence east, south and west around the curve of Horseshoe Drive and along its center line to its intersection with North Easterly Street, thence south along the center line of North Easterly Street to its intersection with East Stonewall Drive, thence west along the center line of East Stonewall Drive to its intersection with Commerce Avenue, the point of beginning.
(Amended to change boundaries 2-25-02-Effective Upon Passage)
34-4 TOWN - NORTH RIVER PRECINCT
The Town North River Precinct shall have the same boundaries as those of the Town - North River Precinct as defined by Section 16-7.1.C. (1) of the Warren County, Virginia, Code, as follows:
Beginning at the point of intersection of the center lines of 6th Street and Manassas Avenue, such point being at the point of intersection of the Fork Election District, the North River Election District and the Shenandoah Election District, thence northerly with the center line of Manassas Avenue to the crossing of the Norfolk Southern Railway (formerly Norfolk and Western Railroad), thence with the Shenandoah Election District and the centerline of the Norfolk Southern Railway in a northern and northeast direction to the center of the North Fork of the Shenandoah River and the Town Boundary, thence northwest with the Town Boundary along the center of the North Fork of the Shenandoah River to a corner of the Town Boundary on the east right-of-way line of U.S. Route 340-522, thence south and then north along the Town Boundary and U.S. Route 340-522 to a corner of the Town Boundary on the southerly right-of-way line of Interstate Route 66, thence continuing west and then south along the Town Boundary to a point in the center of the North Fork of the Shenandoah River, thence continuing
Chapter 34 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 34
34-3
northwest with the Town Boundary along the North Fork of the Shenandoah River to a point, thence leaving the Shenandoah River and continuing southwest with the Town Boundary to a corner of the Fork Election District at the intersection of the centerline of Strasburg Road (Route 55), thence continuing southwest with the Town Boundary to the center of Punch Run, thence continuing with the Town Boundary downstream with Punch Run to its confluence with the South Fork of the Shenandoah River, thence westerly with the center line of the South Fork of the Shenandoah River to a point in the center line of Kendrick Lane extended, thence southeasterly with the center line of Kendrick Lane extended, and then with the center line of Kendrick Lane southeasterly to its intersection with Sixth Street, thence with Sixth Street easterly to its intersection with Manassas Avenue, the point of beginning.
(Amended to change boundaries 2-25-02-Effective Upon Passage)
34-5 TOWN – WEST SHENANDOAH PRECINCT
The Town – West Shenandoah Precinct shall include all that portion of the Shenandoah Election District, as defined by Section 16-7.1.D. (1) of the Warren County, Virginia, Code, located within the corporate limits of the Town of Front Royal, as follows:
Beginning at the point of intersection of the center lines of Manassas Avenue and Happy Creek Road, such point being at the point of intersection of the Fork Election District and the Shenandoah Election District, thence northerly with the center line of Manassas Avenue and with the lines of the Fork Election District and the North River Election District to its crossing of the Norfolk Southern Railway (formerly the Norfolk and Western Railroad), thence with the North River Election District and with the center line of the Norfolk Southern Railway in a northern and northeast direction to the center of the North Fork of the Shenandoah River and the Town Boundary, thence south and east with the Town Boundary to its intersection with the center line of Happy Creek Road, thence westerly with the center of Happy Creek Road to its intersection with Polk Avenue, thence southerly with the center of Polk Avenue to its intersection with Braxton Road, thence easterly with the center line of Braxton Road to its intersection with Leach Street, thence southerly with the center line of Leach Street to its intersection with Horseshoe Drive, thence east, south and west around the curve of Horseshoe Drive and along its center line to its intersection with North Easterly Street, thence south along the center line of North Easterly Street to its intersection with East Stonewall Drive, thence west along the center line of East Stonewall Drive to its intersection with Commerce Avenue, thence north along the center line of Commerce Avenue to its intersection with Happy Creek Road, thence east and north along the center line of Happy Creek Road to its intersection with Manassas Avenue, the point of beginning.
(Amended to change boundaries 2-25-02-Effective Upon Passage)
34-6 TOWN - SOUTH RIVER PRECINCT
The Town South River Precinct shall include all that portion of the South River Election District, as defined by Section 16-7.1.E. (3) of the Warren County, Virginia, Code, wherein it is called the
Chapter 34 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 34
34-4
Town – South River Precinct, located within the corporate limits of the Town of Front Royal, as follows:
Beginning at a point in the center of Commerce Avenue at its intersection with East Main Street, thence with the center line of Commerce Avenue to its intersection with John Marshall Highway, thence east along the center line of John Marshall Highway to its intersection with the eastern Town Boundary near ESA Lane, thence south with the Town Boundary and ESA Lane to a point, thence leaving ESA Lane and continuing west with the Town Boundary to the intersection of South Royal Avenue and Criser Road, thence north-northeast with the center of South Royal Avenue and the Fork Election District to its intersection with the center line of Main Street, thence east along the center of East Main Street to its intersection with the center line of Commerce, the point of beginning
(Amended to change boundaries 2-25-02-Effective Upon Passage)
34-7 POLLING PLACES
The polling place for each Town of Front Royal election precinct shall be the same as the polling places enumerated for the corresponding town precincts set forth in Section 16-6.1 of the Warren County, Virginia, Code. (Amended 10-27-14 to change Code Section-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 38 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 38
38-1
Chapter 38
STATE AND NATIONAL CRIMINAL BACKGROUND INVESTIGATIONS OF JOB APPLICANTS
Sections:
38-1 ADOPTION
38-2 APPLICATION AND FINGERPRINTS
38-3 PROCESSING OF FINGERPRINTS
38-4 DISQUALIFICATION FACTORS
38-5 DENIAL OF EMPLOYMENT
38-6 RELEASE OF INFORMATION
38-7 ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
38-8 CORRECTION OF RECORD
Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal by Ord. No. 1-05 on 12-20-04.
38-1 ADOPTION
This ordinance is enacted pursuant to Section 15.2-1505.1 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended to regulate the employment of persons by the Town of Front Royal.
38-2 APPLICATION AND FINGERPRINTS
An applicant for employment with the Town, upon offer of employment by the Town, shall submit, if required by the Town Manager, two sets of his/her fingerprints taken by the Front Royal Police Department, together with personal descriptive information appropriate for the accomplishment of a records check (date of birth, home address for the past five years, social security number) along with appropriate fees for the processing thereof.
38-3 PROCESSING OF FINGERPRINTS
Upon receipt of the fingerprints and the appropriate fees, the Front Royal Police Department will transmit both sets of fingerprints and appropriate fees to the Central Criminal Records Exchange (CCRE) and/or the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). The CCRE will compare the subject's fingerprints and personal descriptive information against its criminal file and, upon receipt of an applicant's record or application that no record exists, shall make a report to the Town Manager. In the event that the CCRE is requested to submit the fingerprints and personal descriptive information to the FBI, the results of the FBI check will be returned to the CCRE, which will disseminate the state and national results to the Town Manager.
Chapter 38 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 38
38-2
38-4 DISQUALIFICATION FACTORS
As a result of the report from the CCRE, the Town Manager shall consider the following in determining whether a criminal conviction directly relates to the applicant's disqualification for the position: (1) the nature and seriousness of the crime; (2) the relationship of the crime to the work to be performed in the position applied for; (3) the extent to which the position applied for might offer an opportunity to engage in further criminal activity of the same type as that in which the person had been involved; (4) the relationship of the crime to the ability, capacity or fitness required to perform the duties and discharge the responsibilities of the position being sought; (5) the extent and nature of the person's past criminal activity; (6) the age of the person at the time of the commission of the crime; (7) the amount of time that has elapsed since the person's last involvement in the commission of a crime; (8) the conduct and work activity of the person prior to and following the criminal activity; and (9) evidence of the person's rehabilitation or rehabilitative effort while incarcerated or following release.
38-5 DENIAL OF EMPLOYMENT
The Town Manager's determination of disqualification shall result in the denial of employment for the applicant.
38-6 RELEASE OF INFORMATION
If an applicant is denied employment because of information appearing in his/her criminal history record, the Town Manager shall notify the applicant that information obtained from the CCRE contributed to such denial. The information shall not be disseminated except as provided for in this Chapter.
38-7 ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Upon a determination of unfitness or disqualification for the position as a result of information in the record check, the applicant shall have the opportunity to present information or evidence tending to disprove or mitigate the information found.
38-8 CORRECTION OF RECORD
A record subject may request and receive a copy of his/her criminal history record information from the Town Manager. Should the record subject seek to amend or correct his/her record, he/she must contact the CCRE or the FBI for records from other jurisdictions maintained in its file.
(Ord. No. 1-05 Added Entire Section 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 43 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 43
43-1
Chapter 43
AIR POLLUTION
Sections:
43-1 PROHIBITIONS
43-2 GRADING OF SMOKE DENSITY
43-3 EXCEPTONS TO SMOKE DENISTY RESTRICTIONS
43-4 SOOT, CINDERS AND FLY ASH
43-5 AIR POLLUTION COMMISSION
43-6 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
43-7 EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS OF THIS CHAPTER
43-8 AUTHORIZATION TO ENGAGE INSPECTOR
Revised/Re-codified 3-11-85. (Chapter 2A of the 1965 Code. Amended 11-9-64; 12-14-64; 8-23-65). Amendments noted where applicable.
43-1 PROHIBITIONS
It shall be unlawful for any person who is the owner, operator or in control of any stationary steam boiler to permit or cause to escape into the open air within the town any dense smoke, soot, cinders or fly ash, as hereinafter defined in Sections 43-2 to 43-4.
43-2 GRADING OF SMOKE DENSITY
For the purpose of grading the density of smoke under this chapter, the Ringelmann Chart, as now published and used by the United States Bureau of Mines, which is hereby made a part hereof by reference, shall be the standard. Two (2) copies of such chart shall be deposited with the Town Manager. Smoke shall be considered dense when it is equal to or of greater density than No. 2 on such chart.
43-3 EXCEPTIONS TO SMOKE DENSITY RESTRICTIONS
The following shall be exceptions to the provisions of Section 43-2:
A. When cleaning the boiler or stack.
B. When a fire box is cleaned out or a new fire is being built therein, smoke shall be permitted of a density equal to but not in excess of No. 2 on such Ringelmann Chart for a period or periods aggregating not more than nine (9) minutes in any one (1) hour or of a density in excess of No. 2 on such chart for a period or periods aggregating not more than six (6) minutes in any one (1) hour.
C. Blowing of boiler tubes.
Chapter 43 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 43
43-2
D. In the event of a breakdown of the fuel-burning equipment or other failure, which is not reasonably preventable and which causes the emission of smoke of a density greater than No. 2 on the Ringelmann Chart, the emission of such smoke shall be permitted for a reasonable time during the period of such breakdown or failure. The person responsible for such equipment or failure shall forthwith notify the Air Pollution Commission or its representatives of such breakdown or failure, shall give the reasons therefor, shall exercise every reasonable effort to prevent without undue delay the emission of smoke of a density greater than No. 2 on the Ringelmann Chart, shall state when such breakdown or failure will be corrected and shall further notify the Air Pollution Commission or its representatives when such breakdown or failure will be corrected.
43-4 SOOT, CINDERS AND FLY ASH
A. Emission prohibited. No person shall cause or allow the escape or emission from any stack into the open air of such quantities of soot, cinders or fly ash in such place or manner as to cause injury, detriment or nuisance to any person or to the public or in such manner as to cause or have a tendency to cause injury or damage to business or property.
B. Permissible amounts of fly ash.
1. No person shall operate or cause to be operated or maintained or cause to be maintained any furnace or combustion device for the burning of solid fuel unless the quantity of fly ash emitted into the open air shall not exceed seventy-five hundredths (0.75) grain per cubic foot of flue gas at a stack temperature of five hundred degree's Fahrenheit (500 degrees F), applying to a stack temperature of eight hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (850 degrees F) or less, of which amount not to exceed two-tenths (0.2) of a grain per cubic foot shall be of such size as to be retained on a three-hundred-twenty-five-mesh United States standard sieve. These conditions are to be conformed to when the percentage of excess air in the stack does not exceed fifty percent (50%) at full load.
2. Any person violating the provisions of this subsection shall have ninety (90) days after notification by the Air Pollution Commission or its representative within which to cause such furnace or combustion device to comply with the provisions of this subsection. The Town Council, upon the recommendation of the Air Pollution Commission, may extend this time during a period of construction which is being done to comply with this chapter.
C. Emission a public nuisance. The escape or emission of soot, cinders and fly ash, as prohibited herein, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
D. Exempted emissions. In the event of a breakdown of any furnace or combustion device mentioned in Subsection B or other failure which is not reasonably preventable and which causes the quantity of fly ash emitted into the open air to exceed the quantity mentioned in such subsection, the emission of such fly ash shall be permitted for a reasonable time during the period of such breakdown or failure. The person responsible for such equipment or failure shall notify forthwith the Air Pollution Commission or its representative of such breakdown or failure, shall give the reasons therefor, shall exercise every reasonable effort to prevent without undue
Chapter 43 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 43
43-3
delay the emission of smoke of a greater quantity than permitted by Subsection B, shall state when such breakdown or failure will be corrected and shall notify the Air Pollution Commission or its representative when such breakdown or failure has been corrected.
E. Defined. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
SOOT, CINDERS AND FLYASH - Considered to be all matter other than dense smoke, and shall include coke, cinders, dust and soot formed as a result of the combustion of fuel which is carried in the gas stream so as to reach the external air and which have not been completely consumed by the combustion process.
43-5 AIR POLLUTION COMMISSION
A. The Town Council, shall, biennially, at the regular Council meeting in September, beginning in 1966, appoint an Air Pollution Commission. Such Commission shall consist of at least three (3) members, who shall hold office until their successors are named as hereinabove provided.
B. The Air Pollution Commission or its representatives shall have authority to enter at all reasonable times in or upon any private or public property, except private residences, for the purpose of inspecting and investigating any condition which the Commission shall have reasonable cause to believe is a violation of any part of this chapter. Such officials shall at all times comply with all reasonable safety rules then in effect at such properties. Any information relating to secret processes or methods of manufacture or production obtained in the course of such inspections or investigations shall be kept confidential by such officials.
43-6 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the fines and penalties hereinafter provided. All persons participating in any such violation, either as owners, proprietors, lessees, agents, tenants, managers, superintendents, engineers, firemen or janitors, or otherwise, shall severally be liable therefore and subject to the fines and penalties prescribed by Section B of this section.
B. Upon conviction of the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, each such person shall for the first offense be punished by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.) and, upon conviction of a subsequent offense or offenses hereunder, shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.), nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.) or be confined in jail for not more than ten (10) days, either or both.
C. In the event that any person shall have been convicted of three (3) violations of this chapter within any calendar year period, the Town Council may authorize the Air Pollution Commission to direct counsel for the town to institute forthwith a proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin further operation of such equipment as shall have caused the condition resulting in such violations.
Chapter 43 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 43
43-4
43-7 EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS OF THIS CHAPTER
Private residences, except when such residences contain four (4) or more family units, shall be exempted from the provisions of this chapter.
43-8 AUTHORIZATION TO ENGAGE INSPECTOR
The Town Manager is hereby authorized to employ, engage or obtain from time to time, if needed, a competent person for the purpose of carrying out the inspections and investigations hereinabove provided. Such person shall be deemed to be a representative of the Air Pollution Commission for all purposes pursuant to this Chapter.
Chapter 46 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 46
46-1
Chapter 46
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Sections:
46-1 PUBLIC INTOXICATION
46-2 DRINKING IN PUBLIC
46-3 RESTRICTED HOURS
Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal 3-11-85 (Chapter 3 of the 1965 Code, Section 46-1 and 46-3 8-9-76). Other amendments noted where applicable.
46-1 PUBLIC INTOXICATION
If any person is intoxicated in public in the Town, regardless of whether such intoxication results from alcohol, narcotic drug, or other intoxicant or drug of whatever nature, he shall be deemed guilty of a Class IV Misdemeanor as defined in Section 1-15 of this Code.
(Amended 8-28-17-Effective Upon Passage)
46-2 DRINKING IN PUBLIC
A. If any person takes a drink of alcoholic beverages or is found to possess same or offers a drink thereof to another, whether accepted or not, at or in any public place, he shall be guilty of a Class IV misdemeanor, as defined by Section 1-15 of this Code. The terms "alcoholic beverages" and "public place" are defined in Section 4.1-100 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, and said definitions are incorporated herein by reference.
B. Nothing in this Section shall prevent any person from drinking alcoholic beverages or possessing same or offering a drink thereof to another in any rooms or areas approved by the Virginia Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control in an establishment licensed by said Department or the person who operates the same is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages at retail for on premises consumption and the alcoholic beverages drunk or offered were purchased therein.
C. This Section shall not prevent any person from drinking alcoholic beverages or possessing same or offering a drink thereof to another in any room or area approved by the Virginia Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control at an event for which a banquet license or mixed beverage special events license has been granted. Nor shall this Section prevent, upon authorization of the license, any person from drinking his own lawfully acquired alcoholic beverage or offering a drink thereof to another in approved areas and locations at events for which a coliseum or stadium license has been granted.
(Ord. No. 14-00 Amended 9-11-00-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 11-08 Amended/Added (A-C) 9-22-08-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 46 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 46
46-2
46-3 RESTRICTED HOURS
The sale of beer and wine shall be prohibited in the Town from 12:00 midnight to 6:00 a.m. Licensees shall refrain from selling such beverages or permitting the consumption of the same upon the licensed premises during the hours set forth in this section.
Chapter 48 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 48
48-1
Chapter 48
PROCEDURE FOR TAXES OR ASSESSMENT FOR LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
Sections:
48-1 AUTHORITY TO IMPOSE TAXES OR ASSESSMENTS FOR LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS; PURPOSES
48-2 (RESERVED)
48-3 HOW IMPOSED
48-4 (RESERVED)
48-5 HOW COST ASSESSED OR APPORTIONED
48-6 (RESERVED)
48-7 VOLUNTARY AGREEMENTS
48-8 THROUGH 10 (RESERVED)
48-11 ASSESSMENTS TO BE REPORTED TO THE DIRECTOR
48-12 (RESERVED)
48-13 NOTICE TO LANDOWNER OF AMOUNT OF ASSESSMENT
48-14 HOW NOTICE GIVEN; OBJECTIONS
48-15 APPEAL TO COURT; DUTY OF CLERK OF GOVERNING BODY, ETC
48-16 HOW SUCH APPEAL TRIED; LIEN OF JUDGEMENT; WHEN TO TAKE EFFECT; HOW ENFORCED
48-17 DOCEKTING OF ABSTRACTS OF RESOLUTIONS OR ORDINANCES
48-18 INSTALLMENT PAYMENT OF ASSESSMENTS
48-19 RELEASE OF LIENDS DOCKETED
48-20 (RESERVED)
Adopted by Town Council 5-11-98 (Repealed Section 134-56 – 134-63 and 142-8 – 142-16 at time of adoption)
48-1 AUTHORITY TO IMPOSE TAXES OR ASSESSMENTS FOR LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS; PURPOSES
The Town may impose taxes or assessments upon the owners of abutting property for constructing, improving, replacing or enlarging the sidewalks upon existing streets, for improving and paving existing alleys, and for the construction or the use of sanitary or storm water management facilities, retaining walls, curbs and gutters. Such taxes or assessments may include the legal, financial or other directly attributable costs incurred by the Town in creating a district, if a district is created, and financing the payment of the improvements. The taxes or assessments shall not be in excess of the peculiar benefits resulting from the improvements to such abutting property owners. No tax or assessment for retaining walls shall be imposed upon any property owner who does not agree to such tax or assessment.
In addition to the foregoing, the Town Council may impose taxes or assessments upon the owners of abutting property for the construction, replacement or enlargement of waterlines; for the installation of street lights; for the construction or installation of canopies or other weather
Chapter 48 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 48
48-2
protective devices; for the installation of lighting in connection with the foregoing; and for permanent amenities, including, but not limited to, benches or waste receptacles.
Other than by voluntary agreement, any tax or assessment imposed for a local improvement shall be set by the Town Council by ordinance as provided herein.
The Town's assessment ordinances and policies shall be construed and interpreted to comply with the laws of the United States and the Commonwealth of Virginia, granting no additional rights or interest to the landowner and no additional restrictions or limitations upon the assessment authority of the Town than imposed by Federal and State law.
48-2 (RESERVED)
48-3 HOW IMPOSED
Such improvements may be ordered by the Town Council and the cost thereof apportioned in pursuance of an agreement between the governing body and the abutting landowners, and, in the absence of such an agreement, the cost of improvements which is to be defrayed in whole or in part by such tax or assessment, may be ordered on a petition from not less than three-fourths (3/4) of the landowners to be affected thereby or by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of all the members elected to the Town Council. Notice shall be given to the abutting landowners, notifying them when and where they may appear before the Town Council, or such committee or administrative board or other similar board of the Town which the Town Council may appoint for that purpose and to whom the matter of assessment may be referred, to be heard in favor of or against such improvements.
48-4 (RESERVED)
48-5 HOW COST ASSESSED OR APPORTIONED
The cost of such improvement, when the same shall have been ascertained, shall be assessed or apportioned by the Town Council, or by some committee thereof, or by any officer or board authorized by resolution of the Town Council to make such assessment or apportionment, between the Town and the abutting property owners when less than the whole is assessed, provided that, except when it is otherwise agreed between the Town and the landowner, that portion assessed against the abutting property owner or owners shall not exceed one-half of the total cost.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, any portion of the cost of such improvements not funded by such special assessment may be paid from federal or state funds received by the Town for such purpose.
48-6 (RESERVED)
Chapter 48 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 48
48-3
48-7 VOLUNTARY AGREEMENTS
Assessments put on by agreement between the Town and a landowner for local improvements and associated facilities shall comply with the Town's "POLICY FOR ASSESSMENT FOR THE INSTALLATION OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS" as approved by the Town Council. A copy of the written policy is to be available to the public at the Town Hall during the normal business hours of the Town government.
48-8 THROUGH 10 (RESERVED)
48-11 ASSESSMENTS TO BE REPORTED TO THE DIRECTOR OF FINANCE; POSTPONEMENT OF PAYMENT BY CERTAIN PROPERTY OWNERS
The amount assessed against each landowner, or for which he is liable by agreement, shall be reported as soon as practicable to the Director of Finance, who is the collector of taxes for the Town of Front Royal, or his designee, who shall enter the same as provided for other taxes.
The Town Council may provide for the postponement of the payment of such assessment by certain elderly or permanently and totally disabled property owners meeting certain conditions until the sale of the property or the death of the last eligible owner. Eligibility for postponement shall be subject to the conditions set forth in Virginia Code § 58.1-3211 and Town of Front Royal Code § 75-17.1 for such elderly or permanently and totally disabled persons.
The Town Council may provide, in the specific assessment ordinance, for the postponement of the payment of such assessment until the property owner actually connects to the public utility system. However, if the property is conveyed between the time the assessment is made and the time the property owner actually connects to the public utility system, then the entire amount due under the assessment becomes due and payable on the day of the conveyance. In any event, the entire amount of assessment due shall be paid no later than ten years from the creation of the assessment or district.
Unless otherwise provided for in the specific assessment ordinance, the entire amount of the assessment, or the first installment if the landowner is permitted and elects to make payment in installments, shall be due 30 days after the billing date. Upon substantial completion of the improvement, the Town Department overseeing the improvement shall immediately certify in writing to the Department of Finance the date of substantial completion, the Department of Finance shall then immediately cause a bill to be mailed, which date of mailing shall be the billing date, to each abutting landowner stating the amount due, which shall include the amount of the assessment and filing fees, and indicate the date due. Failure of the landowner to receive the mailed bill shall not relieve the landowner of the obligation to make prompt payment.
The Director of Finance shall enter those assessments postponed by the Town Council in accordance with the conditions prescribed as provided for other taxes, but the eligible property owner shall have the option of payment or postponement.
Chapter 48 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 48
48-4
48-12 (RESERVED)
48-13 NOTICE TO LANDOWNER OF AMOUNT OF ASSESSMENT
When the assessment or apportionment is not fixed by agreement, notice thereof, and of the amount so assessed or apportioned, shall be given to each of the abutting owners who shall be cited to appear before Town Council, committee, officer or board having charge of the matter, not less than ten days thereafter, at the time and place designated, to show cause, if he can, against such assessment or apportionment.
48-14 HOW NOTICE GIVEN; OBJECTIONS
The notice may be given by personal service on all persons entitled to such notice, except (i) notice to an infant, a mentally incapacitated person or other person under a disability may be served on his guardian, conservator or committee; (ii) notice to a nonresident may be mailed to him at his place of residence or served on any agent of his having charge of the property or on the tenant of the property; or (iii) in any case when the owner is a nonresident or when the owner's residence is not known, such notice may be given by publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the Town once a week for four successive weeks. In lieu of such personal service on the parties or their agents and of such publication, the notice to 0 parties may be given by publishing the same in a newspaper having general circulation in the Town, once a week for two successive weeks; the second publication shall be made at least seven days before the parties are cited to appear. Any landowner wishing to make objections to an assessment or apportionment may appear in person or by counsel and state such objections.
48-15 APPEAL TO COURT; DUTY OF CLERK OF GOVERNING BODY, ETC
If a property owner's objections are overruled, he shall, within thirty days thereafter, but not afterwards, have an appeal as of right to the Circuit Court for the County of Warren. When an appeal is taken, the Clerk of the Town Council or the officer having charge of the matter, shall immediately deliver to the Clerk of the Court the original notice relating to the assessment, with the judgment of the governing body, committee, officer or board endorsed thereon, and the clerk of the court shall docket the same.
48-16 HOW SUCH APPEAL TRIED; LIEN OF JUDGEMENT; WHEN TO TAKE EFFECT; HOW ENFORCED
Such appeal shall be tried by the court in a summary way, without pleadings in writing and without a jury, after ten days' notice to the Town of Front Royal and the hearing shall be de novo. The amount finally assessed against or apportioned to each landowner, or fixed by agreement with him, as hereinbefore provided, shall be a lien enforceable in equity on his abutting land, from the time when the work of improvement has been completed, subject to his right of appeal and objections as aforesaid. Such lien shall be enforceable against any person deemed to have had notice of the proposed assessment under § 48-17, but if no abstract of the resolution or ordinance authorizing the improvement is docketed as provided in § 48-17, such lien shall be
Chapter 48 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 48
48-5
void as to all purchasers for valuable consideration without notice and lien creditors until and except from the time it is duly admitted to record in the County of Warren.
48-17 DOCKETING OF ABSTRACTS OF RESULUTIONS OR ORDINANCES
When any improvement is authorized for which assessments may be made against the abutting landowners, the Town Council may, before the amount to be finally assessed against or apportioned to each landowner or fixed by agreement is determined, and shall after such amount is finally determined, cause to be entered in the judgment lien book in the Circuit Court Clerk's office for the County of Warren, pursuant to Virginia Code § 15.2-104, an abstract of the resolution or ordinance authorizing such improvement showing the ownership and location of the property to be affected by the proposed improvement and the estimated amount or final amount that will be assessed against or apportioned to each landowner or fixed by agreement with him and the same shall be indexed in the name of the owner of the property. The Town Council may additionally, at the option of the Town Council, cause such abstract to be recorded in the deed book of the Circuit Court Clerk's office for the County of Warren, pursuant to Virginia Code § 15.2-2412. Such assessment shall be a lien solely on the abutting land as provided in § 48-16.
After the completion of the improvement, any estimated amount shall be amended, to show the amount finally assessed against or apportioned to each landowner or fixed by agreement with him, which final amount shall in no event exceed the estimated amount for the improvements as initially authorized. The amount finally assessed against or apportioned to each landowner may be greater than the initially assessed amount when the increased amount is for additional work being performed when the work was requested by the landowner and the additional work and its estimated amount is written into a separate agreement between the Town and the affected landowner. From the time of the docketing of such abstract, any purchaser of, or creditor acquiring a lien on, any of the property described therein shall be deemed to have had notice of the proposed assessment.
Any fee charged by the Clerk of the Circuit Court for recording an abstract of the assessment evidencing a lien for an assessment on an abutting property, shall be paid by the Town and be added to the amount of the lien.
48-18 INSTALLMENT PAYMENT OF ASSESSMENTS
Persons against whom the assessments have been made may pay such assessments in equal installments over a period of eight (8) years or if provided for within the specific assessment ordinance, up to 18 years. Such assessments may be paid in equal annual installments; provided, however, that one-runth (1/9) of the assessment on an 8 year payment period, or the equivalent pro rata share if a longer installment period is provided, shall be paid on or before the due date, and the balance shall be paid in equal, proportional, annual installments thereafter together with interest on the unpaid balances at an annual interest rate, as set in the assessment ordinance, not to exceed the rate of one-year United States Treasury Bills at the time the assessment ordinance is adopted, which rate shall be determined by the Director of Finance. Such installments shall become due at the same time that real estate taxes become due and payable in the Town, and the amount of each installment, including principal and interest, shall be shown on a bill mailed not
Chapter 48 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 48
48-6
later than fourteen days prior to the installment due date to each such person by the treasurer or his designee. If any annual installment is not paid within thirty (30) days after the due date, then the entire unpaid balance shall be declared due and payable and collected in any manner permitted by law.
48-19 RELEASE OF LIENS DOCKETED
The Director of Finance or his designee shall upon discharge of a lien docketed for an assessment as provided for herein by payment in full of the entire balance of the amount of any assessment and interest, deliver a certificate of payment to the property owner and shall execute any other certificate or release, partial or otherwise, as may be required by law. Upon presentation of the certificate, the clerk of the circuit court of Warren County shall mark the lien satisfied in the amount noted on the certificate.
48-20 (RESERVED)
(Ord. No. 6-98 Added Entire Chapter 5-11-98-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 53 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 53
53-1
Chapter 53
BIRD SANCTUARY
Sections:
53-1 DESIGNATION OF LIMITS; RESTRICTIONS
53-2 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal 3-11-85 (Chapter 4 - Sec. 4 – 4.1 of the 1965 Code). Amendments noted where applicable.
53-1 DESIGNATION OF LIMITS; RESTRICTIONS
The entire area within the corporate limits of the town is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. It shall be unlawful to hunt, trap, shoot or attempt to shoot or to molest in any manner any bird or wild fowl or to rob bird nests or wild fowl nests. However, if birds are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or menace to health or property in the opinion of the Town Manager, the Town Manager may take such steps as he may deem necessary to abate such nuisance or menace.
53-2 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more than twenty-five dollars ($25.).
Chapter 57 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 57
57-1
Chapter 57
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
Sections:
57-1 SYSTEM OF NUMBERING ESTABLISHED
57-2 ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL
57-3 IDENTIFICATION OF PROPERTIES BY REFERENCE TO NUMBERING SYSTEM; ASSIGNMENT OF NUMBERS; CONFORMANCE REQUIRED
57-4 SIZE AND POSTING REQUIREMENTS
57-5 ASSIGNMENT OF NUMBERS ON PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLATS
57-6 NUMBER REQUIRED PRIOR TO ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMIT
57-7 RECORD OF ASSIGNED NUMBERS
57-8 OFFICIAL ATLAS; DUPLICATE STREET NAMES PROHIBITED
57-9 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal 12-14-81. Amendments noted where applicable.
57-1 SYSTEM OF NUMBERING ESTABLISHED
A uniform system of numbering properties and principal buildings, as described in the document entitled "Front Royal House Numbering System", prepared by the Lord Fairfax Planning District Commission, is hereby established. This document and the supplemental map, which are on file in the office of the Front Royal Planning Commission Administrator, are hereby adopted and made part of this chapter.
57-2 ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL
The Front Royal Planning Commission Administrator, or his agent, shall be responsible for implementing and maintaining the numbering system, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
57-3 IDENTIFICATION OF PROPERTIES BY REFERENCE TO NUMBERING SYSTEM; ASSIGNMENT OF NUMBERS; CONFORMANCE REQUIRED.
A. All properties or parcels of land within the Town of Front Royal to which a number is assigned by the Front Royal Planning Commission Administrator, or his agent, shall thereafter be identified by reference to the uniform numbering system adopted herein.
B. Properties and buildings shall be assigned numbers in accordance with a schedule determined by the Front Royal Planning Commission Administrator and thereafter shall conform to the
Chapter 57 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 57
57-2
system adopted herein within thirty (30) days from the date of notification by the office of the Front Royal Planning Commission Administrator, or his agent.
C. Numbers will be assigned at intervals determined by the Front Royal Planning Commission Administrator, or his agent. Direction of streets will also be determined by the Front Royal Planning Commission Administrator, or his agent.
57-4 SIZE AND POSTING REQUIREMENTS
Numerals of a minimum of four (4) inches in height or larger, indicating the official numbers for each principal building or each front entrance to such building, shall be posted in a manner as to be visible and distinguishable from the street on which the property is located.
57-5 ASSIGNMENT OF NUMBERS ON PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLATS
Numbers will be assigned to each proposed lot or tract on the surveyor's and the Front Royal Planning Commission's copies of preliminary subdivision plats by the office of the Front Royal Planning Commission Administrator, or his agent.
57-6 NUMBER REQUIRED PRIOR TO ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMIT
No building permit shall be issued for any structure until the owner or developer has procured from the Front Royal Planning Commission Administrator, or his agent, the official house number for the premises.
57-7 RECORD OF ASSIGNED NUMBERS
The office of the Front Royal Planning Commission Administrator, or his agent, shall keep a record of all numbers assigned pursuant to this chapter.
57-8 OFFICIAL ATLAS; DUPLICATE STREET NAMES PROHIBITED
An official atlas of all street names shall be compiled by the office of the Front Royal Planning Commission Administrator. Duplication of street names shall be eliminated, and new street names shall not duplicate or closely approximate street names already assigned.
57-9 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Violations of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.)
Chapter 60 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 60
60-1
Chapter 60
CERTIFICATION OF PLUMBERS, ELECTRICIANS AND BUILDING-RELATED MECHANICAL WORKERS
Sections:
60-1 DEFINITIONS
60-2 APPLICABILITY
60-3 EXEMPTIONS
60-4 ADMINISTRATIVE AND ENFORCEMENT AGENT
60-5 CERTIFICATE REQUIRED; APPLICATION; FEE; LEVELS OF CERTIFICATION
60-6 CERTIFICATION STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES
60-7 CHANGE OF ADDRESS
60-8 REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE
60-9 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal 8-13-84 as Ord. No. 9-84. Amendments noted where applicable.
60-1 DEFINITIONS
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
AGENT - The designated authority charged by the governing body to examine and determine a person's qualifications for certification in accordance with standards and procedures established pursuant to Title 15.1, Chapter 1, Section 15.1-11.4, of the Code of Virginia.
BUILDING-RELATED MECHANICAL WORKER - Any person who engages in or offers to engage in, for the general public for compensation, the installation, maintenance or alteration of mechanical systems, including: heating systems; ventilating systems; cooling systems; steam- and hot-water heating systems; water heaters; process piping; boilers and pressure vessels; appliances utilizing gas, liquid or solid fuel; chimneys and vents; mechanical refrigeration systems; fireplaces; barbecues; incinerators; crematories; fire-suppression systems; and air pollution systems.
CERTIFICATION - The process whereby a duly appointed local agent issues a certificate to an applicant certifying that person's accordance with the standards and procedures established pursuant to Title 15.1, Chapter 1, Section 15.1-11.4, of the Code of Virginia.
ELECTRICIAN - Any person who engages in or offers to engage in, for the general public for compensation, erecting, installing or repairing all forms of electric wiring, electric devices,
Chapter 60 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 60
60-2
electric fixtures, electric motors and electric materials, but who shall not engage in the designing of electrical layouts or systems.
HELPER (LABORER) - Any person who is under the supervision of and assists a plumber, electrician or building-related mechanical worker in the performance of their duties and by reason of experience and education is not able to satisfy the ability and proficiency standards established in this chapter for a Level One certification.
PLUMBER - Any person who engages in or offers to engage in, for the general public for compensation, installing, maintaining, extending and altering all piping, fixtures, plumbing appliances and plumbing appurtenances in connection with sanitary drainage or storm drainage, venting systems and public or private water supply systems; within or adjacent to any building or structure.
60-2 APPLICABILITY
This chapter shall apply to any person who engages in or offers to engage in, for the general public for compensation, plumbing, electrical or building-related mechanical work in the Town of Front Royal, such that his practice requires specialized skill or training, and that the public needs, and will benefit by, assurance of his professional and occupational ability. Furthermore, no helper or laborer shall be employed to assist with any electrical, plumbing or building-related mechanical work requiring a building permit unless a certified plumber, electrician or building-related mechanical worker is present.
60-3 EXEMPTIONS
The following are exemptions from certification:
A. Any person holding a valid certification issued after July 1, 1978, by another county, city or town in the commonwealth in accordance with the provision of Section 15.1-11.4 of the Code of Virginia.
B. Any person certified or licensed in his trade prior to July 1, 1978, in accordance with provisions made by any local governing body in the commonwealth.
C. Any person who shall have paid for a local license to the city, town or county in which his principal office and branch offices may be located, and who is thereby exempt from obtaining a Front Royal business license under the provisions of Section 58-299 of the Code of Virginia.
D. Any person holding a valid Class A contractor's license in the appropriate classification, as duly registered by the State Registration Board for Contractors, pursuant to Title 54, Chapter 7, of the Code of Virginia.
E. Any person employed as a helper or laborer, as defined within this chapter.
Chapter 60 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 60
60-3
F. Any person issued a certificate of journeymanship after completing an apprenticeship program approved by the Virginia Apprenticeship Council.
G. Any person doing work on his or her own property.
60-4 ADMINISTRATIVE AND ENFORCEMENT AGENT
The Town Manager, or his designee, is hereby appointed as the agent for the purpose of examining and determining applicants' qualifications for certification in their trade. The agent shall have the power and it shall be his duty to receive applications for certification as plumbers, electricians or building-related mechanical workers, to examine all such applicants, to grant certificates in accordance with the standards established pursuant to Title 15.1, Chapter 1, Section 15.1-11.4, of the Code of Virginia, and to deny certification to those applicants who fail to meet these standards. The agent shall enforce all the provisions of this chapter and shall utilize the procedures for certification as prescribed herein.
60-5 CERTIFICATE REQUIRED; APPLICATION; FEE; LEVELS OF CERTIFICATION
A. Every person desiring to engage in plumbing, building-related mechanical work or electrical work in the Town of Front Royal first must obtain a Level One (journeyman) or a Level Two (master) certificate in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise exempted herein.
B. Application for certification shall be in writing, on forms provided by the town's agent and obtainable at the Town Hall. All applications shall be accompanied by a fee of fifty dollars ($50.).
C. Application for certification in specified areas of competence shall be for one (1) of two (2) levels of certification:
1. Level One (journeyman): a certificate issued to a person who possesses the necessary ability, proficiency and qualifications to perform the work of installing, repairing and maintaining specific types of equipment and related apparatus and who is capable of performing such tasks utilizing a working knowledge sufficient to comply with the pertinent provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code and according to plans and specifications complying with the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. The holder of a Level One certificate shall be limited to the type of work and types of equipment and related apparatus for which certification is granted.
2. Level Two (master): a certificate issued to a person who possesses the necessary ability, proficiency and qualifications to supervise the work of installing, repairing and maintaining specific types of equipment and related apparatus utilizing a working knowledge sufficient to comply with the pertinent provisions of the Uniform Statewide Building Code and to plan and lay out the details of installation of specific types of equipment and related apparatus according to plans and specifications complying with the Virginia Uniform Statewide
Chapter 60 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 60
60-4
Building Code. The holder of a Level Two certificate shall be limited to the type of work and types of equipment related to apparatus for which certification is granted.
60-6 CERTIFICATION STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES
Each applicant for certification shall be required to fulfill the standards established for determining ability and proficiency and qualifications in the area of expertise specified on the application.
A. Ability and proficiency.
1. Level One (journeyman). Applicants desiring to obtain certification at Level One shall provide evidence that one (1) of the following experience and education standards have been attained:
a. Four (4) years of practical experience in the specified trade or directly related area of expertise for which certification is desired.
b. Successful completion prior to July 1, 1981, of a registered apprenticeship established in accordance with the Virginia Voluntary Apprenticeship Act in trade for which certification is desired.
c. An associate degree in a curriculum related to the trade for which certification is desired and two (2) years of practical experience in the trade for which certification is desired.
d. A bachelor's degree in the study of engineering in a curriculum related to the trade for which certification is desired and one (1) year of practical experience in the trade for which certification is desired.
2. Level two (master). Applicants desiring to obtain certification at Level Two shall furnish evidence that they have met the following experience or standards: one (1) year of experience supervising the installation or repair of the specific types of materials, equipment or related apparatus utilized in the trade for which certification is desired and either:
a. Four (4) years of practical experience in the specific trade or directly related area of expertise for which certification is desired.
b. Successful completion prior to July 1, 1981, of a registered apprenticeship established in accordance with the Virginia Voluntary Apprenticeship Act in the trade for which certification is desired.
c. An associate degree in the trade for which certification is desired and two (2) years of practical experience in the specific area of expertise for which certification is desired; or
Chapter 60 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 60
60-5
d. A bachelor's degree in the study of engineering in a curriculum related to the trade for which certification is desired.
B. Qualifications.
1. The applicant shall be examined by the agent or board in order to determine his qualifications. The examination shall be based on current pertinent provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code and shall correspond to the level of certification specified in the application.
a. The examination may be, in the discretion of the agent or board, in a written or oral format.
b. The examination shall be offered at least once every three (3) months.
c. An applicant must correctly answer seventy-five percent (75%) of the questions on the examination to be deemed qualified.
2. Should an applicant fail the qualifications examination, such person shall be eligible to retake the examination at the next regularly scheduled testing date.
3. If the applicant fails the examination on the second attempt, then such person shall not be reconsidered for certification within twelve (12) months of the date of such failure.
C. Certificate. If upon examination an applicant fulfills the ability, proficiency and qualification standards within the area and level of certification specified, the agent or board shall deliver to such person a certificate to that effect.
60-7 CHANGE OF ADDRESS
Every worker certified pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall give immediate notice to the agent or board of any change of address.
60-8 REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE
A. The agent shall have the power to revoke the certificate of any individual who misrepresents his qualifications or who supplies materially false information in obtaining a certificate under this chapter or who is found to have violated the provisions of the Uniform Statewide Building Code in the practice of his trade.
B. A revoked certificate shall not thereafter be reissued without satisfactory compliance with the certificate standards of this chapter, including reexamination.
Chapter 60 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 60
60-6
60-9 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.).
Chapter 62 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 62
62-1
Chapter 62
CURFEW
Sections:
62-1 ESTABLISHMENT: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE; SUNSET PROVISION
62-2 DEFINITIONS
62-3 CURFEW HOURS
62-4 CURFEW RESTRICTIONS
62-5 EXCEPTIONS TO CURFEW
62-6 PROCEDURE
62-7 SEVERABILITY
62-8 PENALTIES
Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal 3-11-85 (Chapter 19 - Sec. 19-15 of the 1965 Code). Other amendments noted where applicable.
62-1 ESTABLISHMENT: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE; SUNSET PROVISION
An ordinance shall be enacted to establish a nocturnal and school-time curfew for all juveniles over six (6) years of age and under eighteen (18) years of age and regulating their actions in public places; defining the duties of parents of juveniles; and providing for related matters including exceptions, permits, procedures, construction and severability, and penalties for violations.
A. The Town Council of the Town of Front Royal has become concerned by the increasing nationwide problem of criminal offenses being committed by and against juveniles, from which the Town is unfortunately not immune. A significant amount of such crime occurs during late night hours, when most law-abiding juveniles are usually at home and asleep.
B. The Town Council intends, by establishment of the curfew defined by this Chapter to promote the safety and well-being of all the citizens of the Town by reducing the incidence of crimes committed by and against juveniles, reduce juvenile delinquency, protect juveniles from harm, provide guidance to young citizens whose immaturity, inexperience, and lack of judgment may sometimes impair their ability to exercise their rights wisely; and to encourage or, if necessary require, parents to exercise parental authority over and take responsibility for the activities and whereabouts of their minor children.
C. This ordinance shall become effective at 11:00 p.m. on September 1, 1996.
(Ord. No. 6-96 Amended Entire Section 4-11-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 11-96 Amended/Added (A-C) 8-26-96-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 62 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 62
62-2
62-2 DEFINITIONS
A. Emergency: means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or death, or the loss of a substantial property interest.
(Ord. No. 11-96 Amended 8-26-96-Effective Upon Passage)
B. Establishment: means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited including but not limited to any place of amusement, entertainment or retail sales.
C. Juvenile: a juvenile or minor is any unmarried or unemancipated person over six (6) years of age and under eighteen (18) years of age.
(Ord. No. 11-96 Amended (formerly “operator”) 8-26-96-Effective Upon Passage)
D. Public place: means any place to which the public or a significant portion of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, sidewalks, parks, playgrounds, restaurants, cafes, taverns, places selling or dispensing alcoholic beverages, arcades, shops, places of amusement, bowling alleys, theaters, refreshment stands, places renting or selling video tapes or games, shopping centers, parking lots, pawn shops, places of retail sale; common areas of hotels, motels and apartments; and similar areas that are open to the use of the public whether in or upon any motor vehicle. As a type of public place, a street is a way or place, of whatever nature, open to the use of the public as a matter of right for purposes of vehicular travel or in the case of a sidewalk thereof for pedestrian travel. "Street" includes that legal right of way, including but not limited to the cartway of traffic lanes, the curb, the sidewalks whether paved or unpaved, and grass plots or other grounds found within the legal right of way of a street.
(Ord. No. 11-96 Amended 8-26-96-Effective Upon Passage)
E. Parent: means any person having legal custody of a juvenile (i) as a natural or adoptive parent, (ii) as a legal guardian, (iii) as a person who stands in loco parentis, or (iv) a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of a court or in whose care a juvenile has been placed by a court, or (v) any adult person 18 years of age or over, responsible for the day to day care and custody of a juvenile by arrangement with a parent or guardian of a juvenile or any person with whom a juvenile resides not in the company of the juvenile's parent or guardian.
F. Remain: means to stay, be present or fail to immediately leave an establishment or public place when requested to do so by an operator or an employee of an establishment, police officer or other person in control of the premises; or to congregate with another juvenile in an establishment or public place.
(Ord. No. 11-96 Amended 8-26-96-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 62 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 62
62-3
G. School: means any public, private, denominational, or parochial school that is licensed, or exempt from licensing, by the Commonwealth of Virginia, or any other State or government, and any degree granting institution of higher education as prescribed in the regulations of the Board of Education; and shall include any alternative program of study or work/study offered by such an institution.
(Ord. No. 6-96 Amended Entire Section 4-11-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 11-96 Added “G” 8-26-96-Effective Upon Passage)
62-3 CURFEW HOURS
The curfew established by this Chapter shall be in effect during the following times:
A. During the period ending at 5:00 a.m. and beginning:
1. At 11:59 p.m. on Friday and Saturday nights; and
2. 11:00 p.m. on all other nights.
(Ord. No. 6-96 Amended Entire Section 4-11-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 11-96 Amended Entire Section 8-26-96-Effective Upon Passage)
62-4 CURFEW RESTRICTIONS
Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter:
A. It shall be unlawful for any juvenile to be present, go upon or remain in or upon any establishment or public place during the hours of curfew defined in Section 62-3.
B. It shall be unlawful for any parent to knowingly permit, allow by inaction or to encourage their juvenile child to be present, go upon or remain in or upon any establishment or public place during the hours of curfew defined in Section 62-3. The Court or jury hearing a charge of violating this ordinance may draw an inference of knowledge and intent of the parent charged to permit, allow or encourage their juvenile child to violate this ordinance upon a showing of previous knowledge or notice to that parent that their juvenile child has violated the curfew provisions of this ordinance previously to the violation giving rise to the charge. It shall, therefore, be no defense that a parent was completely indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of such juvenile.
(Ord. No. 11-96 Amended “B” 8-26-96-Effective Upon Passage)
C. It shall be unlawful for the operator of a motor vehicle in which a juvenile is a passenger, to knowingly permit, allow by inaction or to encourage a juvenile to be present or remain in or upon such motor vehicle in a public place, or carry a juvenile into or upon a public place, during the hours of curfew defined in Section 62-3.
(Ord. No. 6-96 Amended Entire Section 4-11-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 11-96 Amended “C” 8-26-96-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 62 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 62
62-4
62-5 EXCEPTIONS TO CURFEW
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 62-4, it shall not be a violation of this ordinance for any juvenile to be present, go upon or remain in or upon any establishment or public place, or motor vehicle in a public place:
A. When the juvenile is in the immediate company of the juvenile's parent or other adult given temporary custody and control of the juvenile by the juvenile's parent for a designated time, purpose and specified area.
B. When the juvenile is within 100 yards of his residence and the adult owner or resident of any private property which the juvenile is upon has given permission for the juvenile to be upon the property.
(Ord. No. 11-96 Amended 8-26-96-Effective Upon Passage)
C. When the juvenile is engaged in interstate or intrastate travel through the Town or originating or terminating in the Town, with the consent of the juvenile's parent, if traveling on a direct route from point of origination to the point of termination without any unnecessary detour or stop. Further, when the juvenile has traveled to the Town of Front Royal in the company of a parent, from a residence located outside of Warren County, a mere sojourn away from the juvenile's parent while they are visiting or vacationing will not alone constitute a violation of this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 11-96 Amended 8-26-96-Effective Upon Passage)
D. When the juvenile is in the course of legal employment or traveling to or from the juvenile's place of employment and the juvenile's residence by a direct route without any unnecessary detour or stop.
(Ord. No. 11-96 Amended 8-26-96-Effective Upon Passage)
E. When the juvenile is currently attending any activity sponsored by any: educational, public, government, civic, political or religious organization, or non-profit voluntary association, or other similar entity that takes responsibility for the juvenile; or while in the process of traveling to or from the location of the activity by a direct route without any unnecessary detour or stop.
(Ord. No. 11-96 Added 8-26-96-Effective Upon Passage)
F. When in the course of any military service, provided the juvenile has in his or her possession official military orders or identification.
G. When the juvenile is currently enrolled and attending any school, as defined previously and the students of such school are not generally required to attend such school, whether due to vacations, terms breaks, or an early release for the day; or when the juvenile is taught by a tutor or teacher possessing qualifications prescribed by the Board of Education and approved by the Division superintendent, or is currently qualified for home school instruction as required by
Chapter 62 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 62
62-5
Virginia Code Section 22.1-254.1, is so recorded with the Division Superintendent of Schools of the school division where the juvenile resides and is in fact being home school instructed; or when the juvenile, together with the juvenile's parents, by reason of a bona fide religious training or belief and not because of an essentially political, sociological or philosophical view or a merely personal moral code, is conscientiously opposed to attendance at school pursuant to Virginia Code Section 22.1-257(B)(2) and Section 22.1-257(E), the day time curfew established by Section 62-3 shall not apply to the juvenile.
(Ord. No. 11-96 Added 8-26-96-Effective Upon Passage)
H. When the juvenile has graduated from any high school recognized, certified or licensed by any State or Government, or which is legally exempt from such recognition, certification, or licensing, or the juvenile has completed the requirements for the General Education Development certificate (G.E.D.), or has completed a prescribed course of study asdefined by a local school board, pursuant to Section 22.1-253.13:4 and has been awarded a certificate or diploma as described therein.
(Ord. No. 11-96 Added 8-26-96-Effective Upon Passage)
I. When the juvenile is utilizing the facilities of a public library, or traveling to or from such public library, with the consent of the juvenile's parent, if such travel is on a direct route from the library to the juveniles residence or such other location not prohibited by this ordinance without any unnecessary detour or stop.
(Ord. No. 11-96 Added 8-26-96-Effective Upon Passage)
J. When the juvenile is on an errand as directed by the juvenile's parent, without any unnecessary detour or stop, until the hour of 12:30 A.M. "Errand", as used herein, may include, but is not limited to: the juvenile's medical or legal appointments, job interviews, attendance at court as a witness or litigant, or an older juvenile providing transportation for a sibling to such an appointment or event.
(Ord. No. 11-96 Added 8-26-96-Effective Upon Passage)
K. When the juvenile is exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly. When practicable, the juvenile or his parent shall first deliver to the Chief of Police, or his designee, a written communication, signed by the juvenile and countersigned, if practicable, by a parent of the juvenile with their home address and telephone number, specifying when, here and in what manner the juvenile will be in a public place during hours when the ordinance is applicable to said minor in the exercise of a First Amendment right specified in such communication.
(Ord. No. 11-96 Added 8-26-96-Effective Upon Passage)
L. When reasonable necessity exists for the juvenile to be or remain in a public place during the hours of curfew, but only after the juvenile's parent has communicated to the Chief of Police or
Chapter 62 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 62
62-6
his designee, the facts establishing the reasonable necessity relating to a specified public place at a designated time for a described purpose including points of origin and destination.
(Ord. No. 11-96 Added 8-26-96-Effective Upon Passage)
M. When the juvenile is responding to the immediate and necessary requirements of a present emergency threatening human life, limb or a substantial property interest.
(Ord. No. 6-96 Amended Entire Section 4-11-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 11-96 Added “M” 8-26-96-Effective Upon Passage)
62-6 PROCEDURE
A. If a police officer has probable cause to believe that a juvenile is in a public place or establishment in violation of this Chapter, the officer shall notify the juvenile that he is in violation of this Chapter and shall require the juvenile to provide his full name, date of birth, address and telephone number and how to contact his parent or guardian along with their name, residence address and telephone number. In determining the age of the juvenile and in the absence of convincing evidence such as a driver's license, student identification, or other official photo identification, a police officer shall use his best judgment in determining age. The police officer may then charge the juvenile with a violation of this Chapter by summons and release the juvenile on the summons in the same manner as provided by law for adults, pursuant to Virginia Code Section 16.1-260.
B. Notwithstanding paragraph (A) of this Section, when the police officer has reasonable grounds to believe that the juvenile is also engaged in delinquent conduct, or will continue to violate this Chapter, or has provided the police officer material false information required by Paragraph (A), or otherwise meets the requirements of Virginia Code Section 16.1-246, the police officer shall then take the juvenile to the police station where a parent or other guardian shall immediately be notified to come for the juvenile.
C. When a parent or guardian has come to take charge of the juvenile, and the appropriate information has been recorded, the juvenile shall be released to the custody of the parent or guardian. If a parent cannot be located or fails to take charge of the juvenile, then the juvenile shall be released to the juvenile authorities pursuant to Virginia Code Section 16.1-247, except to the extent that in accordance with police policy, approved in advance by juvenile authorities, the juvenile may temporarily be entrusted to an adult, neighbor or other person who will, on behalf of a parent or guardian, assume responsibility for the juvenile pending the availability or arrival of a parent. The police officer shall then seek a juvenile petition charging the juvenile with the violation(s) for which the juvenile was detained.
D. In the case of a violation of this Chapter by a juvenile, the Chief of Police shall cause to be delivered or mailed to the juvenile's parent or guardian a written notice of the violation with a warning that any subsequent violation may result in enforcement of parental responsibility and of applicable penalties; and the Chief of Police shall maintain a record of all such written notices.
(Ord. No. 11-96 Amended 8-26-96-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 62 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 62
62-7
E. In any event the police officer shall, within 24 hours, file a written report with the Chief of Police or, shall participate to the extent of the information for which he is responsible in the preparation of a report, on the curfew violation. It is not the intention of this Section to require extensive reports that will prevent police officers from performing their primary police duties. The reports shall be as simple as is reasonably possible.
(Ord. No. 6-96 Added Entire Section 4-11-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 11-96 Amended 8-26-96-Effective Upon Passage)
62-7 SEVERABILITY
Severability is intended throughout and within the provisions of this Chapter. If any provision, including any exception, part, phrase, or term, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby and the validity of this Chapter in any and all other respects shall not be affected thereby. The exemptions set out in Section 62-5 are intended to be applied to all circumstances or a reasonably similar nature to those specifically enumerated. Therefore, the failure to Section 62-5 to specify a particular variety of educational institution, program, cultural or religious event, or errand should not be interpreted to deny exemption, provided the exemption will not conflict with or defeat the purposes and intent of this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 6-96 Added Entire Section 4-11-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 11-96 Amended 8-26-96-Effective Upon Passage)
62-8 PENALTIES
Every person who violates any provision of this Chapter or; any juvenile in violation of this Chapter who fails to proceed immediately to their residence when ordered by a law enforcement officer; or who gives a false name or address to a law enforcement officer when apprehended in violation of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction be fined: not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first offense, not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second offense, and not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a third or subsequent offense or; in the case of a juvenile, the court hearing the matter may proceed pursuant to Virginia Code Section 16.1-278.4 and Section 16.1-278.6, where applicable, for the welfare of the juvenile and the best interests of the community. Each such violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 6-96 Added Entire Section 4-11-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 11-96 Amended 8-26-96-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 66 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 66
66-1
Chapter 66
DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS
Sections:
ANIMALS GENERALLY
66-1 LIVESTOCK RUNNING AT LARGE
66-2 IMPOUNDMENT; REDEMPTION; SALE
66-3 MAINTENANCE OF PENS AND KENNELS
66-4 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS
66-5 SLAUGHTERING OF STOCK
DOGS
66-6 DOGS RUNNING AT LARGE
66-6.1 TETHERING RESTRICTIONS FOR DOGS AND OTHER CANINES
66-7 NOISY DOGS
66-8 DANGEROUS DOGS AND VICIOUS DOGS
66-9 PROUD FEMALE DOGS
66-10 DISPOSITION OF UNTAGGED DOGS
66-11 RABIES
KEEPING OF CERTAIN ANIMALS
66-12 DEFINITIONS
66-13 PROHIBITION
66-14 EXEMPTIONS
ASSAULT AND INTIMIDATION WITH ANIMALS
66-15 FINDINGS AND POLICY OF ARTICLE IV
66-16 DEFINITIONS
66-17 ANIMALS USED TO INTIMIDATE
66-18 CONTAINMENT OR MUZZLING OF CERTAIN ANIMALS HAVING AN INTIMIDATING OR FRIGHTENING APPEARANCE; REQUIREMENT ANIMAL BE CONFINED OR PENNED
66-19 UNEXPECTED EXPOSURE TO FRIGHTENING DISPLAY
66-20 PROCEDURE TO DECLARE AN ANIMAL INTIMIDATING
66-21 DUTY OF OWNER OR CUSTODIAN TO NOTIFY AUTHORITIES
66-22 EXCEPTIONS
66-23 PENALTY
66-24 SEVERABILITY
Chapter 66 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 66
66-2
Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal 3-11-85. (Chapter 4 of the 1965 Code including following amendments: Amended 11-13-72 “Noisy Dogs”; Amended 12-11-72 “Vicious or Destructive Dogs”; Amended 5-1-75 “Dogs Running at Large”; Ord. No. 6-84 Amended 6-11-84 “Dogs Running at Large”; Ord. No. 11-84 Added 9-24-84 “Keeping of Certain Animals within the Limits of the Town of Front Royal”; Ord. No. 12-84 Amended on 9-24-84 “Livestock Running at Large”, “Maintenance of Pens and Kennels, and “Slaughtering Prohibited”; Sections 66-8 and 66-9 amended at time of adoption of Code). Other amendments noted where applicable.
ANIMALS GENERALLY
66-1 LIVESTOCK RUNNING AT LARGE
It shall be unlawful for an owner or custodian to permit cows, horses or other livestock to run at large within the Town.
66-2 IMPOUNDMENT; REDEMPTION; SALE
It shall be the duty of the Town Police, upon finding an animal running at large in violation of Section 66-1, immediately to stable or pen such animal and forthwith to post at the courthouse in the Town, notice of having taken possession of such animal, with a reasonable description of the same. It shall furthermore be the duty of the Police, in the event that no pound or pen is provided by the Town, to arrange with a private person for the care, keep and protection of such animal so taken up and report his action to the Town Manager or, in his absence, to the Mayor, who will forthwith notify the owner of such animal, if known, and issue a summons to be served upon him thereby bringing the case before the County Court for trial. If the owner of such animal is unknown, the Town Manager shall, after ten (10) days' notice given by written notices posted in the courthouse and post office in the Town, offer such animal for sale, at public auction, to the highest bidder before the courthouse door, and out of the proceeds coming into his hands, he shall first pay the cost of keep of such animal from time it has been taken up until the day of sale, all court costs and fees, cost of sale and such fine as shall have been imposed. Any balance remaining in his hands shall be deposited in the treasury, and if the person properly entitled to the same upon a hearing before the County Court establishes his ownership of such animal, then the remainder of the proceeds of such sale shall be paid over to him.
66-3 MAINTENANCE OF PENS AND KENNELS
Pens, stables, coops, kennels and yards for any animals or fowl located in the Town shall be kept in a sanitary condition at all times by the owner or person in charge thereof and shall be subject to inspection by the Health Officer, who shall be authorized to go upon the property in question to inspect facilities in plain view.
66-4 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS
A. Any person who overrides, overdrives, overloads, tortures, ill-treats or cruelly or unnecessarily beats, maims, mutilates or kills any animal, whether belonging to himself or
Chapter 66 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 66
66-3
another, or deprives any animal of necessary sustenance, food or drink or causes any of the above things or, being the owner of such animal, permits such acts to be done by another or willfully sets on foot, instigates, engages in, or in any way furthers an act of cruelty to any animal or shall carry or cause to be carried in or upon any vehicle or vessel or otherwise any animal in cruel, brutal or inhuman manner so as to produce torture or unnecessary suffering shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, but nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the dehorning of cattle.
B. The word "animal" as used in this section, shall be construed to include birds and fowls.
66-5 SLAUGHTERING PROHIBITED
It shall be unlawful for any butcher or vendor of meats or any other person to slaughter animals or fowl within the Town limits.
DOGS
66-6 DOGS RUNNING AT LARGE
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit his dog to run at large as hereinafter defined. For the purpose of this section, a dog shall be deemed to run at large while roaming, running or self-hunting off the property of its owner or custodian and not under its owner's or custodian's immediate control. Any person who permits said dog to run at large shall be fined not more than two hundred dollars ($200.). Any dog found running at large may be subject to seizure and impoundment by the Dog Warden.
(Ord. No. 3-92 Amended Fine 3-23-92-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 2-97 Amended 9-22-97-Effective 6-1-98)
66-6-1 TETHERING RESTRICTIONS FOR DOGS AND OTHER CANINES
This ordinance is passed pursuant to Va. Code § 3.2-6543 et. seq. which authorizes localities to pass ordinances preventing cruelty to animals.
A. Tether means, when used as a noun, any device, including but not limited to a chain, leash, cable, tie down, or tie out, attached to a stationary point or object, trolley or run used to contain or restrain a dog or other canine (as used in this ordinance, “canine” shall mean a hybrid of the domestic dog and any other species of the Canidae family). When used as a verb, tether shall mean to attach a dog or other canine to such a device.
B. No person shall tether or cause to be tethered any dog or other canine except when the tether meets the following conditions:
Chapter 66 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 66
66-4
1. Appropriate to the age and size of the dog or other canine, the tether shall weigh no more than 10 percent of the animal’s weight;
2. Attached to the dog or other canine by a properly applied collar, halter, or harness configured so as to protect the dog or other canine from injury and prevent the dog or other canine or tether from becoming entangled with other objects or animals, or from extending over an object or edge that could result in the strangulation or injury of the dog or other canine; and
3. At least three times the length of the dog or other canine, as measured from the tip of its nose to the base of its tail, except when the dog or other canine is being walked on a leash or is attached by a tether to a lead line.
C. It shall be unlawful for a person to tether any dog or other canine:
1. When the dog or other canine is four months old or younger;
2. When the dog or other canine is a female in estrus;
3. When the temperature is less than thirty-two degrees Fahrenheit or greater than ninety degrees Fahrenheit unless the dog or other canine is provided adequate shelter under Virginia Code § 3.2-6500;
4. If the tether weighs more than ten percent of the dog’s or other canine’s body weight;
5. On the same tether concurrently with another dog or other canine; or
6. For longer than twelve hours per twenty-four-hour period on a cable run or four hours on a fixed tether per twenty-four-hour period.
D. Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be punished by a Class 3 misdemeanor with a fine not to exceed $500. Any animal control officer or other law enforcement officer may seize the unlawfully tethered dog or other canine pursuant to his or her authority under Virginia Code § 3.2-6569.
(Entire Section Added 11-27-17-Effective Upon Passage)
66-7 NOISY DOGS
A. It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to keep, harbor or confine within the town any dog which shall habitually, continuously or intermittently make or emit sounds or noises of such volume and nature as to interfere unreasonably with or disturb the peace, quiet, comfort or repose of persons of ordinary sensibilities within the neighborhood in the reasonable use and enjoyment of their property.
Chapter 66 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 66
66-5
B. Upon complaint being made to any Police Officer that the provisions of this section are being violated, the Police Officer shall give notice to such owner of such complaint and shall further order the discontinuance of the disturbance. It shall be unlawful for the owner of such dog to fail, after the expiration of twenty-four (24) hours from the receipt of such notice, to cause the discontinuance of the disturbance.
66-8 VICIOUS OR DESTRUCTIVE DOGS
A. Definitions:
1. A “dangerous dog” means a canine or canine crossbreed which has bitten, attacked, or inflicted injury on a person or companion animal, other than a dog, or killed a companion animal.
2. A “vicious dog” means a canine or canine crossbreed which has (i) killed a person; (ii) inflicted serious injury to a person, including multiple bites, serious disfigurement, serious impairment of health, or serious impairment of a bodily function; or (iii) continued to exhibit the behavior which resulted in a previous finding by a court that is a dangerous dog, provided that its owner has been given notice of that finding.
3. Notwithstanding the definitions above, no canine or canine crossbreed shall be found to be a dangerous dog or vicious dog solely because it is a particular breed, nor shall the local governing body prohibit the ownership of a particular breed of canine or canine crossbreed. No animal shall be found to be a dangerous dog or vicious dog if the threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who was (i) committing, at the time, a crime upon the premises occupied by the animal’s owner or custodian, (ii) committing, at the time, a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the animal’s owner or custodian or (iii) provoking, tormenting, or physically abusing the animal, or can be shown to have repeatedly provoked, tormented, abused, or assaulted the animal at other times. No police dog which was engaged in the performance of its duties as such at the time of the acts complained of shall be found to be a dangerous dog or a vicious dog. No animal which, at the time of the acts complained of, was responding to pain or injury, or was protecting itself, its kennel, its offspring, or its owner or owner’s property, shall be found to be a dangerous dog or a vicious dog.
B. Procedures for Determining a Dog to be Dangerous or Vicious
1. Any Animal Control Officer who has reason to believe that a canine or canine crossbreed within his jurisdiction is a dangerous dog or vicious dog shall apply to a magistrate of the jurisdiction for the issuance of a summons requiring the owner or custodian, if known, to appear before a General District Court at a specified time. The summons shall advise the owner of the nature of the proceedings and the matters at issue. The Animal Control Officer or owner shall securely confine the animal in a humane matter until such time as evidence shall be heard and a verdict rendered. The
Chapter 66 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 66
66-6
court, through its contempt powers, may compel the owner, custodian or harborer of the animal to produce the animal.
2. In addition to Paragraph 1, Subsection B of this Section 66-8, an Animal Control Officer may determine, after investigation, whether a dog is a dangerous dog. If the Animal Control Officer determines that a dog is a dangerous dog, he may order the animal’s owner to comply with the provisions of the ordinance. If the animal’s owner disagrees with the Animal Control Officer’s determination, he may appeal the determination to the General District Court for a trial on the merits.
C. Disposition of Dangerous or Vicious Dogs
1. Vicious Dog – If, after hearing the evidence, the court finds that the animal is a vicious dog, the court shall order the animal euthanized in accordance with the provisions of Section 3.1-796.119
2. Dangerous Dog –
a. If, after hearing the evidence, the court finds that the animal is a dangerous dog, the court shall order the animal’s owner to comply with the provisions of the ordinance.
b. The owner of any animal found to be a dangerous dog shall, within ten days of such finding, obtain a dangerous dog registration certificate from the local Animal Control Officer for a fee of fifty dollars in addition to other fees that may be authorized by law. (i) All certificates or renewals thereof required to be obtained under this section shall only be issued to persons eighteen years of age or older who present satisfactory evidence that the animal has been neutered or spayed. (ii) All certificates or renewals thereof required to be obtained under this section shall only be issued to persons who present satisfactory evidence that the owner has liability insurance coverage, to the value of a least $50,000.00 that covers animal bites. The insurance policy shall contain a provision requiring that the Town be named as an additional insured party and that the Town shall be notified by the insurance company of any cancellation, termination, or expiration of the policy. The local Animal Control Officer shall also provide the owner with a uniformly designed tag which identifies the animal as a dangerous dog. The owner shall affix the tag to the animal’s collar and ensure that the animal wears the collar and tag at all times. All certificates obtained pursuant to this paragraph shall be renewed annually for the same fee and in the same manner as the initial certificate was obtained.
c. All certificates or renewals thereof required to be obtained under this section shall only be issued to person eighteen years of age or older who present satisfactory evidence (i) of the animal’s current rabies vaccination, if applicable, and (ii) that the animal is and will be confined in a proper enclosure or is and will be confined inside the owner’s residence or is and will be muzzled and confined in the owner’s fenced-in yard until
Chapter 66 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 66
66-7
the proper enclosure is constructed. In addition, owners who apply for certificates or renewals thereof under this section shall not be issued a certificate or renewal thereof unless they present satisfactory evidence that (i) their residence is and will continue to be posted with clearly visible signs warning both minors and adults of the presence of a dangerous dog on the property and (ii) the animal has been permanently identified by means of a tattoo on the inside thigh or by electronic implantation.
d. While on the property of its owner, an animal found to be a dangerous dog shall be confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked structure of sufficient height and design to prevent its escape or direct contact with or entry by minors, adults, or other animals. The structure shall be designed to provide the animal with shelter from the elements of nature. When off its owner’s property, an animal found to be a dangerous dog shall be kept on a leash and muzzled in such a manner as not to cause injury to the animal or interfere with the animal’s vision or respiration, but so as to prevent it from biting a person or another animal.
e. If the owner of an animal found to be a dangerous dog is a minor, the custodial parent or legal guardian shall be responsible for complying with all requirements of this section.
f. After an animal has been found to be a dangerous dog, the animal’s owner shall immediately, upon learning of same, notify the local Animal Control Authority if the animal (i) is loose or unconfined; (ii) bites a person or attacks another animal; (iii) is sold, given away, or dies; or (iv) has been moved to a different address. If the dangerous dog is sold, given away, or has been moved to a different address, the previous owner will provide local Animal Control Authorities with the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner, who must also comply with the requirements of this ordinance.
g. The owner of any animal which has been found to be a dangerous dog who willfully fails to comply with the requirements of the ordinance shall be guilty of a Class I misdemeanor.
D. Fees; Training
All fees collected pursuant to the ordinance, less the costs incurred by the Animal Control Authority in producing and distributing the certificates and tags required by the ordinance, shall be paid into a special dedicated fund in the treasury of the locality for the purpose of paying the expense of any training course required under Section 3.1-796.105.
(Ord. No. 15-99 Amended Entire Section 8-23-99-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 66 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 66
66-8
66-9 PROUD FEMALE DOGS
It shall be unlawful for any person who shall own or have in his possession any proud female dog to suffer the same to run at large during such a period to allow such dog to remain on his premises to the annoyance of others after notice by the officers of the Town.
66-10 DISPOSITION OF UNTAGGED DOGS
Dogs without tags will be turned over to the Dog Warden.
66-11 RABIES
Any dog which is known to be suffering from rabies, or which is suspected of suffering from such disease, shall be at once confined by the owner until it is definitely known whether the animal is so infected. If it is found to have such disease, the owner shall at once cause such animal to be killed and the body to be burned or buried. In the event of the failure of the owner to obey the terms of this section, the police may cause such animal to be killed or confined under order of the Chief of Police.
KEEPING CERTAIN ANIMALS PROHIBITED WITHIN TOWN LIMITS
66-12 DEFINITIONS
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated:
DOMESTICATED HOUSEHOLD PETS - Animals kept for companionship, rather than as consumable commodity or producer thereof, which are tame, non-venomous or non-predatory, and shall include but, not be limited to dogs, house cats, caged birds, rabbits, hamsters and gerbils.
EXOTIC ANIMALS - Those animals, other than dogs, house cats, caged birds and other domesticated household pets, which because of a predatory nature, venomous bite or sting, size or disposition present a potential danger to town residents, including but not limited to lions and tigers, mountain lions and other large cats, bears, poisonous snakes and lizards, elephants, monkeys and apes, foxes, wolves, coyotes, alligators and crocodiles.
FOWL - Those birds raised for the purpose of meat, egg or feather production, and shall include but not be limited to, chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, peacocks, guinea hens and pigeons, including homing pigeons.
LIVESTOCK - Those animals raised for the purpose of meat and dairy production, hide or fur production or as draft animals, and shall include but not be limited to cows, horses, donkeys, mules, pigs, sheep.
(Amended 11-23-15-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 66 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 66
66-9
66-13 PROHIBITION
Except for duly authorized parades, processions, zoos, circuses, rides, fairs and exhibitions, licensed pet shops, animal shelters and veterinary offices and hospitals, it shall be unlawful to raise, house, or otherwise keep exotic animals within the limits of the Town of Front Royal.
(Amended to remove “livestock, fowl or” 11-23-15-Effective Upon Passage)
66-14 EXEMPTIONS
A. This Article shall not apply to domesticated household pets, as defined herein, nor to livestock, fowl and exotic animals in transit through the Town of Front Royal by a carrier.
B. This Article shall not apply to livestock or fowl on any operating farm of one (1) acre in size or more located within the town limits.
C. Animals authorized as Urban Agriculture under Chapter 175 shall be exempt of the restrictions of this Article.
(Added “C” 11-23-15-Effective Upon Passage)
ASSAULT AND INTIMIDATION WITH ANIMALS
(Added 5-13-96 by Ord. 5-96)
66-15 FINDINGS AND POLICY OF ARTICLE IV
The Town Council finds that the Town's citizens have been subject to fear, intimidation and apprehension of physical harm by the appearance and handling of certain animals. That this fear is reasonable and has had the effect of restricting the citizens use and enjoyment of public properties, places and ways. At times, certain animals are being used to threaten and intimidate the Town's citizens much as persons may be threatened or intimidated with a pointed or brandished firearm or other weapon. The average citizen not having specific knowledge about particular animals, the fear, intimidation and apprehension caused by these animals is reasonable as perceived even where the animal may pose no actual danger and may in fact be docile; much as a pointed but unloaded firearm will cause fear, intimidation and apprehension.
The Council finds that fear, intimidation and apprehension can be as debilitating and harmful to the Town's citizens as actual danger. The Council, finding it necessary to the health, welfare and peace of mind of its citizens, enacts this Article, pursuant to the Town of Front Royal Charter Section 18 (12),(13) and (25), to prevent and control the intimidation of the Town's citizens by certain animals which are intimidating in their appearance or in the manner in which they are handled.
Chapter 66 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 66
66-10
66-16 DEFINITIONS
For purposes of this Article "intimidating animal" includes and means the following:
1. Any snake.
2. Any dangerous or vicious dog as defined in this Chapter.
3. Any animal that attacks, charges or approaches or attempts to attack, charge or approach a person or animal while barking, growling, with raised hackles, or in any other threatening manner and under circumstances that would cause a reasonable person to be startled, afraid or in fear of harm. This shall not include such behavior if displayed under circumstances in which the owner or custodian could lawfully use force to defend person or property or where the animal is injured.
4. Any animal that has previously been used to assault, intimidate or frighten any person.
5. Any snake or canine owned or in the custody of any person previously convicted of allowing, permitting or encouraging an animal to attack, assault, intimidate, or frighten any person or animal if such canine is of a size or appearance as to be reasonably perceived capable of causing harm to any person or companion animal if provoked.
6. Any animal that pursuant to the procedure set forth in Section 66-20 below has been declared an intimidating animal.
66-17 ANIMALS USED TO INTIMIDATE
It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any animal:
1. To allow, permit, urge, or encourage such animal to attack, charge or approach any person or animal while growling, barking, with raised hackles or in any other threatening manner, or;
2. To allow, permit, urge, or encourage such animal to attempt to attack, attempt to approach, any person or animal while such animal is growling, barking, with raised hackles or in any other threatening manner, any person, or;
3. To threaten to sic, urge or command any animal to attack or charge any person or animal; or threaten to cause such animal to approach any person or animal while such animal is growling, barking, with raised hackles or in any other threatening manner, any person or animal.
However, this section shall not apply to any person engaged in excusable or justifiable self-defense.
Chapter 66 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 66
66-11
66-18 CONTAINMENT OR MUZZLING OF CERTAIN ANIMALS HAVING AN INTIMIDATING OR FRIGHTENING APPEARANCE; REQUIREMENT ANIMAL BE CONFINED OR PENNED
An intimidating animal as described in Section 66-16 must be locked inside a secure container or enclosure, or in the case of a dog or other canine securely muzzled, at any time such animal is in a public place or a private place open to the public. A secure container or enclosure is one from which the animal cannot escape. A secure muzzle is one which prevents the animal from biting a person or other animal and one which the animal cannot remove. No owner or custodian shall permit an intimidating animal to be brought into a public place or other place open to the public unless he has determined with certainty that the intimidating animal cannot escape containment or is muzzled with a muzzle that prevents the canine from biting and which the canine cannot remove.
Any person who permits an intimidating animal to run at large, or remain unconfined, unrestricted or not penned up shall be deemed to have violated the provisions of this Article. Any intimidating animal found running at large shall be subject to seizure and impoundment by an animal warden or any other law enforcement officer.
66-19 UNEXPECTED EXPOSURE TO FRIGHTENING DISPLAY
No owner or custodian of an intimidating animal, whether or not such animal is contained or muzzled, shall leave such animal in, on or along a public place or way or place open to the public, when not under its owner's or custodian's immediate control, where it may attack, charge or approach or attempt to attack, charge or approach a person or animal while barking, growling, with raised hackles, or in any other threatening manner and under circumstances that would cause a reasonable person to be startled, afraid or in fear of harm.
66-20 PROCEDURE TO DECLARE AN ANIMAL INTIMIDATING
In addition to the animals described in Section 66-16, any specific animal may be declared an intimidating animal for purposed of this Article upon notice and hearing.
Any animal warden or any other law enforcement officer who has reason to believe that an animal within his jurisdiction is an intimidating animal shall apply to a magistrate of the jurisdiction for the issuance of a summons requiring the owner or custodian to appear before a general district court at a specified time. The summons shall advise the owner of the nature of the proceeding and the matters at issue. The court, though its contempt powers, may compel the owner or custodian of the animal to produce the animal. If, after hearing the evidence, the court finds that the animal has been engaged in the behavior described in Section 66-17, the court shall declare the animal an intimidating animal for purposed of this Article and order the animal's owner to comply with the provisions of Sections 66-18, 19 & 21 of this Article.
Chapter 66 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 66
66-12
66-21 DUTY OF OWNER OR CUSTODIAN TO NOTIFY AUTHORITIES
The owner or custodian of any intimidating animal, vicious or dangerous dog must immediately notify the Front Royal Police Department in the event such animal escapes from confinement or the control of the owner or custodian. Further, the failure of the owner or custodian to immediately make such notification may be used to show the willfulness in allowing such animal to run at large. Such immediate notification by an owner or custodian charged with such offense may be introduced in defense to show lack of willfulness if the person can specify the manner of notification, the identity of the police official notified and the time of notification. Such notification or failure to notify shall not be dispositive of willfulness and may be rebutted by other competent evidence.
66-22 EXCEPTIONS
This Article shall not apply to a dog owned or in the service of any government law enforcement agency. Nor shall it apply to any snake being displayed as part of an educational event when the event has been previously planned and scheduled with the permission of the person or authority having ownership or control of the location where the event will be held and persons present are given notice of the nature of the educational event.
66-23 PENALTY
Any violation of this Article or commission of an act declared unlawful by this Article shall be punished as a misdemeanor pursuant to Town of Front Royal Code Section 1-15.
It shall not be a defense to a charge placed under this Article that any animal is in fact not dangerous or is in fact docile. However, this Article is not intended to apply to an animal that is of such a size or appearance that reasonable persons would not be startled, afraid or placed in fear of harm to themselves, another person or a companion animal under the circumstances present at the time of any offense charged.
66-24 SEVERABILITY
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, and words of the Chapter are severable, and if any word, sentence, paragraph or section of this Chapter shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining words, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Chapter, because the same would have been enacted by the Council without the incorporation in this Chapter of any such unconstitutional or invalid word, clause, sentence, paragraph or section.
Chapter 70 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 70
70-1
Chapter 70
ELECTRICITY
Sections:
CONTRACTORS; FEES; RESPONSIBILITIES; EXCEPTIONS
70-1 INSTALLATION OF WIRING TO BE BY ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR OR OWNER
70-2 BOND TO BE GIVEN BY ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR
70-3 CERTIFICATE OF LIABILITY INSURANCE
70-4 TOWN MANAGER TO BE NAMED STATUTORY AGENT OF CONTRACTOR
70-5 PAYMENT OF LICENSE TAX REQUIRED
70-6 DISPOSITION OF EXAMINATION FEES AND FINES
70-7 RESPONSIBILITY FOR DAMAGES
70-8 EXCEPTIONS
70-9 THROUGH 70-11 (RESERVED)
70-12 CUTTING OFF ELECTRICITY IN EMERGENCY
70-13 (RESERVED)
GENERAL PROCEDURES
70-14 NOTIFICATION AND PERMIT REQUIRED
70-15 APPLICATION FOR AND ISSUANCE OF PERMIT
70-16 DETAILED DRAWING REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN SERVICES
70-17 INSPECTION OF WIRES PRIOR TO CONCEALMENT
70-18 INSPECTION AFTER COMPLETION; CERTIFICATE OF INSPECTION
70-19 FEES
70-20 (RESERVED)
TELEVISION AND RADIO
70-21 PERMIT FOR INSTALLATION OF RECEVING OR TRANSMITTING ANTENNAS
70-22 INSPECTION OF WIRING EQUIPMENT OR APPARATUS CORRECTION OF UNSAFE CONDITIONS
ELECTRIC RATE CHARGES
70-23 ELECTRIC CHARGES
70-24 THROUGH 36 (RESERVED)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
70-37 COMPLIANCE WITH STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS REQUIRED
70-38 THROUGH 70-41 (RESERVED)
70-42 MASTS, ANTENNAS AND TRANSMISSION LINES
70-43 RADIO AND TELEVISION MATERIALS, DEVICES OR APPARATUS
70-44 STANDARDS FOR MATERIALS, DEVICES OR APPARATUS
70-45 IDENTIFICATION OF MAKER ON CERTAIN DEVICES
70-46 (RESERVED)
Chapter 70 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 70
70-2
ELECTRICAL CODE
70-47 ADOPTION OF STANDARDS
70-48 (RESERVED)
70-49 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
70-50 ELECTRICAL CONNECTION AND CHARGES
70-51 RATES FOR ELECTRICITY SUPPLIED BY THE TOWN
70-52 PAYMENT OF ELECTRIC BILLS
70-53 EXTENSION OF LINES TO PROPERTY
70-54 ATTACHING SIGNS OR OTHER MATERIALS TO POLES OR SUPPORTS PROHIBITED
70-55 REFUSAL OF SERVICE
70-56 TYPE AND SIZE OF METER
70-57 LOCATION AND CONTROLOF METERS
70-58 UNAUTHORIZED INTERFERENCE OF BREAKING OF METER SEAL
70-59 CHARGE FOR REINSPECTION OF METER
70-60 DETERMINATION OF CONSUMPTION WHEN METER FOUND STOPPED
70-61 SALE OF ELECTRICITY RESTRICTED
70-62 LOCATION OF SERVICE ENTRANCE AND POINT OF ATTACHMENT OF SERVICE WIRES TO BUILDING
70-63 MINIMUM ALLOWABLE AMPERAGE AND CHANGES IN LINE SERVICE FOR THE CONVENIENCE OF THE CUSTOMER
70-64 UNDERGROUND SERVICE CONNECTIONS
70-65 AGGREGATION OF RETAIL CUSTOMER DEMAND RESPONSE
70-66 ANCILLARY SERVICES PROVIDED BY DEMAND RESPONSE RESOURCES
Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal 3-11-85 (Chapter 7 of the 1965 Code including amendments 8-9-76; 6-9-80; 8-13-84. Sections 70-2A, 70-9; 70-14; 70-48 and 70-49 amended at time of adoption of Code. Added (70-23 D)“Charges for Electric Surge Protection Program”10-25-99 - Removed 1-28-19;
Other amendments noted where applicable.
CONTRACTORS; FEES; RESPONSIBILITIES; EXCEPTIONS
70-1 INSTALLATION OF WIRING TO BE BY ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR OR OWNER
Any alterations or additions to be made in the existing wiring of any building or the wiring of any building or the wiring of any building for the placing of any electric lights, motors, heating devices or any apparatus requiring the use of electrical current shall be done by an electrical contractor and inspected by an electrical inspector, hereinafter defined, (hereinafter, an “Electrical Inspector”) being an individual meeting the following criteria according to the Code of Warren County, Virginia, Chapter 76, Building Construction, Electrical Inspections, as being certified by the Virginia Board of Housing, Office of Uniform Statewide Building Code, to perform electrical inspections of electrical conductors, wiring and equipment and to properly determine whether they conform to the requirements of the code; who has been designated by the
Chapter 70 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 70
70-3
Middle Department Inspection Agency, hereafter referred to as "MDIA," from among its personnel who are available to perform the duties of Electrical Inspector as provided in this the Warren County Code, in accordance with an agreement between Warren County and MDIA; and a person who bears the credentials designating them as an inspector for Warren County issued by the Warren County Building Official. There may be more than one Electrical Inspector and where the word "the" is used in the Warren County Code with reference to an Electrical Inspector, it shall refer to any Electrical Inspector as defined in the Warren County Code in accordance with the provisions of that Code to do such work. The owner of a building may do such wiring in his own building; provided however, that the wiring shall be inspected by the Electrical Inspector in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Amended 1-28-19-Effective Upon Passage)
70-2 BOND TO BE GIVEN BY ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR
A. Every electrical contractor holding a certificate of competence shall give a surety bond payable to the Town in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.), with corporate surety approved by the Town Attorney and conditioned to indemnify and save harmless the Town, as well as any other person, from all expense and damage that may be caused by any negligent, defective or inadequate work done in the Town under any contract that such person may undertake and also conditioned upon the faithful performance of, and compliance with, all of the provisions of this chapter.
B. Such electrical contractor shall not engage in or carry on his trade or occupation until such bond has been given, nor shall any license be issued to such electrical contractor under Chapter 98 of this Code until such bond has been given.
C. Such bond shall be for the license period and shall be renewed upon renewal of license.
D. The Electrical Inspector and Town Manager shall have authority to declare such bond forfeited. Upon declaration of forfeiture, the electrical contractor shall have the right of appeal within thirty (30) days to Town Council to determine whether such expense and damage was caused by any negligent, defective or inadequate work done in the Town under any contract with such electrical contractor and whether such electrical contractor complied with the faithful performance of, and compliance with, all of the provisions of this chapter. Town Council shall have the authority to determine the admissibility of evidence without regard to the burden of proof, or the order of presentation of evidence, so long as a full and equal opportunity is afforded to all parties for the presentation of their evidence. All evidence shall be presented in the presence of the Town Council and the parties, except by mutual consent of the parties. Documents, exhibits and lists of witnesses are to be exchanged between the parties at least three (3) days in advance of the appeals hearing. The appearance of witnesses before the Town Council at the appeals hearing is strictly voluntary. A majority decision of the Town Council acting within the scope of the appeals hearing is final and binding on the parties.
(Amended (D) 1-28-19-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 70 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 70
70-4
70-3 CERTIFICATE OF LIABILITY INSURANCE
An electrical contractor of whom a bond is required in Section 70-2 may give a certificate of liability insurance in lieu of such bond. Such certificate of liability insurance shall be subject to all the terms, conditions and requirements of Section 70-2.
70-4 TOWN MANAGER TO BE NAMED STATUTORY AGENT OF CONTRACTOR
A. It shall be provided in the surety bond, given as provided in Section 70-2, that the Town Manager shall be named as statutory agent of an electrical contractor holding a certificate of competence issued under this chapter, for all purposes under the provisions of this chapter.
B. It shall be unlawful for any such electrical contractor to fail, neglect or refuse to name the Town Manager as his statutory agent for all purposes under the provisions of this chapter.
70-5 PAYMENT OF LICENSE TAX REQUIRED
No person shall engage in or carry on the trade or occupation of an electrical contractor within the town without having paid the requisite license tax under Chapter 98 of this Code.
70-6 DISPOSITION OF EXAMINATION FEES AND FINES
All examination fees and all fines paid or collected consequent upon violations of this chapter shall be paid to the town and credited to the general fund of the Town.
70-7 RESPONSIBILITY FOR DAMAGES
In no case will the Energy Services Department be responsible for damage to walls or buildings where reasonable care has been exercised in making the service installations installed pursuant to Section 70-46.
(Amended to “Energy Services Department” 1-28-19-Effective Upon Passage)
70-8 EXCEPTIONS
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to commercial broadcasting stations.
70-9 THROUGH 70-11 (RESERVED)
(Removed Section on “ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR” 1-28-19-Effective Upon Passage)
70-12 CUTTING OFF ELECTRICITY IN EMERGENCY
The Energy Services Department may cause the turning off of all electrical current and cut out or disconnect, in case of emergency, any wire where electrical current is dangerous to life or property or may interfere with the work of the Fire Department.
(Amended to “Energy Services Department” 1-28-19-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 70 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 70
70-5
70-13 (RESERVED)
(Removed “RECORDS” 1-28-19-Effective Upon Passage)
GENERAL PROCEDURES
70-14 NOTIFICATION AND PERMIT REQUIRED
No alterations or additions shall be made in the existing wiring of any building, nor shall any building be wired for the placing of any electric lights, motors, heating devices or any apparatus requiring the use of electrical currents, nor shall any alterations be made in wiring of any building after inspection, without first notifying the Electrical Inspector and securing a permit from Warren County therefor, except minor repair work, such as repairing flush and snap switches, replacing fuses, changing lamp sockets and receptacles, taping bare joints and repairing drop cords. This section shall not apply to the construction, maintenance or repair lines of public utility companies or other franchises of the Town.
(Amended to add “Warren County” 1-28-19-Effective Upon Passage)
70-15 APPLICATION FOR AND ISSUANCE OF PERMIT
Application for a permit, as required in Section 70-14, describing the electrical work, shall be made by the person installing such work, and the permit in question, when issued, shall be issued to such applicant.
70-16 DETAILED DRAWING REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN SERVICES
No permit, as required in Section 70-14, shall be issued for an electrical installation requiring a service entrance in excess of one hundred (100) amperes unless the person applying for such permit, as provided in Section 70-15, files a detailed drawing with the Electrical Inspector allowing a reasonable time for study before such work begins. Such drawing shall show the size and location of all mains, submains and branch feeders.
70-17 INSPECTION OF WIRES PRIOR TO CONCEALMENT
All wires which are to be hidden from view shall be inspected before concealment. Any person installing such wires shall notify the Electrical Inspector of such installation, giving him a reasonable time in which to make the required inspection before such wires are concealed.
70-18 INSPECTION AFTER COMPLETION; CERTIFICATE OF INSPECTION
Upon completion of work done pursuant to a permit as required in Section 70-14, it shall be the duty of the person making the installation in question to notify the Electrical Inspector, who shall inspect the installation within a reasonable time after such notice is given, and, if it is found to be fully in compliance with this chapter and does not constitute a hazard to life or property, he shall
Chapter 70 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 70
70-6
issue to such person, for delivery to the owner, a certificate of inspection authorizing connection to the electrical service and the turning on of the current.
70-19 FEES
All fees for electrical inspections by the Electrical Inspector shall be determined by Warren County by general regulation.
(Amended to add “Warren County” 1-28-19-Effective Upon Passage)
70-20 (RESERVED)
(Removed “REVIEW OF CONDEMNATION OF ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS” 1-28-19-EffectiveUpon Passage)
TELEVISION AND RADIO
70-21 PERMIT FOR INSTALLATION OF RECEIVING OR TRANSMITTING ANTENNAS
Work shall not be commenced on the installation of television or radio receiving or transmitting antennas before a permit therefor is obtained from Warren County. An inspection fee, the amount of which shall be determined by Warren County, shall be paid for each permit.
(Amended to add “Warren County” 1-28-19-Effective Upon Passage)
70-22 INSPECTION OF WIRING, EQUIPMENT OR APPARATUS; CORRECTION OF UNSAFE CONDITIONS
The Electrical Inspector may inspect any wiring, equipment or apparatus conducting or using electric current for television, AM, FM, amateur, receiving and transmitting antennas in the Town, and, if conductors, equipment or apparatus are found to be unsafe to life or property, the Electrical Inspector shall notify the person owning or operating the hazardous wiring or equipment to correct the condition within the time specified by the Electrical Inspector. The Electrical Inspector may reinspect, without fee, existing television antennas erected too close to high-voltage electric lines so as to present a hazardous condition. Failure to correct violations in the specified time shall be unlawful.
Chapter 70 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 70
70-7
ELECTRIC RATE CHARGES
70-23 ELECTRIC CHARGES
A. The base rate for electric service for residential customers shall be as follows, effective for the electric meters read on or after March 25, 2019, and continuing as stated herein:
1. Effective from March 25, 2019, facilities charge per billing cycle, as established by the Town: eight dollars and fifty cents ($8.50).
(Added 6-22-98-Effective 8-1-98 ; Amended/Added (a-c) 5-27-03-Effective 7-1-03)
(Amended (c)/Added (d) 7-25-05-Effective 8-1-05 ; Amended (a-b)/Removed (c-d) 6-26-06-Eff Upon Passage)
(Amended to decrease charge/removed (a-b) 6-25-07-Effective 7-1-07)
(Amended to extend rate 10-24-08-Effective 11-1-08 ; Amended to remove end date 6-8-09-Eff Upon Passage)
(Amended Rate 6-12-17-Effective 7-1-17; Amended Rate 3-25-19-Effective Upon Passage)
2. Effective from March 25, 2019, charges for all kilowatt hours per billing cycle, as established by the Town: $0.09850 per kilowatt hour.
(Added 6-22-98-Effective 8-1-98 ; Amended/Added (a-c) 5-27-03-Effective 7-1-03)
(Amended (c)/Added (d) 7-25-05-Effective 8-1-05 ; Amended (a-b)/Removed (c-d) 6-26-06-Eff Upon Passage)
(Amended to decrease charge/removed (a-b) 6-25-07-Effective 7-1-07)
(Amended to extend rate 10-24-08-Effective 11-1-08 ; Amended to remove end date 6-8-09-Eff Upon Passage)
(Amended Rate 3-25-19-Effective Upon Passage)
B. The base rates for electric service for commercial customers shall be as follows, effective for the electric meters read on or after March 25, 2019, and continuing as stated herein:
1. Effective from March 25, 2019, facilities charge per billing cycle, as established by the Town: twenty dollars and zero cents ($20.00).
(Added 6-22-98-Effective 8-1-98 ; Amended/Added (a-c) 5-27-03-Effective 7-1-03)
(Amended (c)/Added (d) 7-25-05-Effective 8-1-05 ; Amended (a-b)/Removed (c-d) 6-26-06-Eff Upon Passage)
(Removed (a-b) 6-25-07-Effective 7-1-07 ; Amended to extend rate 10-24-08-Effective 11-1-08)
(Amended to remove end date 6-8-09-Effective Upon Passage ; Amended Rate 6-12-17-Effective 7-1-17)
(Amended Rate 3-25-19-Effective Upon Passage)
2. Effective from March 25, 2019, charges for the first 700 kilowatt hours per billing cycle, as established by the Town: $0.12600 per kilowatt hour.
(Added 6-22-98-Effective 8-1-98 ; Amended/Added (a-c) 5-27-03-Effective 7-1-03)
(Amended (c)/Added (d) 7-25-05-Effective 8-1-05 ; Amended (a-b)/Removed (c-d) 6-26-06-Eff Upon Passage)
(Removed (a-b) 6-25-07-Effective 7-1-07 ; Amended to extend rate 10-24-08-Effective 11-1-08)
(Amended to remove end date 6-8-09-Effective Upon Passage ; Amended Rate 3-25-19-Eff Upon Passage)
3. Effective from March 25, 2019, charges for all kilowatt hours over 700 per billing cycle, as established by the Town: $0.08800 per kilowatt hour.
Chapter 70 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 70
70-8
When a commercial customer requires capacity over 7.5 kilowatts, the first energy block shall be increased by 53 kilowatt hours for each 1/2 kilowatt required in excess of 7.5 kilowatts. The second energy block shall then include all kilowatt hours in excess of the first energy block as adjusted for such additional energy.
(Added 6-22-98-Effective 8-1-98 ; Amended/Added (a-c) 5-27-03-Effective 7-1-03)
(Amended (c)/Added (d) 7-25-05-Effective 8-1-05 ; Amended (a-b)/Removed (c-d) 6-26-06-Eff Upon Passage)
(Removed (a-b) 6-25-07-Effective 7-1-07 ; Amended to extend rate 10-24-08-Effective 11-1-08)
(Amended to remove end date 6-8-09-Effective Upon Passage ; Amended Rate 3-25-19-Eff Upon Passage)
C. Effective July 1, 2017, all customers billed on the rates described in subsections A and B, above, shall, in addition to the rates therein described, be subject to a Power Cost Adjustment (PCA) charge. The maximum Power Cost Adjustment amount charged for each kilowatt hour of energy sold by the Town may be adjusted according to the following formula:
Max (PCA) = C-(BxS)
C = The estimated cost of delivered purchased power in dollars by the Town for the twelve-month period.
S = The estimated total kilowatt hours to be sold by the Town for the twelve-month period.
B = The average cost of delivered purchased power per kilowatt hour purchased by the Town which is recovered in the Town's retail rate schedules.
The maximum Power Cost Adjustment (PCA) will be computed according to the above formula for a twelve-month period beginning July 1st of each year, but the Town may choose to charge less than the maximum PCA calculated by this formula. Should it appear at any time during the twelve-month period that continued use of the PCA then in effect for the remainder of the twelve-month period will result in a substantial under/over recovery of the delivered cost of power purchased by the Town, then the Town may modify the PCA (up or down), above, to recover the applicable power cost more accurately.
(Added (C) 10-24-08-Effective 11-1-08; Amended (C) 6-12-17-Effective 7-1-17)
D. Charges for Installation of Dusk to Dawn Light Poles.
1. Effective from July 1, 2007 the monthly rate for dusk-to-dawn lights shall be eleven dollars and seventy-eight cents ($11.78).
(Amended 12-21-98-Effective Upon Passage ; Amended 10-25-99-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended/Added (a-c) 5-27-03-Effective 7-1-03 ; Amended (c) and Added (d) 7-25-05-Effective 8-1-05)
(Amended (a-b)/Removed (c-d) 6-26-06-Effective Upon Passage ; Removed (a-b) 6-25-07-Effective 7-1-07)
(Amended to extend rate 10-24-08-Effective 11-1-08 ; Amended to remove end date 6-8-09-Eff Upon Passage)
2. There shall be no installation charge for dusk-to- dawn lights in the event that a utility pole is located in the immediate vicinity to which the dusk-to-dawn light can be connected.
Chapter 70 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 70
70-9
3. In the event that no utility pole is available in the immediate vicinity on which a dusk-to-dawn light can be installed, there shall be a charge, as established by resolution, for the installation of said pole. (Amended (3) 1-26-04-Effective 3-1-04)
4. The customer requesting the dusk-to-dawn light service must maintain the service for at least one full year or pay at least a total of twelve (12) installments of the rates as described above.
(Amended (4) 5-27-03-Effective 7-1-03)
E. 1. For residential temporary electrical service not to exceed 100 amperes in capacity and requiring one service drop existing distribution facilities will be charged a fee. (Chapter 12)
2. For larger residential and commercial temporary services, the charge will be at the customers’ expense. The Town will perform the installation and bill the customer for the actual costs of such installation, including labor, vehicle usage and materials used, less the value of any salvageable materials recovered during the removal process of the temporary service.
(Added (E) 6-9-14-Effective 7-1-14)
70-24 THROUGH 36 (RESERVED)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
70-37 COMPLIANCE WITH STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS REQUIRED
Except as otherwise provided, all installations of electrical equipment shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, with the statues of the state, with the National Electrical Code and any orders, rules and regulations issued by authority thereof and with approved electrical standards as prescribed by this chapter or by the statutes of the state or by any orders, rules or regulations set forth by authority thereof.
70-38 THROUGH 70-41 (RESERVED)
(Removed 1-28-19-Effective Upon Passage)
70-42 MASTS, ANTENNAS AND TRANSMISSION LINES
The provisions of this section shall apply to masts and antennas and to transmission lines, as follows:
A. Masts or antennas shall be of noncombustible and noncorrosive material, except that in the case of ground support, a wooden pole may be used when adequately treated with a wood preservative. When a mast or antenna is installed on a roof, it shall be mounted on its own platform and be securely anchored with guy wires.
Chapter 70 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 70
70-10
B. Outdoor antennas shall be of an approved type and shall not exceed the maximum height of fifty (50) feet above a roof support or seventy (70) feet above ground support. In areas where reception may be affected by the obstruction of tall buildings, antennas in excess of the above specified height may be installed only when approved by the Energy Services Department. Every antenna shall be adequately grounded for protection against lightning. In no case shall an antenna be installed nearer to a street or sidewalk than the height of the antenna plus one (1) foot, unless approved by the Energy Services Department. Anchor points for antennas, masts and guy wires shall be anchor screws or lead expansion shields drilled into solid block, concrete or other noncombustible construction. No wires, cables or guys shall cross or extend over any part of a public street, way or sidewalk.
(Amended (B) to “Energy Services Department” 1-28-19-Effective Upon Passage)
C. Transmission lines shall be kept at least twelve (12) inches from existing telephone or light wires. Rawl plugs are approved only for supporting transmission lines. Standoff support insulators must be used at least every ten (10) feet in running the transmission line down the building.
D. Lightning arrestors shall be approved by the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., and both sides of the line shall be adequately protected with proper arrestors or neon lamps to remove static charges accumulated on the line. When lead-in conductors of polyethylene ribbon type are used, lightning arrestors shall be installed in each conductor. If a coaxial cable is used for the lead-in, suitable protection may be provided without lightning arrestors by grounding the exterior metal sheath.
E. Antennas shall be designed and installed in such manner as to resist a wind pressure of twenty-five (25) pounds per square foot, and in no case shall guy wires be less than three-thirty-seconds-inch five-strand cable or equivalent, galvanized. Rawl plugs shall be used for guy wires or for mounting brackets.
F. Ground wires shall be of copper wire, not smaller than No. 10 for grounding masts and lightning arrestors, and shall be installed in a mechanical manner with as few bends as possible, maintaining a clearance of a least two (2) inches from the combustible material.
G. Ground straps for grounding masts and attaching arrestors to water pipe shall be approved ground fittings.
H. Miscellaneous hardware, such as brackets, turnbuckles, thimbles, clips, etc., shall be hot-dipped galvanized or similarly treated for weather protection. The turnbuckles shall be protected against turning by threading the guy wires through the turnbuckles.
70-43 RADIO AND TELEVISION MATERIALS, DEVICES OR APPARATUS
No electrical materials, devices or apparatus designed for attachment to or installation on any electrical circuit or system for television, AM, FM, amateur and commercial receiving shall be installed, used, sold or offered for sale for use in the Town unless such electrical materials,
Chapter 70 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 70
70-11
devices or apparatus are in conformity with the approved methods of construction for safety to life and property.
70-44 STANDARDS FOR MATERIALS, DEVICES OR APPARATUS
Electrical materials, devices or apparatus shall conform with the standards of the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., and electrical materials, devices or apparatus so conforming are hereby approved for the use in the Town.
70-45 IDENTIFICATION OF MAKER ON CERTAIN DEVICES
The maker's name, trademark or other identification symbol shall be placed on all electrical devices sold or offered for sale for use or used in the Town requiring one hundred fifteen (115) volts or more.
70-46 (RESERVED)
(Removed “BOLTS, METER BASES AND RACKS” 1-28-91-Effective Upon Passage)
ELECTRICAL CODE
70-47 ADOPTION OF STANDARDS
There is hereby adopted by reference, for the purpose of prescribing rules and regulations governing the installation and use of electrical construction and all material and appliances used in connection with electrical work and the operation of all electrical apparatus within the town, that certain code known as the "National Electrical Code, latest Edition," being the standard of the National Board of Underwriters for electric wiring and apparatus, and such National Electrical Code, latest Edition, is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which the Code of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia, shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the Town; provided, however, that in the event of conflict or inconsistency between the provisions of the National Electrical Code hereby adopted and the provisions of any other ordinance to the Town, the more stringent provisions shall be construed to prevail.
(Amended to “latest” edition 1-28-19-Effective Upon Passage)
70-48 (RESERVED)
(Removed “AVAILABILITY OF COPIES OF STANDARDS” 1-28-19-Effective Upon Passage)
70-49 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Chapter 70 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 70
70-12
Any persons failing, neglecting or refusing to comply with the National Electrical Code, latest Edition, adopted by reference in Section 70-47, shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, Penalties, of this Code.
(Amended to “latest” edition 1-28-19-Effective Upon Passage)
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
70-50 ELECTRICAL CONNECTION AND CHARGES
There shall be an electrical connection charge as provided below for connection with electrical lines or system. (Amended 9-25-06-Effective Upon Passage)
1. In new major subdivisions of five lots or more, the developer, builder or customer shall provide excavation and installation with pull ropes of conduits for underground service. The developer, builder or customer shall provide the complete assembly of all street light poles. The connection charge for lots not exceeding one acre in size shall be two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). The connection charge for lots of at least one acre but not exceeding two acres in size shall be five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The connection charge for lots of at least two but less than three acres in size shall be seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00).
(Added 9-25-06-Effective Upon Passage)
2. For the development of underground service to a single lot, to lots within a minor subdivision, or to a small, single-phase commercial user, the developer, builder or customer shall provide and set the meter base and shall provide excavation and installation of conduits with pull ropes for underground service from the meter base to the pole. After the building receives a satisfactory certification of the electrical inspection, the Town shall provide and install all other components of the service connection. The connection charge for such service shall be one thousand one hundred dollars ($1,100.00) provided the service line does not exceed one hundred twenty-five feet (125') in length. For any service line exceeding one hundred twenty-five feet (125') in length, the developer, builder or customer shall be billed and shall pay to the Town on a times and materials basis for the actual time and materials expended by the Energy Services Department or its agents in performing the work.
(Added 9-25-06-Effective Upon Passage ; (Amended 1-28-19-Effectiv Upon Passage)
3. For the development on overhead service to a single lot, to lots within a minor subdivision, or to a small, single-phase commercial user, the developer, builder or customer shall provide and set the meter base, service mast, weather head and the wire from the meter base to the weather head, mast bracket, including an additional thirty-six inches (36") for the entrance service. After the building receives a satisfactory certification of the electrical inspection, the Town shall provide and install the service drop and shall attach the drop to the entrance service. The connection charge for such service shall be one thousand one hundred dollars ($1,100.00) provided the service line does not exceed one hundred twenty-five feet (125') in length. For any service line exceeding one hundred twenty-five feet (125') in length, the developer, builder or customer shall be billed and shall pay to the Town on a times and materials basis for the actual
Chapter 70 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 70
70-13
time and materials expended by the Energy Services Department or its agents in performing the work. The Town shall provide one (1) pole at no additional cost. For each additional pole required, the developer, builder or customer shall be billed and shall pay to the Town on a times and materials basis for the actual time and materials expended by the Energy Services Department or its agents in performing the work.
(Added 9-25-06-Effective Upon Passage ; Amended 1-28-19-Effectiv Upon Passage)
4. For the development of large commercial and industrial users on three-phase service, the developer, builder or customer shall be responsible for pouring the transformer pad and installing the conduit with pull rope from the pole to the pad. The developer, builder or customer shall pay for the transformer and shall install the service entrance (conduit and conductor) from the building to the transformer pad. The Town will set the transformer and complete the connection at the pole and at both sides of the transformer. The developer, builder, or customer shall pay for and provide a serviceable and appropriate transformer suitable for customer’s needs at the developer’s, builder’s or customer’s expense.
(Added 9-25-06-Effective Upon Passage ; Amended 1-28-19-Effectiv Upon Passage)
5. The connection charge for such service shall be three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500.00) provided the service line does not exceed one hundred twenty-five feet (125') in length. For any service line exceeding one hundred twenty-five feet (125') in length, the developer, builder or customer shall be billed and shall pay to the Town on a times and materials basis for the actual time and materials expended by the Energy Services Department or its agents in performing the work. The Town Shall provide one (1) pole at no additional cost. For each additional pole required, the developer, builder or customer shall be billed and shall pay to the Town on a times and materials basis for the actual time and materials expended by the Energy Services Department or its agents in performing the work.
(Amended (5) 1-28-19-Effectiv Upon Passage)
70-51 RATES FOR ELECTRICITY SUPPLIED BY THE TOWN
Rates charged, as of the effective date of this chapter, by the Town, for electricity supplied by the Town shall continue in effect until changed by the Council.
70-52 PAYMENT OF ELECTRIC BILLS
Electric bills shall be paid and processed in accordance with the provisions contained in Section 134-71 of this Code.
(Amended 2-23-98-Effective Upon Passage)
70-53 EXTENSION OF LINES TO PROPERTY
All applicants for extensions of electric lines to property not served by such electric lines as of October 1, 2006 shall furnish the necessary right-of-way for the building of the line from the connection with the present high-voltage system to the end of the new line. The Town will build the line at the customer's expense in accordance with Section 70-50 of the Town Code, and in
Chapter 70 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 70
70-14
accordance with its plans and specifications for the building of electric lines. All pole line hardware and other equipment shall be in accordance with standard practices of the Town.
(Amended 9-25-06-Effective Upon Passage)
70-54 ATTACHING SIGNS OR OTHER MATERIALS TO POLES OR SUPPORTS PROHIBITED
It shall be unlawful for any person to attach any material, signs or other devices to the poles or supports used by the Town in connection with the Town electrical system.
70-55 REFUSAL OF SERVICE
The Energy Services Department may refuse electrical service when he is notified by the Electrical Inspector that such work is being installed not in conformity with the National Electrical Code.
(Amended to “Energy Services Department” 1-28-19-Effective Upon Passage)
70-56 TYPE AND SIZE OF METER
The type and size of electrical meters to be furnished by the Town, when the Town furnishes electric service, shall be determined by the Town’s Director of Energy Services.
(Amended to “Town’s Director of Energy Services” 1-28-19-Effective Upon Passage)
70-57 LOCATION AND CONTROL OF METERS
All electrical meters shall be placed in such location in or on the building as designated by the Energy Services Department and shall at all times be under the exclusive management and control of the Energy Services Department.
(Amended to “Energy Services Department” 1-28-19-Effective Upon Passage)
70-58 UNAUTHORIZED INTERFERENCE OR BREAKING OF METER SEAL
It shall be unlawful for any person, except the duly authorized agent of the Energy Services Department, to break the seal placed on a electrical meter or to interfere with such electrical meter in any way.
(Amended to “Energy Services Department” 1-28-19-Effective Upon Passage)
70-59 CHARGE FOR REINSPECTION OF METER
A charge of as established by resolution, shall be added to the electric bill of each consumer who, by his request, has the Town test and inspect an electric meter, when said electric meter has
Chapter 70 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 70
70-15
been tested and inspected by the Town at the request of the consumer twice within a previous twelve-month period. Should, however, the electric meter be found to be inaccurate or malfunctioning, the charge will not be assessed.
(Amended 1-28-02-Effective Upon Passage ; Amended 1-26-04-Effective 3-1-04)
(Amended to add “twice” 1-28-19-Effective Upon Passage)
70-60 DETERMINATION OF CONSUMPTION WHEN METER FOUND STOPPED
At any time an electricity meter is found stopped at the reading time, the consumption for the period the meter was stopped will be the average for the past four (4) readings.
70-61 SALE OF ELECTRICITY RESTRICTED
No person shall send or offer for sale any electricity purchased from the Town or generated by other means within the Town.
70-62 LOCATION OF SERVICE ENTRANCE AND POINT OF ATTACHMENT OF SERVICE WIRES TO BUILDING
The location of the service entrance and the point at which service wires are to be attached to the building shall be determined by the Energy Services Department after consultation with the owners of the property and the electrician or electrical contractor making the installation.
(Amended to “Energy Services Department” 1-28-19-Effective Upon Passage)
70-63 MINIMUM ALLOWABLE AMPERAGE AND CHANGES IN LINE SERVICE FOR THE CONVENIENCE OF THE CUSTOMER
A. No service entrance shall be wired for less than one hundred (100) amperes unless the owner can show proof that a sixty-ampere service will be satisfactory for his total needs.
B. Electric line changes, including but not limited to service and amperage upgrades, made for the convenience and at the request of the customer, and not out of necessity, when and while allowed and subject to the approval of the Town, shall be installed, maintained, changed, relocated, replaced or repaired at the expense of the customer. The Town will perform or provide for such installation, maintenance, change, relocation, replacement or repair and bill the customer for the actual costs of such installation, maintenance, change, relocation, replacement or repair, including labor, vehicle usage and materials used.
(Added (B) 9-25-06-Effective Upon Passage ; Amended 1-28-19-Effective Upon Passage)
70-64 UNDERGROUND SERVICE CONNECTIONS
A. In an area served by overhead lines, when a customer desires that the service shall run underground from the pole to the building, the owner shall install the requisite service
Chapter 70 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 70
70-16
equipment. The Energy Services Department shall be consulted as to the advisability of such a service and shall specify the meter location and the pole from which the service shall be run. Either conductor suitable for underground installations in conduit or other cable approved for the purpose, installed in accordance with the utility's specifications, shall be used.
(Amended to “Energy Services Department” 1-28-19-Effective Upon Passage)
B. If at any time the Energy Services Department needs to replace a pole supporting an underground service connection, installed as provided in Subsection A, the customer shall be notified of the time, and he shall have his electricians on hand to take care of the service while pole replacement is being made.
(Amended to “Energy Services Department” 1-28-19-Effective Upon Passage)
70-65 AGGREGATION OF RETAIL CUSTOMER DEMAND RESPONSE
A. The Town of Front Royal, or its authorized designee, is the sole entity permitted to bid demand response on behalf of retail electric customers served by the Town's electric system directly into any Commission-approved independent system operator's or regional transmission organization's organized electric markets.
B. Retail electric customers served by the Town of Front Royal wishing to bid their demand response into a Commission-approved independent system operator's or regional transmission organization's organized electric markets may do so by participating in the program established by the Town of Front Royal or its authorized designee. Retail electric customers of the Town are not permitted to participate in the demand response program of any other entity without the express prior authorization of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia.
(Added Entire Section (A-B) 2-23-09-Effective Upon Passage)
70-66 ANCILLARY SERVICES PROVIDED BY DEMAND RESPONSE RESOURCES
A. The Town of Front Royal, Virginia, or its authorized designee, is the sole entity permitted to bid demand response on behalf of retail customers served by the Town's electric system directly into any Commission-approved independent system operator's or regional transmission organization's organized markets for energy imbalance, spinning reserves, supplemental reserves, reactive power and voltage control, or regulation and frequency response ancillary services (or its functional equivalent in the Commission-approved independent system operator's or regional organization's tariff).
B. Retail customers served by the Town of Front Royal's electric system wishing to bid their demand response into a Commission-approved independent system operator's or regional transmission organization's organized markets for energy imbalance, spinning reserves, supplemental reserves, reactive power and voltage control, or regulation and frequency response ancillary services (or its functional equivalent in the Commission-approved independent system operator's or regional organization's tariff) may do so by participating in the program established
Chapter 70 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 70
70-17
by the Town of Front Royal or its authorized designee. Retail customers are not permitted to participate in the demand response program of any other entity without the express prior authorization of the Town of Front Royal.
(Ord. 2-09 Added Entire Section (A & B) 2-23-09-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 72 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 72
72-1
Chapter 72
SPECIAL EVENTS
72-1 PURPOSE OF CHAPTER
72-2 PERMIT REQUIRED
72-3 PERMIT APPLICATION
72-4 PERMIT APPROVAL PROCESS
72-5 PERMIT EXCEPTIONS
72-6 PERMIT REVOCATION/SUSPENSION
72-7 PROVISIONS OF THIS CHAPTER
Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal 3-11-85 (formerly adopted 11-26-73. Section 72-8 added at time of adoption of Code. Entire Chapter was amended by Ord. 4-12 on 1-23-12 (formerly Entertainment Festival).; Revised/Reorganized Content and Added Subsections 1-14-19. Other amendments noted where applicable.
72-1 PURPOSE OF CHAPTER
A. The Town Council enacts this Chapter for the purpose of regulating the time, place and manner of special events and demonstrations within the Town and to accommodate competing demands for the public use of streets, sidewalks and public places. Regulation is necessary to preserve the public peace and safety, to permit free expression on issues of public concerns, to protect persons and property, to maintain acceptable conditions of traffic flow upon the streets and sidewalks and to prevent, control or eliminate any illegal, injurious or dangerous effects of this lawful activity.
B. The Town Council does not enact this Chapter or seek through its enforcement, to deny or abridge any person’s rights of assembly and free speech or the opportunity for communication of thought and discussion of public questions in public places.
(Amended 3-13-06-Effective Upon Passage ; Amended 8-27-07-Effective Upon Passage) (Amended 7-11-11-Effective Upon Passage ; Amended 1-23-12-Effective Upon Passage)
72-2 PERMIT REQUIRED
No person(s) or entity shall conduct any of the following special events or activities unless a permit has been granted by the Town:
1. Any gathering of individuals or groups for the purpose of listening to or participating in entertainment and/or commemorative festivals or parades with or without music and with or without the use of microphones and amplifiers conducted in open spaces not within an enclosed structure.
(Amended 1-14-10 – Removed the number of persons constituting a gathering-Effective Upon Passage)
2. Any planned gathering that results in the closing of any part of any public street or sidewalk to accommodate persons attending the gathering.
Chapter 72 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 72
72-2
3. Parades, processions, marathons, bicycle races and other events utilizing the sidewalks or vehicular travel portion of Town streets.
4. Motion picture, video or broadcast television productions, other than news media, involving the staging of vehicles, equipment, props or personnel on public property, including buildings, streets and sidewalks, or requiring the use of Town equipment or services.
72-3 PERMIT APPLICATION
A. An application for any permit required by this Chapter shall be made to the Town Manager or the Manager’s designee. The application shall be submitted not less than thirty (30) days nor more than six (6) months prior to the date of the proposed activity. An application for a major event (one involving the closure of more than three (3) blocks or which will last more than two (2) days) shall be filed not less than sixty (60) days nor more than six (6) months before the first date of the proposed activity. The application shall contain the following information, utilizing a form provided by the Town Manager.
If an application is submitted after the filing deadline set forth in Subsection A. the Town Manager or the Manager’s designee may waive the filing deadline requirement of Subsection A upon a demonstration by the applicant in writing, that circumstances giving rise to the proposed event did not reasonably allow the applicant to apply for a permit within the time prescribed.
The application shall contain the following information, utilizing a form provided by the Town Manager’s Office:
1. Description of the proposed activity;
2. Date, time and location/route of proposed activity and the anticipated number of participants and spectators;
3. Provisions for restroom facilities; security including but not limited to crowd, noise, parking, and traffic control; emergency services, fire protection, waste and refuse disposal, ADA compliance, and loud speaker placement. Plans for control shall meet all state and local requirements, ordinances and regulations.
(Amended 1-14-19-Effective Upon Passage)
4. Food and beverages to be sold or distributed. Plans for sale or distribution shall meet all state and local requirements, ordinances and regulations;
5. The designation of an individual or individuals who shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with the provisions of this Chapter and the conditions of the permit;
6. Proposed equipment, including but not limited to, vehicles, staging, bleachers, shelters, lighting and electricity requirements;
Chapter 72 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 72
72-3
7. If revenue is anticipated to be generated by the activity, the individuals or entity that will benefit therefrom, and a list of anticipated vendors. Vendors associated with special events permitted through this Chapter shall not be subject to Town business license requirements, however, the approved permit does not eliminate any requirement for any business license, permit(s) which may be prescribed by any other federal, state or local statues, ordinances, rules or regulations or compliances with any other federal, state or local statues, ordinances or rules or regulations;
8. If animals such as horses are to be included in the event, provision of waste collection shall be provided by the Event Coordinator.
9. If pets are to be excluded from the event and how this shall be communicated to attendees;
10. Such additional information or assurances as the Town Manager may require.
(Amended 1-4-19 – Removed reference to “temporary signage”-Effective Upon Passage)
B. A completed application shall be processed and either granted or denied within a reasonable time of receipt, but not more than thirty (30) days from the receipt of any application requiring sixty (60) days’ advance filing or fifteen (15) days from the receipt of any application requiring thirty (30) days’ advance filing. Such decision shall be in writing, setting forth the conditions of the permit, if granted, or the reasons for denial. The decision shall be provided to the applicant at the address stated in the application.
Prior to the final denial of any application, the applicant shall be apprised of the reason therefore and shall be able to appeal to the Town Council.
72-4 PERMIT APPROVAL PROCESS
A. The Town Manager or the Manager’s designee may impose, as conditions to granting a permit, such further requirements and restrictions as will reasonably protect the public health, safety, welfare, peace and order. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to the following:
1. Any proposed use of public property, right-of-way, or facilities will have a public benefit and not unreasonably interfere with the normal use of property, right-of-way or facility by the Town or the general public;
2. The proposed activity does not present a safety or health risk to participants, spectators or the public, or an environmental hazard;
3. The proposed activity is compatible with the surrounding area or neighborhood, in consideration of anticipated noise, traffic, crowd capacity and other identifiable factors;
Chapter 72 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 72
72-4
4. Should the proposed activity include music or entertainment, provision of such entertainment shall not exceed twelve (12) hours in any twenty-four (24) hour period from the first gathering of participants;
5. Race events shall be responsible to provide traffic cones along affected routes to keep participants within coned boundaries, place race marshals at the start/finish and at every intersection along the coned route;
6. The applicant has provided proof of liability insurance underwritten by insurers acceptable to the Town, indemnifying the Town against any perils, suits, claims and losses which may arise in connection with the proposed activity. Such coverage shall be in amounts consistent with a standard schedule approved by the Town Manager, based upon risks associated with each type of event, in consideration of anticipated attendance. The Certificate of Liability Insurance to cover the event shall name the Town as an “Additional Insurer”;
7. Should the proposed activity take place within the Historic Downtown area the following restrictions shall be met;
a. Full and/or partial closure of Main Street, shall be permitted two (2) times a month with a maximum of twelve (12) closures a calendar year; and,
b. Full closure of the Gazebo Parking Lot shall be permitted only when the full or partial closure of Main Street has been requested/permitted.
c. Partial closure of the Gazebo Parking Lot shall be permitted, but the East Main Street entrance to the Parking Lot will remain open to accommodate parking for the Visitor’s Center and local businesses. Bollards will be placed in the parking lot, by the Town, to allow such parking.
(Amended “a” and Added “b-c” 1-14-19-Effective Upon Passage)
d. Town or County sponsored events shall have priority in use of any downtown public property or right-of-way. For events not sponsored by the Town or County, applicants who have held a quality event in the previous year and remain in good standing with the Town shall have priority for the same time and location the following year. All other applications are processed in order of receipt.
8. The payment of a reasonable fee for the use of Town utilities in connection with the proposed activity shall be as follows:
Service Fee
Electric Service $25.00 per day
Water Service Current metered rate
(Amended 1-14-19 – Removed all reference to other service fees-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 72 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 72
72-5
9. By acceptance of the issuance of the permit, the applicant provides the Town Manager, the Manager’s designee, and/or duly constituted law enforcement officers full access to the event for the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of this Chapter.
10. Event Coordinators shall make every effort to promote the following and communicate to all organizers, vendors, entertainers or participants other than attendees the following suggested actions:
a. Event organizer, vendor, entertainer and participant parking should be in locations other than the Peyton Street Parking Lot. The Event Coordinators shall seek permission from off-site property owners for participant parking;
b. Participants in events associated with road closures shall confine exhibits, equipment and supplies to road area only. Blocking of sidewalks is prohibited;
i. Event Coordinators shall provide first right of refusal for one space adjacent to each merchants’ business up to six (6) weeks in advance of the event. Event Coordinators are encouraged to provide reduced rates for this space;
ii. Event Coordinators shall place vendor booths on alternating sides of the road or shall alternate side of the road each year for successive events; and,
iii. Pedestrian access paths shall be provided to the sidewalk at a rate of one ten (10) foot space every forty (40) feet of vendor booths. All sidewalk access points shall be free from vendor booths.
11. Any permit granted under the provisions of this Chapter shall remain in effect for the duration of the proposed activity.
(Amended 1-14-19 – Removed reference to “conforming to Zoning Ordinance”-Effective Upon Passage)
72-5 PERMIT EXCEPTIONS
This Chapter shall not apply to:
1. Gatherings on residentially-zoned property for the celebration of birthdays, anniversaries or family reunions;
2. Sporting events on any publicly-owned property;
3. Gatherings or events on Warren County or school-owned property with the permission of the County or School Board; or,
4. Gatherings or events on Randolph Macon Academy or school-owned property.
Chapter 72 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 72
72-6
72-6 PERMIT REVOCATIONS/SUSPENSION
The Town Manager or the Manager’s designee shall be authorized to revoke or suspend any permit previously granted:
1. For violation of any provisions of this Chapter or of any condition of the permit;
2. For any material misrepresentation, intentional or otherwise, made in connection with the application;
3. When weather conditions render the subject activity unsafe; and,
4. When otherwise required in the interest of public health, safety and welfare or environmental considerations.
In the event a permit is revoked or suspended, the permittee shall immediately discontinue, or cause to be discontinued, the activity for which the permit was granted, but shall thereafter, be entitled to a hearing concerning the revocation or suspension decision as provided by Subsection 72-3.B.
72-7 PROVISIONS OF THIS CHAPTER
A. The Town Manger may designate one (1) or more officers or employees of the Town to administer the provisions of this Chapter.
B. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Chapter shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor.
(Amended 3-13-06-Effective Upon Passage ; Amended 8-27-07-Effective Upon Passage) (Amended 1-23-12-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended 1-14-19 – Removed Subsection “PERMIT PROCESSING FEE”-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 73 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 73
73-1
Chapter 73
FARMERS’ MARKET
Sections:
73-1 DEFINITIONS
73-2 EXEMPTION CERTIFICAT REQUIRED
73-3 COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING REQUIREMENTS
73-4 HEALTH STANDARDS
73-5 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal 9-9-85 as Ord. No. 8-85. Amendments noted where applicable.
73-1 DEFINITIONS
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
DOMESTIC PRODUCTS - Processed, cooked, dried canned or preserved foodstuffs and other agricultural products meant for human consumption, to include but not to be limited to jellies, pickles, herbs, smoked meats, baked goods, candies, canned foods and other prepared edibles.
FARMERS' MARKET - A collection of two (2) or more vendors, selling farm or domestic products, garden produce or nursery products, ornamental or otherwise, which have been grown or produced by the vendor offering the same for sale, in a open-air setting or with temporary or partially enclosed structures.
73-2 EXEMPTION CERTIFICATE REQUIRED
Every vendor who is engaged in the sale of products at a farmers' market shall sign an affidavit and obtain an exemption certificate from the Town Treasurer as provided in Town Code Section 98-61F. Said exemption certificate shall be displayed in lieu of a town business license.
73-3 COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING REQUIREMENTS
All farmers' markets shall be conducted in accordance with the requirements of special permits issued under the Town Zoning Ordinance. No special permit shall be issued, and if issued shall be revoked, if any of the vendors at the farmers' market site are engaged in the sale of goods, wares or services other than farm or domestic products, garden produce or nursery products, ornamental or otherwise.
Chapter 73 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 73
73-2
73-4 HEALTH STANDARDS
All farmers' market sites shall be swept clean, hosed down and/or picked clean daily. No foodstuff or debris shall be permitted to remain upon the site overnight. Foodstuffs must be displayed under sanitary conditions in compliance with all Health Department and/or Virginia Department of Agriculture standards. Failure to so comply will be cause for revocation of the special permit to conduct the farmers' market.
73-5 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1, Article II, Penalties, of the Code of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia.
Chapter 75 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 75
75-1
Chapter 75
FINANCE AND TAXATION
Sections:
DEPOSIT OF TOWN FUNDS
75-1 DESIGNATION OF DEPOSITORIES
BANK FRANCHISE TAX
75-2 DEFINITIONS
75-3 IMPOSITION OF TAX
75-4 DELIVERY OF RETURNS
75-5 ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION
75-6 TIME OF PAYMENT
75-7 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
EXEMPTION FOR CERTIFIED POLLUTION CONTROL EQUIPMENT, FACILITIES AND PROPERTY
75-8 DEFINITIONS
75-9 GRANT OF EXEMPTION
TAX RELIEF FOR THE ELDERLY OR DISABLED
75-10 DEFINITIONS
75-11 APPLICABILITY
75-12 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT; RULES AND REGULATIONS
75-13 CONDITIONS FOR GRANT OF EXEMPTION OR DEFERRAL
75-14 CLAIMING OF EXEMPTION OR DEFERRAL
75-15 AMOUNT OF EXEMPTION OR DEFERRAL
75-16 CHANGES IN STATUS
75-17 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
POSTPONEMENT OF PAYMENT FOR LOCAL IMPROVEMENT ASSESSMENTS
75-17.1 ELIGIBILITY; DEFERRAL; REQUIREMENTS
SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS FOR AGRICULTURAL, HORTICULTURAL, FORREST OR OPEN SPACE REAL ESTATE
75-18 TAXATION TO BE IN ACCORDANCE WITH STATE LAW & THIS ARTICLE
75-19 APPLICATIONS
75-20 DETERMINATION OF ELIGIBILITY AND VALUE
75-21 RECORDING OF PROPERTY VALUES
75-22 ROLLBACK TAX AND INTEREST
RESTAURANT MEAL EXCISE TAX
75-23 DEFINITIONS
75-24 LEVY
75-25 COLLECTION OF TAX BY SELLER
75-26 EXEMPTIONS; LIMITS ON APPLICATION
Chapter 75 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 75
75-2
75-27 GRATUITIES AND SERVICE CHARGES
75-28 REPORT OF TAXES COLLECTED
75-29 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF ORDINANCE
75-30 COLLECTIONS TO BE HELD IN TRUST
75-31 COMMISSION FOR COLLECTION
75-32 RESERVED
MOTEL EXCISE TAX FOR TRANSIENTS
75-33 DEFINITIONS
75-34 TAX LEVIED; RATE
75-35 PAYMENT AND COLLECTION
75-36 COLLECTIONS TO BE HELD IN TRUST
75-37 COMMISSION FOR COLLECTION
75-38 REGISTRATION; REPORTS AND REMITTANCES
75-39 PENALTIES AND INTEREST
75-40 RECORDS
75-41 REPORT REQUIRED FOR OPERATORS DISPOSING OF BUSINESS
75-42 EXEMPTIONS
75-43 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
DELINQUENT REAL ESTATE AND PERSONAL PROPERTY TAX LISTS
75-44 MAILING OF BILLS; DUE DATES, PENALTY AND INTEREST; IMPOSITION OF THE TAXES AND RATES
75-45 PREPARATION OF DELINQUENT TAX LISTS
75-46 CREDIT TO TREASURER
75-47 PUBLICATION
75-48 RESUBMISSION
SEPARATE CLASSIFICATIONS FOR PERSONAL PROPERTY TAXATION
75-49 VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT AND RESCUE SQUAD MEMBERS MOTOR VEHICLES
JAIL EXPENSE TAX
75-50 COURT COSTS FOR JAIL EXPENSES
ENTERPRISE ZONE
75-51 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
75-52 BOUNDARIES
75-53 DEFINITIONS
75-54 QUALIFICATION FOR BENEFITS
75-55 LOCAL ENTERPRISE ZONE INCENTIVES
75-56 APPLICATION
75-57 ADMINISTRATOR
TECHNOLOGY ZONE
75-58 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
Chapter 75 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 75
75-3
75-59 "TECHNOLOGY BUSINESSES" DEFINED
75-60 QUALIFICATION
75-61 ZONE BENEFITS
75-62 ZONES
75-63 MASTER AGREEMENT
DOWNTOWN SERVICE DISTRICT
75-64 DOWNTOWN SERVICE DISTRICT CREATED
75-65 ADDITIONAL TAX IMPOSED
75-66 DOWNTOWN SERVICE DISTRICT DEFINED
75-67 PURPOSES OF TAX AND FACILITIES AND SERVICES PROPOSED
75-68 PROPOSED PLAN FOR PROVIDING FACILITIES AND SERVICES
75-69 BENEFITS WHICH CAN BE EXPECTED
75-70 OTHER POWERS AND DUTIES
75-71 SEVERABILITY
75-72 PARTIAL YEAR TRANSITION
75-73 ELECTRIC CONSUMERS TAX
75-74 TOURISM ZONE INCENTIVES
75-75 HISTORIC DISTRICT INCENTIVES FOR REHABILITATION
Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal 3-11-85. (Chapter 8 of the 1965 Code including adoptions/amendments 1-22-73; 5-28-73;6-25-73; 7-28-75; 7-23-79; 10-8-79; 5-26-80;7-13-81; 4-25-83). Ord. No. 1-86 Added 75-26.1 “Commission for Collection of Taxes” 1-13-86. Ord. No. 4-86 repealed 75-32(M) 5-12-86. Ord. No 6-88 Added 75-48 “Production of Information – Sales and Use Tax Info.” 7-11-88. Ord. No.11-2000 repealed 75-26.1 “Commission for Collection of Taxes” 6-26-00. Other amendments noted where applicable.
DEPOSIT OF TOWN FUNDS
75-1 DESIGNATION OF DEPOSITORIES
The funds of the Town shall be deposited in a “qualified public depository”, which shall be any national banking association, federal savings and loan association or federal savings bank and any bank, trust company or savings and loan association organized under Virginia law which has an office and accepts deposits in the Town of Front Royal, provided that said ‘qualified public depository” is insured by the FDIC or the FSLIC or otherwise complies with the requirements of the Virginia Security for Public Deposits Act, Virginia Code Section 2.1-359, et seq.
All accounts for the deposit of Town funds shall be established by the Town Treasurer with the concurrence of the Town Council.
(Ord. No. 1-88 Amended 2-22-88-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 75 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 75
75-4
BANK FRANCHISE TAX
(Adopted 5-26-80)
75-2 BANK FRANCHISE TAX DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BANK - Any incorporated bank, banking association or trust company organized by or under the authority of the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia and any bank or banking association organized by or under the authority of the laws of the United States, doing business or having an office in the Commonwealth of Virginia or having a charter which designates any place within the Commonwealth of Virginia as the place of its principal office, whether such bank or banking association is authorized to transact business as a trust company or not, and any joint-stock land bank or any other bank organized by or under the authority of the laws of the United State upon which the Commonwealth of Virginia is authorized to impose a tax. The word "bank" as used in this Article shall exclude all corporations organized under the laws of other states and doing business in the Commonwealth of Virginia; it shall exclude corporations organized not as banks under the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia; and it shall exclude all natural persons and partnerships.
75-3 BANK FRANCHISE TAX - IMPOSITION OF TAX
A. Levy with reference to bank located in Town. Pursuant to Section 58-485.010, Code of Virginia, there is hereby imposed a tax of eighty cents ($.80) on each one hundred dollars ($100.) of the taxable value of the shares of stock in any bank located in the Town; provided, however, that if any such bank has any branch or branches located outside the corporate limits of the Town, the tax imposed by this section shall be only upon such proportion of the taxable value of the net capital of such bank as the total deposits of the bank, minus deposits through any branch or branches located outside the corporate limits of the Town, bear to the total deposits of the bank as the end of the preceding year.
B. Levy with reference to branches located in Town. Pursuant to Section 58-485.012, Code of Virginia, there is hereby imposed a tax of eighty cents ($.80) per one hundred dollars ($100.) on such proportion of the taxable value of the net capital of any bank having a branch located in the Town, the principal office of which is located outside the corporate limits of the Town, as the deposits through the branch or branches so located in the Town bear to the total deposits of the bank as of the end of the preceding year.
75-4 BANK FRANCHISE TAX - DELIVERY OF RETURNS
Each bank in the Town, and each bank located outside the Town which has, as of the beginning of any tax year, a branch located in the town, shall make all returns and schedules to the Town Treasurer, as required by Section 58-485.013, Code of Virginia, on or before March 1 of each year.
Chapter 75 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 75
75-5
75-5 BANK FRANCHISE TAX - ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION
The assessment and collection of the taxes imposed under the provisions of this Article shall be in conformity with the applicable sections of Chapter 10.01 of Title 58, Code of Virginia.
75-6 BANK FRANCHISE TAX - TIME OF PAYMENT
The taxes imposed under this Article shall be paid to the Town on or before June 1 of each tax year.
75-7 BANK FRANCHISE TAX - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Any bank which shall fail or neglect to comply with any provision of this Article shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.), which fine shall be recovered upon motion, after five (5) days notice in the Circuit Court of this locality. The motion shall be in the name of the commonwealth and shall be presented by the attorney for the commonwealth of this locality.
EXEMPTION FOR CERTIFIED POLLUTION CONTROL EQUIPMENT, FACILITIES AND PROPERTY (Adopted 6-25-73)
75-8 DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this Article, the following words or phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
CERTIFIED POLLUTION CONTROL EQUIPMENT, FACILITIES AND PROPERTY - Any property, including real or personal property, equipment, facilities or devices, used primarily for the purpose of abating or preventing pollution of the atmosphere or waters of the commonwealth, and which the state certifying authority having jurisdiction with respect to such property has certified to the Department of Taxation as having been constructed, reconstructed, erected or acquired in conformity with the state program or requirements for abatement or control of water or atmospheric pollution or contamination.
STATE CERTIFYING AUTHORITY - The State Water Control Board for water pollution and the State Air Pollution Control Board for air pollution, including any interstate agency authorized to act in place of a certifying authority of the state.
75-9 GRANT OF EXEMPTION
Certified pollution control equipment, facilities, and property, as defined in this Article, are hereby declared to be a separate class of property and shall constitute a classification for local taxation separate from any other such classification of real or personal property, and such property shall be exempt from local taxation.
Chapter 75 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 75
75-6
TAX RELIEF FOR THE ELDERLY OR DISABLED (Adopted 1-22-73)
75-10 TAX RELIEF DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
AFFIDAVIT - The real estate tax exemption or deferral affidavit.
ASSESSMENT - The monetary lien placed by the Town of Front Royal upon real property for the construction, improving, replacement, enlargement or use of sidewalks, alleys, sanitary and storm sewers, curbs and gutters, water lines, lighting fixtures and any other permanent amenities constituting improvements.
(Ord. No. 11-04 Added 10-11-04-04-Effective 11-1-04)
DEFERRAL - Deferral from the Town of Front Royal real estate tax and/or assessments for land improvements according to the provisions of this Article.
(Ord. No. 11-04 Added 10-11-04-04-Effective 11-1-04)
DWELLING - The full-time residence of the person or persons claiming exemption or deferral. The word "dwelling" shall include manufactured homes as defined in Section 36-85.3 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended.
FAIR MARKET VALUE - When applied to real estate, the assessed value, as shown on the records of the Town of Front Royal; when applied to personal property, the actual value as shown on the records of the Town of Front Royal.
GROSS COMBINED INCOME - For the purposes of the Article gross combined income shall include all income from all sources excluding life insurance benefits or receipts from borrowing or other debt.
(Ord. No. 11-04 Added 10-11-04-04-Effective 11-1-04)
PROPERTY - Real property or manufactured homes as defined in Section 36-85.3 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended.
RELATIVE - Any relation by blood or marriage.
TAXABLE YEAR - The calendar year, from January 1 until December 31, for which exemption or deferral is claimed.
TOWN - The Town of Front Royal, Virginia.
TOWN COUNCIL - The Town Council of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia.
Chapter 75 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 75
75-7
TOWN TREASURER - The Town Treasurer of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia or any of his duly authorized deputies or agents.
(Ord. No. 8-04 Amended Entire Section 6-14-04-Effective 7-1-04)
75-11 TAX RELIEF - APPLICABILITY
An exemption of real estate tax or an assessment deferral and/or real estate tax deferral for a dwelling and the land on which it is situated, up to a maximum of one (1) acre, is provided for qualified property owners who are not less than sixty-five (65) years of age or who are under sixty-five (65) years of age and are permanently and totally disabled and who are eligible according to the terms of this Article. Persons qualifying for exemption or deferral are deemed to be bearing an extraordinary real estate tax burden in relation to their income and financial worth.
(Ord. No. 8-04 Amended 6-14-04-Effective 7-1-04; Ord. No. 11-04 Amended 10-11-04-04-Effective 11-1-04)
75-12 TAX RELIEF – ADMINISTRATION/ENFORCEMENT; RULES/REGULATIONS
The exemption or deferral shall be administered by the Town Treasurer according to the provisions of this Article. The Town Treasurer is hereby authorized and empowered to create an affidavit form and adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations in conformance with the provisions of this Article, including the requirement of answers under oath, as may be reasonably necessary to determine qualifications for exemption or deferral as specified by this Article. The Town Treasurer may require the production of certified tax returns and appraisal reports to establish income or financial worth.
(Ord. No. 8-04 Amended 6-14-04-Effective 7-1-04; Ord. No. 11-04 Amended 10-11-04-04-Effective 11-1-04)
75-13 TAX RELIEF - CONDITIONS FOR GRANT OF EXEMPTION OR DEFERRAL
A. Exemption shall be granted to persons subject to the following provisions:
1. The title of the property for which exemption is claimed is held or partially held, on January 1 of the taxable year, by the person or persons claiming exemption and is occupied as the sole dwelling of the person or persons claiming exemption.
2. The person occupying the dwelling and owning title or partial title thereto is sixty-five (65) years or older on December 31 of the year immediately preceding the taxable year or less than sixty-five (65) years of age and has been certified as permanently and totally disabled.
3. The total gross combined income received from all sources during the preceding calendar year by the owners of the dwelling who use it as their principal residence and the owners' relatives who live in the dwelling shall not exceed the Federal living wage for one (1) individual (the Federal living wage is calculated as 130% of the U.S. Department of Health & Human Services Poverty Guideline). Any amount up to six thousand five hundred dollars ($6,500.00) of income of each relative who is not the spouse of an owner living in the
Chapter 75 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 75
75-8
dwelling is excluded from the total combined income calculation. There shall also be an exclusion of up to seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) of income for an owner who is permanently disabled.
4. The net combined financial worth of the owner(s) as of December 31 of the year immediately preceding the taxable year shall be determined by the Town Treasurer to be an amount not to exceed one hundred thousand ($100,000.00). The net financial worth shall include the fair market value of all assets, including equitable interests of the owner(s) and the spouse of the owner(s), and shall exclude the fair market value of the dwelling and the land upon which it is situated, up to a maximum of one (1) acre, for which the exemption is claimed.
B. Deferral shall be granted to persons subject to the following provisions:
1. The title of the property for which deferral is claimed is held or partially held, on January 1 of the taxable year, by the person or persons claiming deferral and is occupied as the sole dwelling of the person or persons claiming deferral.
2. The person occupying the dwelling and owning title or partial title thereto is sixty-five (65) years of age or older on December 31 of the year immediately preceding the taxable year or less than sixty-five (65) years of age and has been certified as permanently and totally disabled.
3. The total gross combined income received from all sources during the preceding calendar year by the owners of the dwelling who use it as their principal residence and the owner's relatives who live in the dwelling shall not be less than the Federal living wage for one (1) individual nor exceed thirty thousand ($30,000.00). Any amount up to six thousand five hundred dollars ($6,500.00) of income of each relative who is not the spouse of an owner living in the dwelling is excluded from the total combined income calculation. There shall also be an exclusion of up to seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) of income for an owner who is permanently disabled.
4. The net combined financial worth of the owner(s) as of December 31 of the year immediately preceding the taxable year shall be determined by the Town Treasurer to be an amount not to exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,00.00). The net financial worth shall include the fair market value of all assets, including equitable interests of the owner(s) and the spouse of the owner(s), and shall exclude the fair market value of the dwelling and the land upon which it is situated, up to a maximum of one (1) acre, for which the deferral is claimed.
(Ord. No. 8-87 Amended “C” & “D”10-12-87-Effective 1-1-88)
(Ord. No 7-88 Amended “C-E” 9-12-88-Effective 1-1-89)
(Ord. No. 11-92 Amended “C” 11-9-92-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 12-92 Repealed “F”11-9-92-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 8-04 Amended “A-E”6-14-04-Effective 7-1-04)
(Ord. No. 11-04 Amended “A&B” and Repealed “C-E” 10-11-04-04-Effective 11-1-04)
Chapter 75 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 75
75-9
75-14 TAX RELIEF - CLAIMING OF EXEMPTION OR DEFERRAL
A. Annually, between January 1 and September 1 of the taxable year, the person or persons claiming an exemption or deferral must file a real estate tax exemption or real estate tax and/or assessment deferral affidavit with the Town Treasurer.
B. The applicant claiming an exemption or a deferral shall file the affidavit with the Town Treasurer on forms supplied by the Town of Front Royal setting forth the names of all related persons occupying the real estate in question, the names of all related persons occupying the real estate in question and stating that the total combined net worth, including equitable interests and the combined income from all sources, of the owner(s) and said relatives. If the applicant is under sixty-five (65) years of age, the affidavit shall have attached thereto a certification by the Veterans Administration or the Railroad Retirement Board or, if such person is not eligible for certification by any of these agencies, a sworn affidavit by two (2) medical doctors licensed to practice medicine in the Commonwealth of Virginia to the effect that the person is permanently and totally disabled, as defined in the Code of Virginia, Section 58.1-3217. The affidavit of at least one (1) of the doctors shall be based upon a physical examination of the person by said doctor. The affidavit of one (1) of the other doctors may be based upon medical information contained in the records of the Civil Service Commission which is relevant to the standards for determining permanent and total disability, as defined in the Code of Virginia, Section 58.1-3217. The Town Treasurer shall also make such further inquiry of persons seeking exemption or deferral, requiring answers under oath, as may be reasonably necessary to determine qualifications as specified herein, including qualification as permanently and totally disabled. The Town Treasurer may further require the production of certified tax returns to establish the income or financial worth of any applicant or tax exemption or deferral. Exemptions or deferrals may be granted for any year following the date that the qualifying individual reaches the age of sixty-five (65) years or for any year following the date that permanent and total disability occurs.
C. If, after audit and investigation, the Town Treasurer determines that the person or persons are qualified for exemption or deferral, he shall deduct the amount of the exemption or deferral from the claimant's real estate tax liability and/or assessment liability for the taxable year in question.
D. The fact that persons who are otherwise qualified for tax exemption or deferral are residing in hospitals, nursing homes, convalescent homes or other facilities for physical or mental care for extended periods of time shall not be construed to mean that the property for which the tax exemption or deferral is sought ceases to be the sole dwelling of such persons during such extended periods of absence, so long as such property is not used by or leased to others for consideration.
E. A qualified applicant who has filed a real estate tax exemption or real estate tax and/or assessment deferral affidavit, as provided herein, and been found qualified by the Town Treasurer, shall be permitted to file with the Town Treasurer, for a period not more than two (2) years following the filing of said affidavit, an annual certification that the information contained in the last preceding affidavit has not changed, provided that no changes in income, net worth
Chapter 75 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 75
75-10
and any of the other conditions contained in this Article has occurred which affect the applicant's eligibility for exemption. The annual certifications will then be accepted by the Town Treasurer in lieu of the annual affidavit.
(Ord. No. 7-88 Amended Entire Section 9-12-88-Effective 1-1-89)
(Ord. No. 8-04 Amended Entire Section 6-14-04-Effective 7-1-04)
(Ord. No. 11-04 Amended Entire Section 10-11-04-Effective 11-1-04)
75-15 TAX RELIEF - AMOUNT OF EXEMPTION OR DEFERRAL
An applicant meeting the requirements of this Article shall be entitled to an exemption or deferral of all real estate tax and assessment liability, as applicable, on the dwelling and the land on which is it situated, up to a maximum of one (1) acre.
The qualifying taxpayer may choose to defer a lesser amount than allowed above.
The accumulated amount of deferred real estate taxes for the period, including but not exceeding the five (5) immediately preceding years, shall be paid without penalty and without interest to the Treasurer of the Town of Front Royal by the vendor upon the sale or gift of the property, or from the estate of the descendant within one (1) year after the death of the last owner thereof who qualified for tax deferral under the provisions of this Article. Such deferred real estate taxes shall constitute a lien upon said property as if the taxes had been assessed without regard to the deferral permitted by this Article, provided that such liens shall, to the extent that they exceed in the aggregate ten per centum (10%) of the price for which such property may be sold, be inferior to all other liens of record, and further provided that payment of the accumulated amount of real estate taxes for the period, including but not exceeding the five (5) immediately preceding years, shall serve to satisfy real estate tax liens, but not assessment liens, for all tax years. A record of the taxes and assessments deferred under the provisions of this Article shall be retained in the office of the Treasurer of the Town of Front Royal.
(Ord. No. 8-87 Amended “A” 10-12-87-Effective 1-1-88;Ord. No 7-88 Amended 9-12-88-Effective 1-1-89)
(Ord. No. 14-93 Amended “C” 10-11-92-Effective 1-1-94;Ord. No. 8-04 Amended 6-14-04-Effective 7-1-04)
(Ord. No. 11-04 Amended/Repealed “A-C”10-11-04-Effective 11-1-04)
75-16 TAX RELIEF - CHANGES IN STATUS
Changes in respect to income, financial worth, ownership of the property or other factors occurring during the taxable year for which the affidavit is filed and having the effect of exceeding or violating the limitations and conditions provided in this Article shall nullify any relief of real estate or assessment exemption or deferral for the then current taxable year and the taxable year immediately following; provided, however, that the change in ownership to a spouse, when such changes results solely from the death of the qualifying individual, shall result in a pro-rated exemption or deferral for the then current taxable year. Such pro-rated portions shall be determined by multiplying the amount of the exemption or deferral by a fraction, wherein the number of complete months of the year such property was properly eligible for exemption or deferral is the numerator and the number twelve (12) is a denominator.
(Ord. No 7-88 Amended 9-12-88-Effective 1-1-89;Ord. No. 8-04 Amended 6-14-04-Effective 7-1-04)
(Ord. No. 11-04 Amended 10-11-04-Effective 11-1-04)
Chapter 75 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 75
75-11
75-17 TAX RELIEF - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Any person or persons falsely claiming a deferral shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.) for each offense.
POSTPONEMENT OF PAYMENT FOR LOCAL IMPROVEMENT ASSESSMENTS
(Adopted 11-9-92)
75-17.1 ELIGIBILITY; DEFERRAL; REQUIREMENTS
A. Any elderly or permanently and totally disabled property owner who meets the eligibility requirements for age and/or disability and/or income and financial worth, as more particularly set forth in Sections 75-11 and 75-13A through E of the Front Royal Town Code pertaining to tax relief for the elderly or disabled, and who otherwise is eligible under the requirements of state law set forth in Article 2 and Article 2.1 of Chapter 32 of the Code of Virginia (Sections 58.1-3210 through 58.1-3219.3), as amended), may apply to the Town Treasurer for a postponement in the payments of any assessment for local improvements made against the property owner by the Town of Front Royal in accordance with its authority under Code of Virginia, Section 15.1-239 et seq.
B. Application for postponement shall be made in accordance with the provisions established under Sections 75-12 and 75-14B through E of the Front Royal Town Code pertaining to tax relief for the elderly and disabled. No application shall be permitted until such time as the lien of assessment is due and owing to the town. Application may be made at any time during the calendar year.
C. Payment of assessment.
1. Upon approval of the application by the Town Treasurer, payment of the assessment in question shall be postponed until one (1) of the following occurs:
a. Sale, gift or transfer of the real property subject to the assessment.
b. Death of the last eligible owner.
c. Loss of eligibility under this Article by the property owner.
2. In accordance with the requirements of the Code of Virginia Section 58.1-3219.1, the postponed assessment payment shall be subject to statutory interest computed at the rate established pursuant to Section 6621 of the United States Internal Revenue Code. All accumulated assessment payments and interest shall be paid immediately on sale, gift or transfer of the property, or shall be due and payable immediately upon loss of eligibility by the property owner or shall be paid within one (1) year of the date of death of the last qualifying owner, as applicable.
(Ord. No. 13-93 Amended(C)(2) 10-11-93-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 75 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 75
75-12
D. Property owners qualifying for postponement under this Article shall be required to report changes in status as provided in Town Code Section 75-16.
E. Violators of this Article shall be punished as provided in Town Code Section 75-17.
SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS FOR AGRICULTURAL , HORTICULTURAL, FORREST OR OPEN SPACE REAL ESTATE (Adopted 10-8-79)
75-18 SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS - TAXATION TO BE IN ACCORDANCE WITH STATE LAW AND THIS ARTICLE
The Town finds that the preservation of real estate devoted to agricultural, horticultural, forest and open space uses within its boundaries is in the public interest and, having heretofore adopted a land use plan, hereby ordains that such real estate shall be taxed in accordance with the provisions of Article 1.1 of Chapter 15 of Title 58, Code of Virginia, as amended, and of this Article.
75-19 SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS - APPLICATIONS
A. The owner of any real estate meeting the criteria set forth in Sections 58-769.5 and 58-769.7(b) Code of Virginia, may, on or before November 1 of each year, apply to the Town Treasurer for the classification, assessment and taxation of such property for the next succeeding tax year on the basis of its use, under the procedures set forth in Section 58-769.9, Code of Virginia. Such application shall be on forms provided by the State Department of Taxation and supplied by the Town Treasurer and shall include such additional schedules, photographs and drawings as may be required by the Town Treasurer. An application fee of ten dollars ($10.) shall accompany each application.
B. A separate application shall be filed for each parcel on the land book, provided that, when applications are submitted by one (1) owner for contiguous parcels, only one (1) application fee shall be required.
75-20 SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS - DETERMINATION OF ELIGIBILITY& VALUE
A. Promptly upon receipt of any application, the Town Treasurer shall determine whether the subject property meets the criteria for taxation under this Article. If the Town Treasurer determines that the subject property does meet such criteria, he shall determine the value of such property for its qualifying use, as well as the fair market value.
B. In determining whether the subject property meets the criteria for agricultural use or horticultural use, the Town Treasurer may request an opinion from the Commissioner of Agriculture and Commerce, in determining whether the subject property meets the criteria for forest use, he may request an opinion from the Director of the Department of Conservation and Economic Development; and in determining whether the subject property meets the criteria for open space use, he may request an opinion from the Director of the Commission for Outdoor Recreation. Upon the refusal of the Commissioner of Agriculture and Conservation and
Chapter 75 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 75
75-13
Economic Development or the Director of the Commission on Outdoor Recreation to issue an opinion or in the event of an unfavorable opinion which does not comport with standards set forth by the respective director, the party aggrieved may seek relief from any court of record wherein the real estate in question is located. If the court finds in his favor, it may issue an order, which shall serve in lieu of an opinion for the purposes of this Article.
75-21 SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS - RECORDING OF PROPERTY VALUES
The use value and fair market value of any qualifying property shall be placed on the land book before delivery to the Treasurer, and the tax for the next succeeding tax year shall be extended from the use value.
75-22 SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS - ROLLBACK TAX AND INTEREST
A. There is hereby imposed a rollback tax and interest thereon in such amounts as may be determined under Section 58-769.10, Code of Virginia, upon any property as to which the use changes to a nonqualifying use.
B. The owner of any real estate liable for rollback taxes shall report to the Treasurer, on forms to be prescribed, any change in the use of such property to nonqualifying use and shall pay the rollback then due. On failure to so report any pay within sixty (60) days following such change in use, such owner shall be liable for an additional penalty equal to ten percent (10%) of the amount of the rollback tax and interest, which penalty shall be collected as a part of the tax. In addition to such penalty, there is hereby imposed interest of one-half percent (1/2%) of the amount of the rollback tax, interest and penalty, for each month or fraction thereof during which the failure continues.
C. Any person making a material misstatement of fact in any application filed pursuant hereto shall be liable for all taxes, in such amounts and at such times as if such property had been assessed on the basis of fair market value as applied to other real estate in the taxing jurisdiction, together with interest and penalties thereon, and he shall be further assessed with an additional penalty of one hundred percent (100%) of such unpaid taxes.
D. The provisions of Title 58, Code of Virginia, applicable to local levies and real estate assessment and taxation shall be applicable to assessments and taxation hereunder mutatis mutandis, including, without limitation, provisions relating to tax liens and the correction of erroneous assessments, and for such purposes, the rollback taxes shall be considered to be deferred real estate taxes.
RESTAURANT MEALS EXCISE TAX
(Adopted 8-26-85) (Amended in Entirety 6-26-00)
75-23 RESTAURANT MEALS EXCISE TAX DEFINITIONS
The following words and phrases, when used in this ordinance shall have, for the purpose of this ordinance, the following respective meanings except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Chapter 75 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 75
75-14
CATER – The furnishing of food, beverages, or both on the premises of another, for compensation.
COLLECTOR – The Director of Finance or designee.
DIRECTOR – The Director of Finance and any duly designated deputies, assistants, inspector or other employees.
FOOD - All food, beverage or both, including alcoholic beverages, purchased in or from a food establishment, whether prepared in such food establishment or not, and whether consumed on the premises or not, and without regard to the manner, time or place of service.
FOOD ESTABLISHMENT – Any place in or from which food or food products are prepared, packaged, sold or distributed in the Town, including but not limited to, any restaurant, dining room, grill, coffee shop, cafeteria, café, snack bar, lunch counter, convenience store, movie theater, delicatessen, confectionery, bakery, eating house, eatery, drugstore, ice cream/yogurt shops, lunch wagon or truck, pushcart or other mobile facility from which food is sold, public or private property outside of and contiguous to a building or structure operated as a food establishment at which food or food products are sold for immediate consumption.
MEAL – Meal shall mean any food or drink offered or held out for sale by a food establishment for the purpose of being consumed by any person to satisfy the appetite and is ready for immediate consumption. All such food and beverage, unless otherwise specifically exempted or excluded herein shall be included, whether intended to be consumed on the seller’s premises or elsewhere, whether designated as breakfast, lunch, snack, dinner, supper or by some other name, and without regard to the manner, time or place of service.
(Ord. No. 4-86 Added “Meal” 5-12-86-Effective 7-1-86)
75-24 RESTAURANT MEALS EXCISE TAX - LEVY
There is hereby imposed and levied by the Town on each person a tax at the rate of (4%) on the amount paid for meals purchased from any food establishment, whether prepared in such food establishment, whether prepared in such food establishment or not, and whether consumed on the premises or not.
(Ord. No. 15-91 Amended 6-10-91-Effective 7-1-91;Ord. No. 11-93 Amended 6-14-93-Effective 7-1-93)
(Ord. No. 13-99 Amended 6-28-99-Effective 7-1-99;Ord. No. 11-00 Amended 6-26-00-Effective 7-1-00)
75-25 RESTAURANT MEALS EXCISE TAX - COLLECTION OF TAX BY SELLER
Every person receiving any payment for food with respect to which a tax is levied hereunder shall collect and remit the amount of the tax imposed by this ordinance from the person on whom the same is levied for from the person paying for such food at the time of payment for such food is made: provided, however, no blind person operating a vending stand or other business enterprise under the jurisdiction of the Department for the Visually Handicapped and located on
Chapter 75 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 75
75-15
property acquired and used by the United States for any military or naval purpose shall be required to collect or remit such taxes.
75-26 RESTAURANT MEALS EXCISE TAX - EXEMPTIONS; LIMITS ON APPLICATION
A. The tax imposed under this ordinance shall not be levied on the following items when served exclusively for off-premises consumption:
1. Factory prepackaged candy, gum, nuts and other items of essentially the same nature.
2. Factory prepackaged donuts, ice cream, crackers, nabs, chips, cookies and items of essentially the same nature.
3. Food sold in bulk. For the purpose of this provision, a bulk sale shall mean the sale of any item that would exceed the normal, customary and usual portion sold for on premises consumption (e.g. a whole cake, a gallon of ice cream); a bulk sale shall not include any food or beverage that is catered or delivered by a food establishment for off-premises consumption.
4. Alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages sold in factory sealed containers.
5. Any food or food product purchased with food coupons issued by the United States Department of Agriculture under the Food Stamp Program or drafts issued through the Virginia Special Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infants, and Children.
6. Any food or food product purchased for home consumption as defined in the federal Food Stamp Act of 1977, U.S.C. Section 2012, as amended, except hot food or hot food products ready for immediate consumption. For the purposes of administering the tax levied hereunder, the following items whether or not purchased for immediate consumption are excluded from the said definition of food in the Federal Food Stamp Act: sandwiches, salad bar items sold from a salad bar, prepackaged single-serving salads consisting primarily of an assortment of vegetables and non-factory sealed beverages. This subsection shall not affect provisions set forth in subparagraphs (C) (3), (4) and (5) herein below.
B. A grocery store, supermarket or convenience store shall not be subject to the tax except for any portion or section therein designated as a delicatessen or designated for the sale of prepared food and beverages.
C. The tax imposed hereunder shall not be levied on the following purchases of food and beverages:
1. Food and beverages furnished by food establishments to employees as part of their compensation when no charge is made to the employee.
Chapter 75 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 75
75-16
2. Food and beverages sold by day care centers, public or private elementary or secondary schools or food sold by any college or university to its students or employees.
3. Food and beverages for use or consumption and which are paid directly by the Commonwealth, any political subdivision of the Commonwealth or the United States.
4. Food and beverages furnished by a hospital, medical clinic, convalescent home, nursing home, home for the aged, infirm, handicapped, battered women, narcotic addicts of alcoholics, or other extended care facility to patients or residents thereof.
5. Food and beverages furnished by a public or private non-profit charitable organization or establishment or a private establishment that contracts with the appropriate agency of the Commonwealth to offer meals at concession prices to elderly, infirm, blind, handicapped or needy persons in their homes or at central locations.
6. Food and beverages sold on an occasional basis, [not exceeding twelve (12) times per calendar year], by a non-profit educational, charitable or benevolent organization, church, or religious body as a fundraising activity, the gross proceeds of which are to be used by such organization exclusively for non-profit educational, charitable, benevolent or religious purposes.
7. Food and beverages sold through vending machines.
75-27 RESTAURANT MEALS EXCISE TAX - GRATUITIES & SERVICE CHARGES
Where a purchaser provides a gratuity for an employee of a seller, and the amount of the gratuity is wholly in the discretion of the purchaser, the gratuity is not subject to the tax imposed by this ordinance, whether paid in cash to the employee or added to the bill and charged to the purchaser’s account, provided in the latter case, the full amount of the gratuity is turned over to the employee by the seller.
An amount or percent, whether designated as a gratuity, tip or service charge, that is added to the price of the food and beverages by the seller, and required to be paid by the purchaser, as part of the selling price of the food and beverages and is subject to the tax imposed by this ordinance.
75-28 RESTAURANT MEALS EXCISE TAX - REPORT OF TAXES COLLECTED
A. It shall be the duty of every person required by this ordinance to pay to the Town the taxes imposed by this ordinance to make a report thereof not later than the twentieth (20th) day of the month following the collection of such taxes from customers setting forth such information as the Director of Finance may prescribe and require, including all purchases taxable under this ordinance, the amount charged the purchaser for each such purchase, the date thereof, the taxes collected thereon and the amount of tax required to be collected by this ordinance. Such records shall be kept and preserved for a period of five (5) years. The Director of Finance or his duly authorized agents shall have the power to examine such records at reasonable times and without
Chapter 75 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 75
75-17
unreasonable interference with the business of such person, for the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this ordinance, and to make transcripts of all or any parts thereof.
B. Payment of the taxes so collected shall be remitted with the monthly report. Any person required by this ordinance to pay to the Town the taxes imposed by this ordinance who shall fail or refuse to make the monthly report within the time required or to remit the tax in the amount required, as provided by this Article, shall be required to pay a penalty in the amount of ten percent (10%) of the total tax due. In the event the remittance remains delinquent for more than one (1) month, the penalty shall increase five percent (5%) per month, for each month thereafter until paid, up to a maximum of twenty-five percent (25%) of the delinquent taxes collected but not remitted.
(Ord. No. 14-05 Amended/Added (B) 6-27-05-Effective 7-1-05)
75-29 RESTAURANT MEALS EXCISE TAX - PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF ORDINANCE
A. Any person willfully failing or refusing to file a return as required under this ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor except that any person failing to file such a return shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor if the amount of tax lawfully assessed in connection with the return is $1,000.00 or less. Any person violating or failing to comply with any other provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.
B. Except as provided in subsection (A) above, any corporate or partnership officer, as defined in Virginia Code Section 58.1-3906, or any other person required to collect, account for, or pay over the meals tax imposed under this ordinance, who willfully fails to collect or truthfully account for or pay over such tax, or who willfully evades or attempts to evade such tax or payment thereof, shall, in addition to any other penalties imposed by law, be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.
C. Each violation of or failure to comply with this ordinance shall constitute a separate offense. Conviction of any such violation shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection or remittance of the tax as provided in this ordinance.
75-30 RESTAURANT MEALS EXCISE TAX - COLLECTIONS TO BE HELD IN TRUST
All amounts collected as taxes under this Article shall be held in trust by the operator collecting them, until remitted to the Town as provided by this Article.
75-31 RESTAURANT MEALS EXCISE TAX - COMMISSION FOR COLLECTION
Every operator who collects, accounts for and remits taxes imposed herein to the Town of Front Royal shall receive a commission at the rate of four percent (4%) of the amount of tax due and accounted for by the operator. Said commission shall be paid in the form of a deduction from the tax so remitted. No commission shall be received by any operator in the event that the
Chapter 75 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 75
75-18
amount due from said operator, or any part thereof, is delinquent under the provisions of this Article.
75-32 (RESERVED) (Ord. No. 11-2000 Repealed 6-26-00-Effective 7-1-00)
MOTEL EXCISE TAX FOR TRANSIENTS
(Adopted 8-12-85)
75-33 MOTEL EXCISE TAX - DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this Article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
MOTEL - Any public or private hotel, inn, apartment, hotel, hostelry, tourist home or house, bed and breakfast home or house, motel, rooming house, travel campground or other lodging place within the Town of Front Royal with the capacity for four (4) or more transient lodgers at any one (1) time, offering lodging for compensation to any transient as defined herein.
(Ord. No. 11-95 Added “travel campground” 9-11-95-Effective Upon Passage)
OPERATOR - Includes any person, partnership, corporate entity, those acting in a representative capacity thereof and their successors and assigns, who run, manage, own or otherwise control a motel in the Town of Front Royal.
ROOM RENTAL - The total charge made by any motel for lodging and/or space furnished to any transient.
TOWN - The Town of Front Royal, Virginia.
TRANSIENT - Any person who for any period of less than thirty (30) consecutive days, whether at his own expense or at the expense of another, obtains lodging or the use of any space in a motel.
TREASURER - The Treasurer of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia, or his designated agent.
75-34 MOTEL EXCISE TAX - TAX LEVIED; RATE
There is hereby levied and imposed an excise tax of six percent (6%) of the total amount paid for motel room rental upon any transient in the Town of Front Royal. All fractional amounts of five-tenths cents ($0.005) or more shall be rounded up to the next cent.
(Ord. No. 9-90 Amended 6-29-90-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 5-95 Amended 6-12-95-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 75 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 75
75-19
75-35 MOTEL EXCISE TAX - PAYMENT AND COLLECTION
In every case the tax shall be paid by the transient and collected by the operator at the time the room rental comes due and payable, whether payment is to be made in cash or on credit by means of a credit card or otherwise. The operator shall add the tax to the amount charged for the room rental, and the operator shall pay the taxes collected to the town as provided in this Article.
75-36 MOTEL EXCISE TAX - COLLECTIONS TO BE HELD IN TRUST
All amounts collected as taxes under this Article shall be deemed to be held in trust by the operator collecting them, until remitted to the Town as provided by this Article.
75-37 MOTEL EXCISE TAX - COMMISSION FOR COLLECTION
Every operator who collects, accounts for and remits taxes imposed herein to the Town of Front Royal shall receive a commission at the rate of four percent (4%) of the amount of tax due and accounted for by the operator. Said commission shall be paid in the form of a deduction from the tax so remitted. No commission shall be received by any operator in the event that the amount due from said operator, or any part thereof, is delinquent under the provisions of this Article.
75-38 MOTEL EXCISE TAX - REGISTRATION; REPORTS AND REMITTANCES
A. The Treasurer may require all prospective operators of motels licensed to do business in the Town to register for collection of the tax imposed by this Article.
B. Every operator shall make a report for each calendar month, showing the amount of charges for room rentals, and the amount of tax required to be collected. The monthly reports shall be made on forms prescribed by the Treasurer and shall be signed by the operator. They shall be delivered to the Treasurer on or before the 20th day of the calendar month following the month being reported. Each report shall be accompanied by a remittance in the amount of the tax due, made payable to the Town of Front Royal, Virginia.
75-39 MOTEL EXCISE TAX - PENALTIES AND INTEREST
Any operator who shall fail or refuse to make the monthly report within the time required or to remit the tax in the amount required, as provided by this Article, shall be required to pay a penalty in the amount of ten percent (10%) of the total tax due. In addition, the operator shall pay interest on all taxes imposed under this Article which are past due thirty (30) days or more, at the rate of twelve percent (12%) per annum. All penalties and interest shall be payable to the Town of Front Royal, and are in addition to any criminal penalties imposed under this Article.
75-40 MOTEL EXCISE TAX - RECORDS
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and remittance of the taxes imposed herein to keep and preserve for a period of two (2) years records showing all purchases taxable
Chapter 75 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 75
75-20
under this Article, including the room rental charged to the transient, the date thereof, and the motel excise taxes for transients collected thereon. The Treasurer shall have the power to examine such records at reasonable times without interference by the operator for the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this Article, and to make copies of all and any parts thereof.
75-41 MOTEL EXCISE TAX - REPORT REQUIRED FOR OPERATORS DISPOSING OF BUSINESS
In the event that any motel in the Town shall cease to operate, be sold or otherwise be disposed of, then notwithstanding the regular monthly report and payment requirements as set forth herein, that operator shall be required to file a report of the motel excise taxes for transients due, and make payment of those taxes on the date that the operator ceases operations or otherwise disposes of the business.
75-42 MOTEL EXCISE TAX - EXEMPTIONS
The following shall not be subject to the motel excise tax for transients imposed under this Article:
A. Transient occupancy taxes imposed under Virginia Code Sections 58.1-3819 and 58.1-3820.
B. Tips paid by the transient.
C. Meals or other services not related to the rental of rooms or space furnished by the motel.
D. Lodging furnished by public or private schools to their students or employees.
E. Lodging and/or space purchased by federal, state or local government agencies, or by the officers or employees thereof while on official business.
F. Lodging furnished by a hospital, nursing clinic, convalescent home, nursing home, home for the aged, infirm or handicapped or other extended care facility to patients or residents thereof.
G. Lodging furnished by a nonprofit charitable or civic organization to the elderly, infirm, handicapped or needy persons.
H. Sales taxes on lodging and/or space furnished to transients.
I. Lodging furnished by day-care or other child care facilities for children under the care of such facility.
J. Any other lodging and/or space furnished to transients which is exempted from taxation under the provisions of Virginia Code Section 58.1-3840.
Chapter 75 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 75
75-21
75-43 MOTEL EXCISE TAX - VIOLATIONS
Any operator who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of the Article, or who shall file a false or misleading monthly report hereunder, shall be guilty of a Class 3 Misdemeanor and fined an amount of not more than $500.00.
DELINQUENT REAL ESTATE AND PERSONAL PROPERTY TAX LISTS
(Adopted 11-10-86) (Amended in Entirety 9-25-89 and 9-14-98)
75-44 REAL AND PERSONAL PROPERTY TAXES AND RATES
A. The Town Treasurer, personally or through the Director of Finance, shall, after the annual tax assessments are made available to the Town, but not later than twenty (20) days prior to the due date of the taxes each year, send or cause to be sent by United States mail to each taxpayer assessed with real and personal property taxes and levies for that year amounting to five dollars ($5.00) or more as shown by an assessment book in the Office of the Director of Finance, a bill or bills setting forth the amount due. If the said Director or Treasurer intends to seek collection of a tax in an amount less than five dollars ($5.00), he shall send or cause to be sent to the taxpayer a bill as set forth above. Notwithstanding any of the foregoing, failure of the said Director or Treasurer to send or of the taxpayer to receive a bill shall not affect the taxpayer’s obligation to pay the full amount of said taxes by the due date.
(Amended (A) 11-23-09-Effective 1-1-10 ; Amended (A) 11-10-14-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended 6-27-16-Effective Upon Passage)
B. On and after January 1, 2010, tax payments for real estate and personal property shall become due and payable to the Town of Front Royal on a semiannual basis, with one-half of the annual assessment of such taxes due on or before June 5th of each year after January 1, 2010, and the additional one-half of such taxes due on or before December 5th of each such year. A penalty of 10% of the tax past due or ten dollars ($10.00), whichever is greater, shall be added to any tax not paid by the aforesaid due date, provided that in no case may the penalty exceed the amount of the tax assessed. In addition, interest shall be added to any delinquent taxes and penalties at the rate of 10% per year, with interest commencing on the first day of the month following the date on which any such taxes became due and payable.
(Amended (B) 11-23-09-Effective 1-1-10 ; Amended (B) 5-29-12-Effective Upon Passage)
C. There is hereby imposed upon all real property within the limits of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia, an effective tax rate in the amount of thirteen ($0.13) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of assessed valuation and a tax upon all tangible personal property located within the limits of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia, in the amount of sixty-four cents ($0.64) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of assessed valuation. The tax on all personal property shall include all Machinery and Tools. The tax on all real property shall include all mobile homes.
(Ord. No. 3-10 Added (C) 3-29-10-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 6-11 Amended (C) 3-28-11-Effective Upon Passage ; Amended – 3-24-14-Effective Upon Passage)
(Tax Rate reaffirmed by Council 3-30-15)
(Amended to add Machinery, Tools, Mobile Homes 6-8-15-Eff Upon Passage ; Tax Rate reaffirmed 4-25-16)
(Amended Tax Rate 3-27-17 to 13.5 to be designated to PD – Eff 7-1-17 ; Tax Rate reaffirmed 4-9-18)
Chapter 75 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 75
75-22
(Amended to Increase Tax Rate to Effective Tax Rate Due to Reassessment 4-8-19-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended to Decrease Tax Rate by .005 4.27.19-Effective Upon Passage)
75-45 PREPARATION OF DELINQUENT TAX LISTS
A. The Town Treasurer shall determine and submit to the Town Council on an annual basis: (1) a list of real estate which is delinquent for the nonpayment of taxes; (2) a separate list of such taxes assessed on tangible personal property, machinery and tools and merchant's capital and other subjects of local taxation, other than real estate, as he is unable to collect; (3) a list of the uncollected taxes amounting to less than five dollars each for which no bills were sent under Town Code Section 75-44; and (4) a list of uncollected balances of previously billed taxes amounting to less than five dollars each as to which the treasurer has determined that the costs of collecting such balances would exceed the amount recoverable, provided that the treasurer shall not include on such list any balance with respect to which he has reason to believe that the taxpayer has purposely paid less than the amount due and owing.
B. The lists shall conform to the facts as they existed on June 30 of the year they are submitted to the Town Council. The lists shall be prepared not later than August 1 of each year and shall be submitted to the Town Council at its first regular meeting following completion by the Treasurer. The lists shall reflect the names and addresses of the property owners and/or delinquent taxpayers on the date of assessment and shall state the amounts of delinquent taxes due.
C. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, no tax or levy which has been discharged or otherwise rendered legally uncollectible as to a taxpayer liable upon it in a proceeding under the United States Bankruptcy Code (Title 11 of the United States Code) shall be considered delinquent with respect to that taxpayer on and after the date such obligation is discharged or otherwise rendered legally uncollectible, and the treasurer shall not include any such discharged or uncollectible obligation in any list required to be prepared pursuant to this section. Any such discharged or uncollectible obligation shall be stricken from the books of the treasurer as of the date the obligation is discharged or otherwise rendered uncollectible, and the treasurer thereafter shall have no further duty to collect such tax or levy.
D. TREASURER'S OATH.
1. At the foot of the Delinquent Real Estate Tax List, there shall appear the following oath, to which the Treasurer shall subscribe:
"I, _______, Treasurer of the Town of Front Royal, do swear (or affirm) that the foregoing list is, I verily believe, correct and just, and that I have not received full payment of the taxes for which the real estate therein mentioned is returned delinquent, although I have used due diligence to collect such taxes".
2. At the foot of the delinquent Personal Property Tax List, there shall appear the following oath, to which the Treasurer shall subscribe:
Chapter 75 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 75
75-23
"I, _______, Treasurer of the Town of Front Royal, do swear (or affirm) that the foregoing list is, I verily believe, correct and just, and that I have not received full payment of the taxes assessed on tangible personal property, machinery and tools and merchant's capital or other subjects of local taxation, other than real estate, for which the property or measure of taxation therein mentioned is returned delinquent, although I have used due diligence to collect such taxes."
3. At the foot of each list authorized by Section 75-45 (A) (3) and (4), concerning unbilled and uncollected taxes less than five dollars in the aggregate, there shall appear the following oath, to which the Treasurer shall subscribe:
"I, _______, Treasurer of the Town of Front Royal, do swear that the foregoing list is, I verily believe, correct and just, that I have not received full payment of the taxes although I have used due diligence to collect such taxes."
Compliance with the Section 75-44 and 75-45 shall entitle the Treasurer to execute the oaths for the lists concerning unbilled and uncollected taxes less of than five dollars in the aggregate.
75-46 DELINQUENT TAX LISTS - CREDIT TO TREASURER
The treasurer shall be given credit for all taxes shown on the lists authorized in Section 75-45 (A) (3) and (4) and for obligations discharged in bankruptcy.
75-47 DELINQUENT TAX LISTS - PUBLICATION
The Town Council may cause each list in Section 75-45(A)(1) and (2), or such parts thereof as deemed advisable by the Town Treasurer, to be published once in a town newspaper, but if there be no newspaper published in the Town, then in some newspaper having general circulation therein. Further, the lists shall be posted at the front door of the County Courthouse for a period of thirty (30) days.
75-48 DELINQUENT TAX LISTS - RESUBMISSION
After the first meeting of the Town Council held after June 30 of each year, the Town Treasurer shall again submit the previous year's Delinquent Real Estate Tax List and the previous year's Delinquent Personal Property Tax List to the Council, setting forth the changes which have occurred since June 30 of the previous year.
SEPARATE CLASSIFICATIONS FOR PERSONAL PROPERTY TAXATION
(Adopted 6-11-90)
Chapter 75 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 75
75-24
75-49 VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPT. RESCUE SQUAD MEMBERS' MOTOR VEHICLES
A. Motor vehicles which are owned by active members of a Volunteer Fire Department or Volunteer Rescue Squad which receives annual financial support from the County of Warren, Virginia, are declared to be separate classes of property for personal property taxation by the Town of Front Royal.
B. One (1) motor vehicle per active Volunteer Fire Department or Rescue Squad member which is owned and regularly used by said member to respond to calls or to perform other official duties for the Rescue Squad or Fire Department shall be eligible for a special personal property classification under this section. In January of each year, Volunteer Rescue Squad and Volunteer Fire Department members may apply to the Front Royal Town Treasurer for a separate personal property classification of the applicant's motor vehicle. Acceptance for separate property classification as shall be determined by the Warren County Commissioner of Revenue in accordance with Warren County Code Section 7-1.1 shall then likewise operate to constitute acceptance under the provisions of this section.
JAIL EXPENSE TAX (Adopted 9-24-90)
75-50 COURT COSTS FOR JAIL EXPENSES
In addition to all other fees and costs prescribed by law, there shall be a fee of two dollars ($2.) taxed as costs in each criminal or traffic case brought in all district courts and the Circuit Court of Warren County. Said assessment shall be collected by the Clerk of the court in which the action is filed and remitted to the Treasurer for the Town of Front Royal. Said funds shall be held by the Treasurer and shall be subject to disbursements by the Town Council to defray expenses paid by the Town of Front Royal associated with the jail, courthouse or court-related facilities. (Ord. No. 1-91 Amended 11-26-90-Effective Upon Passage)
ENTERPRISE ZONE (Adopted 11-8-93)
75-51 ENTERPRISE ZONE - STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
The Virginia Enterprise Zone Act, Section 59.1-270 et seq of the Code of Virginia, as amended, authorizes the Town of Front Royal to make written application to the Department of Housing and Community Development for the declaration of an area within the corporate limits as an enterprise zone. It is the purpose of the Enterprise Zone Act, and of this Article, to stimulate business and industrial growth within the area so designated as the Front Royal Enterprise Zone by means of state income tax credits, state sales tax exemptions and local incentives more particularly set forth herein.
75-52 ENTERPRISE ZONE - BOUNDARIES
Chapter 75 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 75
75-25
The Front Royal Enterprise Zone has been deactivated by the Commonwealth of Virginia.
(Amended to Deactivate 6-8-15-Effective Upon Passage)
75-53 ENTERPRISE ZONE - DEFINITIONS
As used in this Article, the following definitions shall apply:
BUSINESS FIRM - Any business entity authorized to do business in the Commonwealth of Virginia and subject to the state income tax on net corporate rate income (Section 58.1-400 et seq.), or a public service company subject to a franchise or license tax on gross receipts, or a bank, mutual savings bank, savings and loan association or a partnership or sole proprietorship. A "business firm" includes partnerships and small business corporations electing to be taxed under Subchapter S of the Federal Internal Revenue Code, and which are not subject to state income taxes as partnerships or corporations, the taxable income of which is passed through to and taxed on individual partners and shareholders. However, a "business firm" does not include organizations which are exempt from state income tax on all income except unrelated business taxable income as defined in the Federal Internal Revenue Code, Section 512, nor does it include homeowners' associations as defined in the Federal Internal Revenue Code, Section 528.
ENTERPRISE ZONE - An area declared by the Governor of the Commonwealth of Virginia to be eligible for the benefits accruing under the Virginia Enterprise Zone Act (Section 59.1-270 et seq.).
EQUIVALENT EMPLOYMENT OR JOB - Forty (40) hours per week of an hourly week (or the salaried equivalent). A single "equivalent job" may be represented by one (1) employed individual, or by multiple employed individuals whose aggregate hours of employment (or salaried equivalent) equal forty (40) hours per week.
EXISTING BUSINESS - Any business operating or located within the Enterprise Zone on January 1, 1994, or within the corporate limits of the Town of Front Royal prior to its location within the Enterprise Zone. A business which retains the same ownership and which was operating or located within the Enterprise Zone on January 1, 1994, or within the corporate limits of the Town of Front Royal prior to location within the Enterprise Zone shall not be defined as a new business, even if the name or entity (corporate or otherwise) has changed.
NEW BUSINESS - A business operating within the Enterprise Zone after January 1, 1994, having had no prior business located within the corporate limits of the Town of Front Royal.
TOWN - The Town of Front Royal, Virginia.
75-54 ENTERPRISE ZONE - QUALIFICATION FOR BENEFITS
Chapter 75 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 75
75-26
A. In order to qualify for local incentives pertaining to business and occupational licenses under this Article, a business firm must be located within the boundaries of the Front Royal Enterprise Zone and must provide the following: (Ord. No. 7-98 Amended 6-8-98-Effective Upon Passage)
1. A new business must provide at least five (5) full-time equivalent jobs. Said employment shall represent new jobs, not positions previously established within the town's corporate limits.
2. An existing business must increase its net full-time equivalent jobs by ten percent (10%) of its existing work force or by five (5) full-time equivalent jobs, whichever is greater.
B. In order to qualify for local incentives pertaining to building permit fees, water and sewer tap fees and rehabilitated real estate tax exemptions, in addition to the new employment requirements set forth in Subsection A, business firms must meet the following additional requirement:
1. A minimum investment of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) in the rehabilitation, renovation, new construction or other building or site improvements in the Enterprise Zone.
C. In order to qualify for local incentives pertaining to utility line extensions, in addition to the new employment requirements set forth in Section A, business firms must meet the following additional requirement:
1. A minimum investment of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.) in the rehabilitation, renovation, new construction or other building or site improvements in the Enterprise Zone.
D. Any business firm located in the Enterprise Zone shall be entitled to receive such additional local incentives as may be conferred by the town.
(Ord. No. 15-93 Added Entire Section/Repealed “F” 11-8-93-Effective Upon Passage)
75-55 ENTERPRISE ZONE - LOCAL ENTERPRISE ZONE INCENTIVES
A. Rebate Credit of business and occupational license fees. Qualified business firms shall be entitled to a credit of business and occupational license fees for a five-year period while the business firm is located within the Front Royal Enterprise Zone, upon application showing compliance with the qualifying requirements. During the first year following application approval, the business firm shall be entitled to an eighty-percent credit of its business and occupational license fees. During the second year, the business firm shall be entitled to a sixty-percent credit. During the third year, the business firm shall be entitled to a forty-percent credit. During the fourth year, the business firm shall be entitled to a twenty-percent credit, and, during the fifth year, the business firm shall be entitled to a twenty-percent credit.
(Ord. No. 7-98 Amended 6-8-98-Effective Upon Passage)
B. Water and sewer tap fee incentives. Qualified business firms located within the Enterprise Zone shall be entitled to a waiver of fifty percent (50%) of all municipal water and sewer tap fees
Chapter 75 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 75
75-27
applied for during the first five (5) years that the business firm is located within the Enterprise Zone.
C. Water and sewer line extension benefits. Qualified business firms located within the Enterprise Zone shall be entitled without assessment or cost to water and sewer line extensions to the property line of the business firm during the entire time that said business firm is located within the Enterprise Zone, so long as the Enterprise Zone remains in effect. The property line shall refer only to a lot or parcel recorded in the land records on or before October 1, 1993. The town shall retain discretion as to the location of all water and sewer line extensions, and the number and size of all line extensions provided hereby.
D. Rehabilitated real estate tax exemption. Qualified business firms located within the Enterprise Zone shall receive a rehabilitated real estate tax exemption on the increase in assessed property value resulting from rehabilitation of commercial and industrial real estate and facilities, which qualify under the provisions of Virginia Code Section 58.1-3220, as amended. The rehabilitated real estate tax exemption shall be extended for a five-year period, upon application showing compliance with the qualifying requirements, on the following basis:
1. An eighty-percent exemption the first year.
2. A sixty-percent exemption the second year.
3. A forty-percent exemption the third year.
4. A twenty-percent exemption the fourth year.
5. A twenty-percent exemption the fifth year.
E. All license fees, building permit fees and water and sewer tap fees shall initially be paid in full by the business firm. The business firm shall then apply for an exemption or rebate hereunder, and, upon approval of the application, the business firm will receive a credit on its prepaid fees or taxes.
(Ord. No. 7-98 Amended/Change “E to F” 6-8-98-Effective Upon Passage)
75-56 ENTERPRISE ZONE - APPLICATION
Any business firm seeking to receive local Enterprise Zone incentives shall make application to the Enterprise Zone Administrator on forms provided by the Front Royal/Warren County Industrial Development Authority. The Enterprise Zone Administrator may require the business firm to provide documentation establishing that said business firm has met the requirements for the receipt of local Enterprise Zone incentives. Failure to provide requested documentation shall result in a denial of the business firm's application for local incentives. Upon approval of any business firm application for local Enterprise Zone incentives, the Enterprise Zone Administrator shall submit a written report to the Finance Director for the Town of Front Royal indicating the name and address of the qualifying business firm and the local Enterprise Zone incentives for which it is qualified. The Enterprise Zone Administrator may require the business firm to
Chapter 75 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 75
75-28
provide additional documentation from time to time to assure that said business firm retains the requisite qualifications for the receipt of local Enterprise Zone incentives. In the event that any business firm shall fail to maintain the requisite qualifications for the receipt of local Enterprise Zone incentives, the Enterprise Zone Administrator shall inform the business firm, in writing, that it is no longer qualified for the receipt of local incentives and shall send a copy of said notice to the Town Finance Director.
75-57 ENTERPRISE ZONE ADMINISTRATOR
The Enterprise Zone Administrator shall be the Executive Director of the Front Royal/Warren County Industrial Development Authority.
TECHNOLOGY ZONE
(Adopted 3-8-99)
75-58 TECHNOLOGY ZONE - STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
It is the purpose of the technology zone to foster high quality job creation and investment by technology related businesses, pursuant to the authority granted by Section 58.1-3850 of the Code of Virginia.
75-59 "TECHNOLOGY BUSINESSES" DEFINED
A. Except as provided in subsection B below, a "technology business" includes any business:
1. That derives, in whole or part, gross receipts from a computer software, hardware, or telecommunication sales, leases, licenses; or (2) services for which computers or telecommunications are used to provide sales, leases, licensing, or services directly to the customer. Such businesses include but are not limited to, the following:
*Electronic information operations and providers.
*Internet service providers.
*Software design and development.
*Computer and peripherals sales or assembly.
*Content developers.
*Internet-based sales and service.
*Hardware design, manufacture, assembly, and development.
*Telecommunications based video service providers.
*Outbound or inbound call centers.
*Telecommunications equipment manufacturing, assembly, or service.
B. "Technology business" does not include regulated utilities, telephone companies, or cable companies, or cable companies, nor does it include a business that merely uses computers or telecommunications in its internal operations.
75-60 TECHNOLOGY ZONE - QUALIFICATION
Chapter 75 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 75
75-29
A. Determination of eligibility shall be made by public board action by the Industrial Development Authority of the Town of Front Royal and County of Warren trading as the Economic Development Authority, the administrator of the program. Upon approval, the Economic Development Authority shall submit a written report to the Front Royal Director of Finance of such determination and include therein the name and address of the qualifying business, a description of the activities meeting the definitions of Section 75-59 of this Code, and the incentives for which the business is qualified.
B. In order to qualify for local incentives pertaining to business and occupational licenses under this Article, a business must be located within the boundaries of a Front Royal Technology Zone and conform to the zoning therein.
C. A business located in a Technology Zone must also make and maintain the following minimum job and capital investments, after November 1, 2009, within 12 months of Technology Zone applications.
Minimum Job Creation: 2 full-time jobs paying a minimum of 2.0 times the minimum wage plus health and benefit plan valued equal to at least 10 percent of the base wage.
Minimum Investment: $3,000 for Downtown Front Royal Zone; $10,000 (improvements, equipment, or machinery) Inventory does not count.
(Ord. No. 13-09 Amended 12-21-09-Effective Upon Passage)
D. A business must be, at the time of application, and remain, during eligibility, current in all local, state, and federal taxes and appropriate user fees. The business must certify the same to the Economic Development Authority at the time of application and annually thereafter.
75-61 TECHNOLOGY ZONE BENEFITS
A. Permit Fee Grants.
The Economic Development Authority shall provide cash reimbursements for the following local permits and fees up to a maximum cumulative value of $500 for qualified Technology Zone businesses provided the business's application for reimbursement is filed with the Economic Development Authority within the first 12 months of operation within the Zone.
Technology Zone Application fees. (EDA)
*Building, Plumbing, Electrical & Mechanical Permit Fees. (Warren County)
*Zoning Permit Fees. (Front Royal)
*Subdivision Application Fees. (Front Royal)
B. Business Professional and Occupational License Taxes.
Provided they continue to remain qualified, qualified businesses shall be entitled to a credit of business and occupational license fees for that portion of their business classified as a "technology business" for a ten-year period while the business is located within a Front Royal
Chapter 75 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 75
75-30
Technology Zone as follows: During the first five years following application approval, the business shall be entitled to a one hundred-percent credit of its business and occupational license fees. During the sixth year, the business firms shall be entitled to an eighty-percent credit. During the seventh year, the business firm shall be entitled to a sixty-percent credit. During the eighth year, the business firm shall be entitled to a forty-percent credit. During the ninth and tenth years, the business firm shall be entitled to a twenty-percent credit.
C. Cash Grants.
Qualified business may be eligible for annual cash grants to be determined on a case by case basis by the County of Warren and Town of Front Royal during the negotiation process based on job creation and investment. A minimum of 10 full-time jobs paying at least 2.0 times the minimum wage, and 3 full-time jobs paying at least 2.0 times the minimum wage in the Downtown Front Royal Zone, and benefits as noted above and a minimum investment of $10,000 and $3,000 for Downtown Front Royal Zone businesses shall be required to be eligible for cash grants.
(Ord. No. 13-09 Amended 12-21-09-Effective Upon Passage)
D. All Town benefits are limited to that portion of the business enterprise created and maintained for and qualified under this Technology Zone program.
75-62 TECHNOLOGY ZONE - ZONES
Three (3) distinct Technology Zones are included herein as follows:
(Ord. No. 09-04 Amended 7-12-04-Effective Upon Passage)
Happy Creek Zone: This zone generally focuses on the Happy Creek Industrial Park and the northern portion of the Human Life International Site. These lands are zone I-2, Industrial Employment District. Technology-based businesses with a manufacturing component are encouraged to locate in this zone, consistent with the provisions of the I-2 Industrial Employment District.
Downtown Front Royal Zone: This zone is located within the downtown area of Front Royal and is generally coincident with the C-2 Downtown Business District. Technology-based businesses with a service orientation are encouraged to locate in this zone. Ground level storefronts are strongly encouraged to be used for retail activities. Due to the inherent size and capacity limitations of a downtown technology business, qualification thresholds for total investment requirement will be reduced from $10,000 to $3,000, and total full-time jobs created at two times the minimum wage rate will be reduced from 10 to 3 in this Zone.
(Ord. No. 13-09 Amended 12-21-09-Effective Upon Passage)
Avtex Area Zone: This zone is located at and surrounding the office building of the former Avtex industrial site on Kendrick Lane. These lands are zoned I-2, Industrial Employment District. Technology-based businesses, either with a service orientation or with a manufacturing
Chapter 75 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 75
75-31
component, consistent with the purposes and intents of the I-2 Industrial Employment District, are encouraged to locate in this zone. (Ord. No. 09-04 Added 7-12-04-Effective Upon Passage)
The boundaries of the zones are set forth on the maps attached to this ordinance upon passage and which hereafter shall be maintained by the Clerk of the Town Council.
(Ord. No. 09-04 Amended Last Paragraph 7-12-04-Effective Upon Passage)
75-63 TECHNOLOGY ZONE - MASTER AGREEMENT
Each qualified business applying for benefits in the Technology Zone program will execute a contract with the Economic Development Authority and the Town of Front Royal that will detail the specific terms and conditions of the firm's participation in the program. This contract must be fully executed prior to award of any program benefits.
DOWNTOWN SERVICE DISTRICT
(Adopted 5-10-99)
75-64 DOWNTOWN SERVICE DISTRICT CREATED
Pursuant to the provisions of 15.2-2400, et seq., Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, a downtown service district is hereby designated and created for the purposes set forth in Section 75-67 of this Code to be named as the "Downtown Service District".
75-65 DOWNTOWN SERVICE DISTRICT - ADDITIONAL TAX IMPOSED
To provide for additional governmental services not being offered uniformly throughout the Town, there is hereby levied uniformly throughout the Town, there is hereby levied a tax twelve cents ($0.12) for every one hundred dollars ($100.00) of assessed value of real property and improvements located in the downtown service district as defined by Section 75-66 in addition to that tax imposed on real estate within the Town generally. Valuation and assessment of real property, timing with respect to valuation, assessment and payment, penalties and interest on delinquencies, assessment of new construction, and all other procedures for and details of administration and collection of the tax imposed by this Article shall be the same as provided for by this Code for real estate taxes generally.
75-66 DOWNTOWN SERVICE DISTRICT DEFINED
A. The boundaries of the Downtown Service District shall be defined as follow: Beginning at the point where Main Street crosses over Happy Creek and continuing south along the center line of Happy Creek to its intersection with Stonewall Drive, thence continuing west along the center line of Stonewall Drive until the intersection with Jackson Street, thence west along the center line of Jackson Street to its intersection with the alley running north-south between Church Street, and Cloud Street thence south along the center line of the alley to the back property line of the parcel located on the southeast corner of Jackson and Church Streets, thence running in a westerly direction along the back property line of said parcel running generally parallel to Jackson Street to its intersection with Church Street, thence south along the center line of Church Street to its intersection with Stonewall Drive, thence west along the center line of Stonewall
Chapter 75 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 75
75-32
Drive to the east property line of the parcel fronting on Royal Avenue, thence south along the eastern property line of the parcels fronting on Royal Avenue to the intersection with Prospect Street, thence west along the center line of Prospect Street to its intersection with Royal Avenue thence in a northerly direction along the center line of S. Royal Avenue to the edge of the southern property line for the parcel identified as lot 105 on Tax Map 20A7, Double Circle 4, thence in a westerly direction along the parcel's southern boundary until its intersection with the alley that runs north/south between Royal Avenue and Lee Street, thence in a northerly direction along the center line of the alleyway to its intersection with Stonewall Drive, thence westerly along the center line of Stonewall Drive to its intersection with Lee Street, thence northerly along the center line of Lee Street to its intersection with the southern boundary of those parcels fronting on the south side of Jackson Street, thence along the southern boundary of those parcels fronting on the south side of Jackson Street to the intersection with the alleyway running north-south between Royal Avenue and Lee Street, thence northerly in the center line of the alley to the intersection with Jackson Street, thence westerly along the center line of Jackson Street to its intersection with Lee Street, thence northerly along the center line of Lee Street to its intersection with the northern boundaries of those parcels fronting on the north side of Jackson Street, thence in an easterly direction along the northern boundary of those properties fronting on the north side of Jackson Street to its intersection with the north-south alley located between Royal Avenue and Lee Street, thence north in the center line of the alleyway to the intersection with W. Main Street, thence easterly with the center line of W. Main Street to its intersection with Royal Avenue, thence north in the center line of Royal Avenue to the northwest corner of the parcel fronting on the north side of 2nd Street, thence in an easterly direction running generally parallel to 2nd Street along the back property line of the property fronting on the north side of 2nd Street to its intersection with Chester Street, thence south along the center line of Chester Street to its intersection with 2nd and Union Streets, thence southwesterly along the center line of Union Street to its intersection with the northeast corner of those properties fronting on North Royal Avenue, thence southeasterly along the eastern boundary of those properties fronting on N. Royal Avenue until the point of intersection with Crescent Street, thence southerly with the center line of Crescent Street to the intersection of the northern boundary of the property located on the northwest corner of the parcel fronting on the north side of Peyton Street, thence in an easterly direction running generally parallel to Peyton Street along the back property line of the property fronting on the north side of Peyton Street to its intersection with Chester Street, thence south along the center line of Chester Street to its intersection with Laura Virginia Hale Place, thence easterly along the center line of Laura Virginia Hale Place to the point of the intersection with the western property line of the parcel located on the west side of Commerce Avenue north of Laura Virginia Hale Place, thence in a northerly direction along the western boundary of said property to its northwest corner, thence in an easterly direction along said properties north border to its intersection with the western right-of-way of Commerce Avenue, thence in a southerly direction along the western right-of-way of Commerce Avenue to its intersection of Laura Virginia Hale Place and Water Street, thence along the center line of Water Street in a southerly direction to its intersection with the southwest corner of the northern most parcel with frontage on both Water Street and Commerce Avenue, thence along the southern boundary of this parcel to the western right-of-way of Commerce Avenue, thence along the western right-Creek to its intersection with Main Street and the point of beginning.
Chapter 75 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 75
75-33
B. References to street names set out in subsection (A) of this section are based upon and fully shown on a Map, dated March 22, 1999, entitled "Downtown Service District, Front Royal, Virginia", a copy of which is on file and available for public inspection in the Office of the Clerk of Council, Town Hall, 16 N. Royal Avenue, Front Royal, Virginia 22630.
C. Public utility facilities in or above the public right-of-way, such as poles, lights, wore, cable, conduit, and piping shall not be included within the downtown service district or subject to the tax imposed by this Article.
D. All parcels of land that are bisected by the downtown service district boundaries, as set out in subsection (A) of this section, are to be considered wholly included within the boundaries of said district.
E. All real property located within the downtown service district as set out in subsection (A) of this section, used exclusively as a single family detached residence, and such other real property otherwise exempt from the payment of real estate taxes, shall not be subject to the tax imposed by this Article.
75-67 DOWNTOWN SERVICE DISTRICT - PURPOSES OF TAX AND FACILITIES AND SERVICES PROPOSED
A. Taxes collected pursuant to this Article shall be levied for and used to provide additional governmental services not being offered uniformly throughout the entire town, including, but not limited to, economic and business development and promotional activities intended to foster business retention; business recruitment and developer recruitment; physical improvements to public facilities which are unique to downtown; planning for the development and acquisition of public spaces needed for downtown; and those public improvements enumerated in Section 15.2-2403, Code of Virginia (1950), as amended.
B. Taxes collected pursuant to this Article shall be segregated so as to enable the same to be expanded only in the downtown service district in which raised.
75-68 DOWNTOWN SERVICE DISTRICT - PROPOSED PLAN FOR PROVIDING FACILITIES AND SERVICES
Provision for the adoption of an annual budget for the facilities and services proposed by this Ordinance shall be by the action of the Front Royal Town Council following such recommendations as bay be offered by the Downtown Business Association, and any property owner subject to the tax imposed herein, working in four (4) primary areas: design, promotion, economic development, and organization. Town Council, upon recommendation by the Downtown Business Association, its membership and any property owner subject to the tax imposed herein, will provide, as permitted by this ordinance, physical improvements to the district, promotion and advertising of the district and its businesses, compilation of market data, an organizational structure for a unified effort to sustain and revitalize the district, and other projects of a similar nature. When receiving the recommendations and advice of the Downtown Business Association, the Town Council shall consider whether, prior to adoption of their budget
Chapter 75 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 75
75-34
recommendations to the Town Council, the Downtown Business Association mailed, at least fifteen (15) days in advance of business owner located within the District's boundaries of the date, time and place of the Downtown Business Association meeting.
75-69 DOWNTOWN SERVICE DISTRICT - BENEFITS WHICH CAN BE EXPECTED
Increased market traffic downtown, the recruitment of new businesses and the expansion of existing businesses, increased profitability of district businesses, increased market awareness, increased property values, and increased community allegiance to the downtown district can be expected by the provision of the facilities and services proposed by this Ordinance.
75-70 DOWNTOWN SERVICE DISTRICT - OTHER POWERS AND DUTIES
The Town shall have all those powers and duties with respect to a downtown service district as set forth in Section 15.2-2403 Code of Virginia (1950), as amended, including the power to contract with any person, firm, or corporation to provide additional governmental services in such district.
A. The tax program authorized by this ordinance on downtown revitalization and development shall expire on June 30, 2005, with the exception that all delinquent taxes owed to the Town as a result of said tax program shall continue to be due to, and collectable by, the Town and that all applicable penalties and interest shall apply.
(Ord. No. 2-02 Amended 12-17-01-Effective Upon Passage)
B. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect on and after July 1, 1999.
C. Prior to the expiration of the tax program authorized by this ordinance, with said date being no later than September 1, 2004, Town Council shall initiate a review of the downtown service district created by this ordinance. Such review shall consider the recommendations of the Downtown Business Association, and any property owner subject to the tax imposed herein, and based upon the findings of said review, the Council shall decide whether to continue the program. If extended, Council shall then establish the appropriate rate of taxation, which rate shall in no event exceed that rate set for the then current real estate tax rate in the Town of Front Royal generally or twelve cents ($.12) per hundred dollars assessed value, whichever is the higher rate; unless the Council shall receive a petition, from two-thirds (2/3) of the property owners subject to the tax and/or licensed business owners whose situs for license purposes is on the property rented or leased in the service district, requesting that a higher rate be set.
(Ord. No. 2-02 Amended 12-17-01-Effective Upon Passage)
75-71 DOWNTOWN SERVICE DISTRICT - SEVERABILITY
Chapter 75 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 75
75-35
Severability is intended throughout and within the provisions of this Article. If any provision, including any period, part, phrase, or term, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby and validity of this Article in any and all other respects shall not be affected thereby.
75-72 DOWNTOWN SERVICE DISTRICT - PARTIAL YEAR TRANSITION
During the 1999 tax year, assessment will be that determined on January 1, 1999, but the tax will be calculated for only a half years tax, from July1, 1999 to December 31, 1999, and for a full year thereafter. The tax for the 1999 tax year will be due on December 5, 1999, at the same time as all other real estate taxes.
75-73 ELECTRIC CONSUMERS TAX (Adopted 10-30-00)
A. Definitions
Consumer means every person who, individually or through agents, employees, officers, representative or permitees, makes a taxable purchase of electricity in this jurisdiction.
Kilowatt hours (kWh) delivered means 1000 watts of electricity delivered in a one-hour period by an electric provider to an actual consumer, except that in the case of eligible customer-generators (sometimes called co generators) as defined in Virginia Code Section 56-594, it means kWh supplied from the electric grid to such customer-generators, minus the kWh generated and fed back to the electric grid by such customer-generators.
Person means any individual, corporation, company or other entity.
Residential consumer means the owner or tenant of property used primarily for residential purposes, including but not limited to, apartment houses and other multiple-family dwellings.
Service provider means the person who delivers electricity to a consumer.
Used primarily relates to the larger portion of the use for which electric utility service is furnished.
B. Electric Utility Consumers Tax
1. In accordance with Virginia Code Section 58.1-3814, effective January 1, 2001, there is hereby imposed and levied a monthly tax on each purchase of electricity delivered to consumers by a service provider, classified as determined by such provider, as follows:
a. Residential consumers: such tax shall be $0.00 plus the rate of $0.003 on each kWh delivered to residential consumers by a service provider, not to exceed $3.00 monthly.
b. Non-residential consumers: such tax on non- residential consumers shall be at the rates per month for the classes of non-residential consumers as set forth below:
Chapter 75 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 75
75-36
i. Commercial consumers – such tax shall be $0.00 plus the rate of $0.00 on each
kWh delivered monthly to commercial consumers not to exceed $3.00 monthly.
ii. Industrial consumers – such tax shall be $0.00 plus the rate of $0.00 on each kWh
delivered monthly to industrial consumers, not to exceed $3.00 monthly.
c. The conversion of tax pursuant to this ordinance to monthly kWh delivered shall not be effective before the first meter reading after December 31, 2000, prior to which time the tax previously imposed by this jurisdiction shall be in effect.
2 .Exemptions: The following consumers of electricity are exempt from the tax imposed by this ordinance.
a. Any public safety agency as defined in Virginia Code Section 58.1-3813.
b. The United States of America, the Commonwealth and the political subdivisions thereof, including this jurisdiction.
3. Billing, collection, and remittance of tax. The service provider shall bill the electricity consumer tax to all users who are subject to the tax and to whom it delivers electricity and shall remit the same to this jurisdiction on a monthly basis. Such taxes shall be paid by the service provider to this jurisdiction in accordance with Virginia Code Section 58.1-3814, paragraphs F. and G., and Virginia Code Section 58.1-2901. If any consumer receives and pays for electricity but refuses to pay the tax imposed by this section, the service provider shall notify this jurisdiction of the name and address of such consumer. If any consumer fails to pay a bill issued by a service provider, including the tax imposed by this section, the service provider must follow its normal collection procedures and upon collection of the bill or any part thereof must apportion the net amount collected between the charge for electric service and the tax and remit the tax portion to this jurisdiction.
Any tax paid by the consumer to the service provider shall be deemed to be held in trust by such provider until remitted to this jurisdiction.
4. Computation of bills not on monthly basis. Bills shall be considered as monthly bills for the purposes of this ordinance if submitted 12 times per year of approximately one month each. Accordingly, the tax for a bi-monthly bill (approximately 60 days) shall be determined as follows: (i) the kWh will be divided by 2; (ii) a monthly tax will be calculated using the rates set forth above; (iii) the tax determined by (ii) shall be multiplied by 2; (iv) the tax in (iii) may not exceed twice the monthly ”maximum tax”.
75-74 TOURISM ZONE INCENTIVES (Adopted 3-23-15)
Chapter 75 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 75
75-37
A. PURPOSE. The purpose for creating tourism zones is to encourage certain types of business growth in the Town that will attract visitors to the Town, increase tax revenue, and enhance the general welfare of Town citizens. Virginia Code §58.1-3851 grants the Town with the legal authority to establish tourism zones and grant tax incentives and regulatory flexibility therein.
B. ESTABLISHMENT OF TOURISM ZONES.
1. Downtown Business Tourism (DBT) Zone Created. There is hereby established the “Downtown Business Tourism Zone,” consisting of all the area designated as such on the map entitled “Town of Front Royal Tourism Zone,” dated February 2015, attached hereto and incorporated herein. The intent of the Downtown Business Tourism Zone is to achieve the overall purpose of Section 75-74.A. by encouraging business growth and housing that enhances the unique character and assets of the downtown area.
2. Entrance Corridor Tourism (ECT) Zone Created. There is hereby established the “Entrance Corridor Tourism Zone,” consisting of all the area designated as such on the map entitled “Town of Front Royal Tourism Zone,” dated February 2015, attached hereto and incorporated herein. The intent of the Entrance Corridor Tourism Zone is to achieve the overall purpose of Section 75-74.A. by encouraging business growth that enhances the unique character and assets of the entrance corridor area.
5. Community Business Tourism (CBT) Zone Created. There is hereby established the “Community Business Tourism Zone,” consisting of all the area designated as such on the map entitled “Town of Front Royal Tourism Zone,” dated February 2015, attached hereto and incorporated herein. The intent of the Community Business Tourism Zone is to achieve the overall purpose of Section 75-74.A. by encouraging general business growth in the Town of Front Royal that supports tourism.
Chapter 75 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 75
75-38
C. ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS.
1. ELIGIBLE USES BY TOURISM ZONE. The following land uses, as categorized within by each tourism zone, are eligible to receive the tourism zone incentives of Section 75-74.D., subject to compliance with all other code requirements of the Town Code.
Chapter 75 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 75
75-39
TABLE 75-74.C.1.
*Including both outdoor and indoor uses, but excluding adult entertainment uses.
** Excluding such uses that are located on the ground level.
2. INVESTMENT CRITERIA. Eligible land uses, as specified under Section 75-74.C.1, shown above, are eligible to receive the tourism zone incentives of Section 75-74.D., shown below, only if all of the following criteria is met.
a. A minimum new capital investment of $25,000.
b. A minimum creation of one new (1) job.
c. Conformance with the Town’s Comprehensive Plan.
d. Compliance with the Town Code.
D. INCENTIVES.
1. BPOL Tax Incentive. BPOL Tax may be reduced for eligible land uses that meet the investment criteria, as specified under 75-74.C.2.
a. Eligible land uses shall be categorized into one of the following three (3) tier groups, depending on the amount of capital investment and quantity of jobs created.
SPECIFIC TOURISM ZONE
ELIGIBLE TYPE OF LAND USES
Downtown Business Tourism (DBT)
Retail
Dining
Lodging
Entertainment*
Culture & Arts
Personal Services & Offices
Condominiums**
Entrance Corridor Tourism (ECT)
Retail
Dining
Lodging
Entertainment*
Culture & Arts
Community Business Tourism (CBT)
Retail
Dining
Lodging
Entertainment*
Personal Services & Offices
Chapter 75 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 75
75-40
TABLE 75-74.D.1.a.
Tier Group
Capital Investment
Jobs Created
Tier 1
$10,000 - $99,999
1-3
Tier 2
$100,000 - $499,999
4-10
Tier 3
$500,000 or more
11 or more
b. The following table illustrates the duration that eligible land uses may receive BPOL tax reduction, based on the tier group they qualify for.
TABLE 75-74.D.1.b.
Note: X = not eligible; = Eligible.
c. Eligible land uses may receive up to 100% BPOL tax reduction for the number of specified years they qualify for under Table 75-74.D.1.b.
d. BPOL tax reduction is based on the estimated increase in BPOL tax, as calculated from estimated increased revenue after the proposed investment. BPOL tax reduction shall not apply to existing BPOL tax prior to the specific investment.
2. Permit Fee Incentive. All eligible land uses may receive up to 100% reduction in permit fees with the Town of Front Royal.
3. Tap Fee Incentive. Eligible commercial land uses may be allowed to make payment of required tap fees over a period of time that does not exceed ten (10) years, without interest or fees, subject to a lien on the property, or other guarantee, for the specified time period. Eligible residential land uses may be allowed to delay payment of required tap fees at a point of time agreeable to the Town of Front Royal, but before all dwelling units are occupied, subject to a lien on the property, or other guarantee, for the specific time period.
YEAR
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11+
Tier 1
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Tier 2
X
X
X
X
Tier 3
X
Chapter 75 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 75
75-41
E. ADMINISTRATION AND INTERPRETATION
1. The Town Manager, or designee, is authorized to administer tourism zones.
2. Interpretations of this section shall be determined by the Town Manager, after consultation with the Town Attorney.
3. All eligible businesses must submit an application for tourism zone incentives to the Town Manager’s Office.
4. The Town Manager, or designee, shall draft a performance agreement for applicants that qualify for incentives. The performance agreement shall be reviewed by the Town Attorney, Director of Finance, Director of Planning & Zoning, or other departments, authorities, committees, commissions or agencies, as determined appropriate by the Town Manager.
5. Performance agreements shall specify all incentives that are to be authorized and may include conditions of approval, such as, but not limited to, requirements that the applicant maintain certain hours of operation, site improvement requirements, or reduction of incentives from their maximum levels authorized by this section.
6. Incentives are not authorized until a performance agreement is approved by Town Council, and nothing herein shall be interpreted to require or obligate the Town to approving any incentives until a performance agreement is approved by Town Council.
7. Town Council may revoke, reduce, or suspend incentives after approval of the performance agreement if the conditions, or other terms, of the performance agreement are not complied with.
(Added Entire Section 3-23-15-Effective Upon Passage)
75-75 HISTORIC DISTRICT INCENTIVES FOR REHABILITATION
A. A partial exemption of real estate taxes for a period of ten (10) years shall be provided for the substantial rehabilitation of any structure [fifty (50) years or older] within a designated historic resource overlay area or to a structure which is listed on the National Register of Historic Places. For the purposes herein, substantial rehabilitation shall involve an investment of at least forty percent (40%) of the pre-rehabilitated assessed value of the structure.
B. The partial exemption shall be equal to the increase in assessed value resulting from the rehabilitation. Rehabilitations cannot replace the original structure. Increases in total square footage may be permitted up to a maximum of fifty (50%) percent of the original structure.
C. The exemption shall commence on January 1 of the year following completion of the rehabilitation and shall run with the real estate for a period of ten (10) years. An increase in an assessment occurring after the first year of the exemption shall not result in an increase in the exemption.
Chapter 75 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 75
75-42
D. No property shall be eligible for such exemption unless the appropriate certificate of appropriateness and building permits have been acquired and the Zoning Administrator and Commissioner of the Revenue have verified that the rehabilitation indicated on the application has been completed. Such rehabilitation shall be completed within two (2) years of issuance of the building permit for the work, except that the deadline for completion may be extended for up to two (2) additional years if the Zoning Administrator determines that reasonable progress has been made towards completion of the project.
(Ord. No. Z-1-93 Amended Title/Added “A-D” 3-22-93 (175-97)-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. Z-3-97 Amended “A, B, D” 10-27-97 (175-97)-Effective Upon Passage)
(Moved Content for this Chapter from 175-97 on 3-23-15)
Chapter 78 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 78
78-1
Chapter 78
FIRE PREVENTION
Sections:
78-1 OPEN BURNING
78-2 BLASTING
78-3 ADOPTION OF STANDARDS; CONDITIONS
78-4 WHEN AND WHERE COPIES AVAILABLE
78-5 MODIFICATIONS
78-6 APPEALS
78-7 NEW MATERIALS, PROCESSES OR OCCUPANTS
78-8 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
78-9 RECOGNITION
Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal 4-23-73(Chapter 10 of the 1965 Code). Other Amendments noted where applicable.
78-1 OPEN BURNING
A. It shall be unlawful for any owner or lessee of land to set fire to or to procure another to set fire to any woods, brush, logs, leaves, grass, debris or other flammable material upon such land unless he previously shall have taken all reasonable care and precaution, by having cut and piled the same or carefully cleared around the same, to prevent the spread of such fire to lands other than those owned or leased by him. It shall also be unlawful for any employee of any such owner or lessee of land to set fire to or to procure another to set fire to any woods, brush, logs, leaves, grass, debris or other flammable material upon such land unless he shall have taken similar precautions to prevent the spread of such fire to any other land.
B. During the period beginning March 1 and ending May 15 of each year, even though the precautions required by the foregoing subsection shall have been taken, it shall be unlawful for any person to set fire to or to procure another to set fire to any brush, leaves, grass, debris or field containing dry grass or other flammable material capable of spreading fire, located in the Town, except between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to fires set on rights-of-way of railroad companies by their duly authorized employees.
C. Any person violating any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.) for each separate offense.
78-2 BLASTING
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any blast to be discharged, either by himself or his agents or employees, without having the blast so confined or protected as to prevent the escape of rock or earth.
Chapter 78 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 78
78-2
78-3 ADOPTION OF STANDARDS; CONDITIONS
There is hereby adopted as the Fire Prevention Code of the town, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, that certain code known as the "Fire Prevention Code," recommended by the National Board of Fire Underwriters, being particularly the 1960 Edition thereof and the whole thereof, and such Fire Prevention Code is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein; and, from the date on which the Code of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia, shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the town, provided that:
A. Whenever the word "municipality" is used in the Fire Prevention Code hereby adopted, it shall mean the Town of Front Royal.
B. Wherever the term "Chief of the Fire Department" is used in the Fire Prevention Code hereby adopted, it shall mean the Building Inspector.
C. Wherever the term "Corporate Counsel" is used in the Fire Prevention Code hereby adopted, it shall be held to mean the Town Attorney.
D. The limits referred to in Section 12.6b of the Fire Prevention Code hereby adopted, in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, shall be as provided by the Council.
E. The limits referred to in Section 16.22a of the Fire Prevention Code hereby adopted, in which storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited, are hereby established as the fire limits of the town.
F. The limits referred to in Section 16.51 of the Fire Prevention Code hereby adopted, in which new bulk plants for flammable liquids are prohibited, shall be as provided by the council.
G. The limits referred to in Section 21.6a of the Fire Prevention Code hereby adopted, in which bulk storage of liquid petroleum gas is restricted, shall be as provided by council.
H. In the event of conflict between the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code hereby adopted and the provisions of any other ordinance of the town, the more stringent provisions shall prevail.
78-4 WHEN AND WHERE COPIES AVAILABLE
Copies of the Fire Prevention Code adopted by Section 78-3 may be obtained at the office of the Building Inspector in the town during regular business hours.
78-5 MODIFICATIONS
The Building Inspector shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code adopted by Section 78-3 upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter
Chapter 78 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 78
78-3
of such Fire Prevention Code, provided that the spirit of such Fire Prevention Code shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification, when granted or allowed, and the decision of the Building Inspector thereon, shall be entered upon the records of the Fire Department, and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant.
78-6 APPEALS
Whenever the Building Inspector shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code adopted by Section 78-3 do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of such Fire Prevention Code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the person aggrieved may appeal from the decision of the Building Inspector to the Town Council within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision from which the appeal is taken.
78-7 NEW MATERIALS, PROCESSES OR OCCUPANCIES
The Town Manager, the Chief of the Fire Department and the Building Inspector shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in the Fire Prevention Code, adopted by Section 78-3. The Building Inspector shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his office and distribute copies thereof to interested persons.
78-8 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code adopted by Section 78-3 or fail to comply therewith or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder and from which no appeal has been taken or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the Town Council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.) or by imprisonment for not more than twelve (12) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. The imposition of one (1) penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and, when not otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
B. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
Chapter 78 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 78
78-4
78-9 RECOGNITION
The Front Royal Volunteer Fire Department, Incorporated, and its rescue squad are hereby recognized as an integral part of the official safety program of the Town.
Chapter 80 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 80
80-1
Chapter 80
FIREWORKS
Sections:
80-1 PROHIBITIONS
80-2 EXCEPTIONS
80-3 PERMITS FOR FIREWORKS DISPLAY
80-4 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal 3-11-85 (Chapter 1, General Provisions, Art. I). Other amendments noted where applicable.
80-1 PROHIBITIONS
No person, firm or corporation shall store, use, possess, manufacture, sell or offer for sale firework as defined by VAC 27-95 to include but not limited to any firecracker, torpedo, skyrocket or other substance or thing of whatever form or construction that contains any explosive or inflammable compound or substance.
(Amended 4-14-14-Effective Upon Passage)
80-2 EXCEPTIONS
A. This chapter shall not apply to the use or the sale of permissible fireworks as defined by VAC 27-95, provided that said fireworks listed in this section may only be used, ignited or exploded on private property with the consent of the owner of such property.
B. This chapter shall have no application to any officer or member of the Town Police Department or the Armed Forces of this state or the United States while acting within the scope of his authority and duties as such, nor shall it be applicable to the sale or use of said materials when used or to be used by any person for signaling or other emergency use in the operation of boat, railroad train or other vehicle for the transportation of persons or property.
(Amended 4-14-14 (A & B)-Effective Upon Passage)
80-3 PERMITS FOR FIREWORKS DISPLAY
Any storage or display of fireworks within the Town limits shall be required to obtain a permit from the Warren County Fire Marshall.
(Amended 4-14-14-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 80 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 80
80-2
80-4 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Violations of this chapter shall be punished as a Class III misdemeanor.
(Amended by adding Class III 4-14-14-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 85 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 85
85-1
Chapter 85
GARBAGE, RUBBISH, REFUSE AND SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
Sections:
GENERAL PROVISIONS
85-1 DUMPING ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY
85-2 COLLECTION AREAS AND DAYS
85-3 COLLECTION CHARGES
85-4 DISPOSITION OF TREE CUTTINGS, YARD WASTE AND BUILDING MATERIAL
85-5 HOURS FOR PLACEMENT AT CURB
85-6 ADDITIONAL CHARGE FOR ENTRANCE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY FOR COLLECTION
85-7 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED
85-8 SUITABLE CONTAINERS DESIGNATED
85-9 (RESERVED)
85-10 RESTRICTIONS
85-11 SEPARATION; VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
85-12 REPORT
Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal 3-11-85 (Chapter 13 of the 1965 Code including the following amendments 12-14-70; 8-23-71; 2-28-72; 7-28-75; 8-23-76; 7-25-77; 5-29-79; 7-28-80; 6-13-83 by Ord. No. 4-83 and 6-25-84 by Ord. No. 8-84). Other amendments noted where applicable.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
85-1 DUMPING ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or otherwise dispose of trash, garbage, refuse or other unsightly matter on a public street, right-of-way or on private property without the written consent of the owner thereof or his agent. When a violation of the provisions of this section has been observed by any person, and the matter dumped or disposed of on the street, right-of-way or private property has been ejected from a motor vehicle, the owner or operator of such motor vehicle shall be presumed to be the person ejecting such trash, garbage, refuse or other unsightly matter, provided that such presumption shall be rebuttable by competent evidence. Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 1-15, General Penalty, and Section 85-11 of this Code.
(Amended 8-26-02-Effective Upon Passage ; Amended 11-27-06-Effective Upon Passage)
85-2 COLLECTION AREAS AND DAYS
Garbage, ashes, recyclable materials, yard waste and trash shall be collected in such areas of the Town and upon such days as may be directed by the Town Manager. Solid Waste collection
Chapter 85 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 85
85-2
trucks shall each collect on the route only once on each scheduled day and shall not thereafter return for additional collections.
(Amended 8-26-02-Effective Upon Passage ; Amended 11-27-06-Effective Upon Passage)
85-3 COLLECTION CHARGES
A. The owner or occupant of each residential unit, office, retail and wholesale business, church, public building, and any other building or unit, provided such structure is connected to the Town's water and sewer system, whether using or not, shall pay a charge to the Town for its collection of solid waste. The owners or occupants of such structures which are not so connected to the water and sewer system may request and pay for refuse collection services from the Town. The collection charge shall be three hundred and 00/100 dollars ($300.00) per month for every customer who requires twice weekly pickup service on container larger than six (6) cubic yards; and two hundred fifteen and 00/100 dollars ($215.00) per month for every customer who requires once weekly pickup service on a container larger than six (6) cubic yards; an additional monthly charge of fifty-eight and 00/100 dollars ($58.00) for tipping fees per pickup of a commercial dumpster; twenty-six and 00/100 dollars ($26.00) per month for each ninety-six (96) gallon container per commercial customer each week; fourteen and 10/100 dollars ($14.10) per month for each ninety-six (96) gallon container per customer each week; and twelve and 00/100 ($12.00) dollars per month for each thirty-two (32) gallon container per customer each week.
(Amended 6-27-88-Effective 7-1-88 ; Amended 6-29-90-Effective 7-1-90 ; Amended 6-10-91-Effective 7-1-91) (Amended 6-8-92-Effective 7-1-92 ; Amended 6-13-94-Effective 7-1-94 ; Amended 5-13-96-Effective 7-1-96) (Amended 6-22-98-Effective 8-1-98 ; Amended 8-26-02-Eff. Upon Passage) (Amended Wording 11-27-06-Effective Upon Passage ; Amended 6-25-07-Effective 7-1-07)
(Amended 9-10-07-Effective Upon Passage ; Amended 9-22-08-Effective 1-1-09)
(Amended 8-10-09-Effective 9-1-09 ; Amended Rates 6-10-13-Effective 7-1-13)
(Amended Rates 6-13-16-Effective 7-1-16)
B. Collection charges shall be paid and processed in accordance with the provisions contained in Section 134-71 of this Code.
(Amended 2-23-98-Effective Upon Passage)
C. In the event that any retail or wholesale business, residential unit, office, church, public building or establishment is not occupied or used for more than one (1) month, the owner or occupant thereof shall be relieved during the vacancy or nonuse from the payment of the monthly charge, provided that the owner notifies the Town of Front Royal, in writing, of the vacancy or nonuse upon forms to be furnished by the Town. Owner or occupant must notify the Town of Front Royal, in writing, when he wishes collection of garbage, ashes and trash to be resumed. Any person making a false statement to avoid payment of the collection charge shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Amended (C) 11-27-06-Effective Upon Passage)
D. In the event that the owner or occupant of any retail or wholesale business, residential unit, office, church, public building or establishment shall exhibit to the Town Treasurer a signed
Chapter 85 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 85
85-3
written contract with a private garbage collection business, providing for the collection of garbage, ashes and trash, then said owner or occupant shall be relieved of the payment of any of the aforementioned monthly fees for the term of said contract.
E. The Town shall provide "On-Call Collection" of large items or large quantities of items to existing residential customers as follows:
1. Individuals shall establish a work order for collection and schedule collection with the Department of Public Works prior to placing material.
(Amended to “Public Works” 4-27-20-Effective Upon Passage)
2. Individuals shall identify the type and quantity of items to be collected, so that the Town may dedicate the necessary forces for collection. Items not acceptable for disposal, such as those identified in Section 85-10(E), or other items, such as, but not limited to, computer monitors, items containing mercury such as thermometers, sofas containing hideaway beds, recliners, items not readily crushable by the Town's mechanical refuse crushers, railroad ties, bricks, rocks, wooden or metal fencing, yard waste including tree limbs, roots, root balls, and stumps, air or propane tanks, swing sets, porch swings, picnic tables, and other items (however, yard waste items may be collected on a not on-call basis in accordance with the procedures established in Section 85-4 of the Town Code) determined by the Director of Public Works to be unacceptable shall not be collected as part of this program. All items to be collected, except furniture and appliances, shall be bagged in plastic or cloth bags, not to exceed fifty-five (55) gallons. All items to be collected shall be placed within the Right-of-Way, but items shall not be placed on the street or sidewalk. The Town shall not enter private property for On-Call Collection.
(Amended to “Public Works” 4-27-20-Effective Upon Passage)
3. There will be no fee for the first collection work order per customer per calendar year containing twenty (20) or fewer bags, not exceeding fifty-five (55) gallons per bag, of bagged items to be collected, plus five (5) pieces of furniture determined by the Department of Public Works, as readily crushable by the Town's mechanical refuse crusher, or household appliances not containing Freon or mercury. For a second collection work order per customer per calendar year, the fee is $25.00. For a third and all subsequent collection work orders per customer per calendar year, the fee is $50.00.
(Amended to “Public Works” 4-27-20-Effective Upon Passage)
4. For the first collection of unbagged items, and/or for collection of more than twenty (20 bags or five (5) furniture items of other acceptable items for collection, not otherwise eligible for collection pursuant to (3.) above, per customer per calendar year, there shall be a fee of Four Hundred Dollars ($400.00) per hour. For a second collection of unbagged items and/or second collection of more than twenty (20) bags or five (5) furniture items or other acceptable items for collection, not otherwise eligible for collection pursuant to (3.) above, per customer per calendar year, there shall be a fee of Six Hundred Dollars ($600.00) per hour. For a third or subsequent collection of unbagged items and/or a third
Chapter 85 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 85
85-4
or subsequent collection of more than twenty (20) bags or five (5) furniture items of other acceptable items for collection, not otherwise eligible for collection pursuant to (3.) above, per customer per calendar year, there shall be a fee of Eight Hundred Dollars ($800.00) per hour.
5. Items containing Freon or other refrigerants, such as refrigerators, freezers, air conditioners, and dehumidifiers shall be subject to an additional fee of $15.00 per item for the recovery of such refrigerants from the device.
6. Tires without rims shall be subject to a collection fee of $2.00 per tire; tires with rims shall be subject to an additional fee of $4.00 per tire for the Town's additional time and labor involved in separating the tires from the rims.
7. For purpose of §85-3(E) only, placement of bagged material or furniture compliant with this Code Section shall not constitute a violation of Town Code §142-4 for residential customers with an established, open On-Call Collection work order obtained through the Department of Public Works to place items for collection within the Town Right-of-Way so long as no such items placed obstruct the traveled portion of any street or sidewalk, and so long as access by the Town is not blocked or impeded. Placement of any material intended for collection through the On-Call Collection Program prior to establishing a work order shall constitute a violation of Town Code §142-4 and shall be subject to enforcement action and punishment as permitted by the Town Code.
(Added (E) 10-23-06-Effective 1-1-07 ; Amended Entire (E) 6-11-12-Effective 7-1-12)
(Amended Entire (E) 10-1-21-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended (7) to “Public Works” 4-27-20-Effective Upon Passage)
85-4 DISPOSITION OF TREE CUTTINGS, YARD WASTE, AND BUILDING MATERIAL
A. Tree and/or brush cuttings shall be reduced to a maximum of five (5) foot lengths, and shall be bundled with rope or heavy twine or placed separately in garbage cans, not to exceed 32 gallons in size, and shall weigh no more than fifty (50) pounds.
B. Yard waste, to include grass clippings, may be placed in the same area as garbage or other refuse for curbside pickup by the Town PROVIDED such material is placed in paper or other biodegradable bags or in garbage cans, not to exceed 32 gallons in size or fifty (50) pounds in weight. In addition, such material shall not be mingled with garbage, ashes and trash. The Town will refuse service for this category of material to any citizen who uses plastic bags, or who mixes it with other waste, and it shall thereafter be the responsibility of the citizen who has violated these rules to dispose of such material. No more than ten (10) bags or 32-gallon containers of yard waste shall be collected from each residence on a single day.
(Amended (B) 11-27-06-Effective Upon Passage ; Amended (B) 6-13-09-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 85 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 85
85-5
C. Rejected building materials shall not be put out for collection.
(Added (C) 11-27-06-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended Title (4) & Content 8-26-02-Effective Upon Passage)
85-5 HOURS FOR PLACEMENT AT CURB
Containers, as provided in Section 85-8, for garbage, ashes or trash, as well as containers for recyclable materials and for yard waste, shall be placed at the street side of the curb on the day of collection before 6:30 AM or after 7:00 PM the night before. Solid waste shall not be set out after the collection truck has passed. It shall be unlawful to place such containers in such a manner that access to them from the collection truck and Town workers is blocked or impeded by any vehicle or other obstruction. Customers shall remove the containers from the town right-of-way before 7:00 AM the day after collection.
(Amended 8-26-02-Effective Upon Passage ; Amended 11-27-0 6 -Effective Upon Passage)
85-6 ADDITIONAL CHARGE FOR ENTRY ONTO PRIVATE PROPERTY FOR COLLECTION
When any person not less than sixty-five (65) years of age or permanently and totally disabled requests in writing that the Town solid waste collection equipment or personnel enter upon private property for the purpose of making such collection, the customer making such request shall pay an additional collection charge of five dollars ($5.00) per month, which shall be added to and collected with the regular solid waste collection charge, and the Town solid waste collection personnel shall enter the private property for the purpose of such collection. In addition, at the discretion of the Director of Public Works, Town solid waste equipment and/or personnel may make curbside collection of the solid waste of any person, regardless of age or ability, whose property does not front on a Town-maintained street and who requests curbside solid waste collection in writing and pays the additional collection charge of five dollars ($5.00) per month; provided that such person places such solid waste for collection at the front lot line at such non-Town-maintained road on the appropriate day and in the appropriate container provided in this Chapter.
(Amended 8-26-02-Effective Upon Passage ; Amended 3-14-05-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended 11-27-06-Effective Upon Passage)
85-7 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED
Deposits for collection and collection by the Town trucks of solid waste shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. Any matter set out for collection which does not comply with the provisions of this chapter will not be collected by the Town but shall be removed by the owner or tenant.
(Amended 11-27-06-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 85 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 85
85-6
85-8 SUITABLE CONTAINERS DESIGNATED
For the purpose of this chapter, a suitable container for all refuse and garbage containing, or which contained, animal or vegetable matter subject to decay or fermentation, and trash, paper, ashes and other matter not subject to decay or fermentation, shall be a container provided by the Town to each customer, unless specifically exempted by the Director of Public Works. Containers shall be 96-gallon capacity unless that size container poses a hazard or unusual inconvenience for the worker or customer. In either event, and with the approval of the Director of Public Works, the Town shall provide 32 gallon containers to the customer. All items placed in the container must be bagged. The container and its contents shall not exceed fifty (50) pounds for the thirty-two (32) gallon container, and one hundred fifty (150) pounds for the ninety-six (96) gallon container. All solid waste set out for collection shall be placed in proper containers. The Town shall not collect items not placed in the proper containers. Customers are required to keep containers sufficiently clean to control odors and vermin.
(Amended & Repealed (B) 8-26-02-Effective Upon Passage ; Amended 11-27-06-Effective Upon Passage)
85-9 (RESERVED)
(Repealed Section 8-26-02-Effective Upon Passage
85-10 RESTRICTIONS
A. Containers for refuse, garbage, trash, paper, ashes and other like waste material, as required in this chapter, shall not be filled more than level with the brim.
B. Covers on all containers, as required in this chapter, shall be kept in place except when filling or emptying.
C. No liquid shall be placed in any container required in this chapter.
D. Hot ashes shall not be placed in any combustible containers required under the provisions of this chapter.
E. The Town shall not collect unauthorized or dangerous items including but not limited to, medical waste, construction debris, automotive parts, hazardous waste, controlled waste, items that may contain asbestos, bio-hazardous material, petroleum products, computer monitors or items contaminated with petroleum, explosives, and reactive chemicals. The property owner shall be responsible for the disposal of such items.
(Added (E) 8-26-02 -Effective Upon Passage ; Ord. No. 14-06 Amended (E) 11-27-06-Effective Upon Passage)
F. Individuals shall place all solid waste within suitable sealed bags prior to placement in containers. If waste scatters because and individual did not secure waste in a bag, the individual/property owner is responsible for the scattered material and may be charged with littering.
(Ord. No. 14-06 Added (F) 11-27-06-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 85 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 85
85-7
85-11 SEPARATION; VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
A. Purpose. The purpose of this Article is to provide the Town of Front Royal with a basis for the effective recycling of solid waste and the development and implementation of the Solid Waste Management Plan.
B. Definitions. As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
RECYCLING - The process of separating a given waste material from the waste stream and processing it so that it is used again as raw material for a product, which may or may not be similar to the original product.
SOLID WASTE - Any garbage, refuse, sludge and other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material, resulting from industrial, commercial, residential, mining and agricultural operations or community activities, but does not include solid or dissolved material in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved material in irrigation return flows or in industrial discharges which are sources subject to a permit from the State Water Control Board; or source, special nuclear or by-product material as defined by the Federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended.
C. Collection and recycling. All occupants of residences and all businesses which are operated for a profit shall separate and make available for collection and recycling such categories of solid waste as are designated by and in such manner as is required by the Town of Front Royal Solid Waste Management Plan promulgated in accordance with the regulations of the Commonwealth of Virginia Department of Waste Management. The provisions of the Town of Front Royal Solid Waste Management Plan shall supersede and take precedence over conflicting provisions, if any, contained in Chapter 85, Article 1, to include but not be limited to any conflicting provisions pertaining to garbage and refuse containers.
D. Nothing in this Article shall affect the right of any person to sell or otherwise dispose of solid waste material as provided in Virginia Code Section 15.2-933 or which may be permitted under any law of the Commonwealth of Virginia.
(Amended (D) 8-26-02-Effective Upon Passage)
E. Nothing in this Article shall impose any liability upon an apartment or commercial office building owner or manager for failure of the tenants to comply with any provisions of the Article, nor shall this Article impose any liability upon any solid waste hauler for the failure of its customers to comply with the provisions of this Article.
F. A civil fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.) may be imposed for violations of the provisions of this Article and the requirements of the Town of Front Royal Solid Waste Management Plan.
Chapter 85 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 85
85-8
G. Penalties for misdemeanor violation of this Chapter shall be as follows:
1. Failure to remove solid waste containers from Town right-of-way: $10.00 per day of non-compliance after third violation notice.
2. Failure to maintain containers in a clean and sanitary condition, free from odor, flies or vermin: $25.00 per occurrence after third violation notice.
3. Failure to bag solid waste placed in containers: $25.00 per occurrence after third violation notice.
4. Late placement of solid waste materials at curbside: $25.00 per occurrence after third violation notice.
5. Inclusion of hazardous, infectious or medical wastes in household solid waste containers: $500.00 per occurrence.
6. Other violations of this Chapter: $25.00 per occurrence after third violation notice.
(Added Entire Article/Section 3-25-91-Effective Upon Passage)
(Added (G)/Changed Title/Removed Article Name 11-27-06-Effective Upon Passage)
(Removed “Failure to separate recyclable material: $10.00/occurrence after 3rd Vio.” 4-27-20-Eff Upon Pass)
85-12 REPORT
A. All companies which collect, store, treat, transport or dispose of solid waste which is generated within the Town of Front Royal shall submit an annual report to the Front Royal Town Manager or his designated agent.
B. Each annual report required hereunder shall include the following information for the period covered by the report:
1. The name and address of the reporting party.
2. The total quantity of solid waste collected, stored, treated, transported or disposed of and the total quantity of solid waste recycled by the reporting party.
3. The date of the report and the period of time covered by the report.
C. The total quantity of solid waste and the total quantity of recycled solid waste reported hereunder shall be based on the actual volume or weight of the solid waste and/or recycled solid waste. Where actual volume or weight cannot be accurately determined, the volume or weight may be reported using carefully estimated data. Each report shall include a statement of the basis for the reported data, e.g., measurement of volume, measurement of weight or estimation and the basis for the estimation.
Chapter 85 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 85
85-9
D. Nothing hereunder shall be construed to require any party to report information of a proprietary nature. In the event that any party fails to report information otherwise required hereunder based on that party's determination that the information is of a proprietary nature, the party shall specify in its report the general nature of the information withheld and the basis for its determination that said information is proprietary.
E. The total quantity of recycled solid waste included in the report shall mean only those solid wastes which were generated within the Town of Front Royal and then recycled.
(Added Entire Article/Section 3-25-91-Effective Upon Passage)
(Removed Article Name 11-27-06-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 88 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 88
88-1
Chapter 88
GRAFFITI
Sections:
88-1 PURPOSE AND INTENT
88-2 GRAFFITI DECLARED A NUISANCE
88-3 DEFINITIONS
88-4 GRAFFITI PROHIBITED
88-5 INCENTIVE PAYMENT FOR ABATEMENT BY PROPERTY OWNER OR OCCUPANT WHERE GRAFFITI NOT CAUSED BY PROPERTY OWNER OR OCCUPANT
88-6 ABATEMENT BY TOWN; ASSESSMENT OF COSTS
88-7 PUBLICATION OF NOTICE AND ABATEMENT BY TOWN WHEN NOTICE CANNOT BE SERVED ON OWNER, OCCUPANT, OR PERSON RESPONSIBLE
88-8 COMMUNITY SERIVICE PROVISIONS
88-9 SEVERABILITY
Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal by Ordinance 11-01 on 9-10-01.
88-1 PURPOSE AND INTENT
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to provide a procedure for removal of graffiti from walls and structures on both public and privately owned property in order to reduce blight and deterioration within the Town and to protect the public safety, and to provide for the recovery of costs of such removal, and to provide a measure of rehabilitation, through community service, for those persons guilty of violations of this chapter.
88-2 GRAFFITI DECLARED A NUISANCE
The existence of graffiti within the corporate limits of the Town of Front Royal is declared by this Council to be obnoxious and a public and private nuisance and must be quickly abated to avoid the detrimental impact of such graffiti on the Town and its residents, and to prevent the further spread of such graffiti.
88-3 DEFINITIONS
As used in this article, “ graffiti” includes but shall not be limited to any non-permitted inscription, word or design that is marked, etched, scratched, drawn, painted, pasted or otherwise affixed to, or on, any sidewalk, wall, building, fence, pole, sign, utility cabinet, or any other structure or surface, regardless of the material of that structural component.
As used in this article, "person" means any individual, firm, owner, sole proprietorship, corporation, unincorporated association, governmental body, municipal corporation, executor, administrator, trustee, guardian, agent, occupant, or other legal entity.
Chapter 88 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 88
88-2
88-4 GRAFFITI PROHIBITED
It shall be unlawful and a Class I misdemeanor for any person to apply graffiti on any surface or structure within the Town of Front Royal.
A. Whenever the Town Manager or his designee determines that graffiti exists in the Town, a notice to abate the graffiti shall be mailed or delivered to either the person responsible for the graffiti or to the property owner or occupant of the property where the graffiti is located requiring the graffiti to be removed within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice. Failure to comply with a notice to abate the graffiti by the person responsible for the graffiti shall be a Class I misdemeanor. Failure to comply with a notice to abate the graffiti by the owner or occupant of the property where the graffiti is located shall be a Class IV misdemeanor.
B. Proof of mailing or delivery of the notice to either the person responsible for the graffiti or the owner or occupant of the property where the graffiti is located shall be sufficient evidence of such notice.
C. Notwithstanding the above, when the graffiti is located on property owned by the Town or located in a Town right-of-way, the Town, in its sole discretion, may cause the graffiti to be immediately removed and the abatement costs assessed pursuant to Section 88-6.
D. The punishment for such violation in which the defacement is more than twenty feet (20') off the ground, on a railroad or highway overpass, or committed for the benefit of, at the direction of, or in association with any criminal street gang, as that term is defined by Section 18.2-46.1 of the Code of Virginia, shall include a mandatory minimum fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(Ord. No. 11-05 Added (D) 6-27-05-Effective 7-1-05)
88-5 INCENTIVE PAYMENT FOR ABATEMENT BY PROPERTY OWNER OR OCCUPANT WHERE GRAFFITI NOT CAUSED BY PROPERTY OWNER OR OCCUPANT
Where the property owner or occupant of the property where the graffiti is located complies with the notice to abate within fifteen (15) days and removes the graffiti, the property owner or occupant shall be entitled to an incentive payment not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) payable by the Town upon presentation of satisfactory proof of the cost of abatement and upon verification by the Town of the cost expended for graffiti removal, as long as the graffiti was not caused by said owner or occupant.
88-6 ABATEMENT BY TOWN; ASSESSMENT OF COSTS
A. If graffiti remains on any structure or surface in the Town after the expiration of the time specified in the notice given pursuant to this article, or if the graffiti is located on property owned by the Town or located in a Town right-of-way, the Town may cause the same to be removed therefrom at the expense of the person responsible for the graffiti or the owner or occupant of the property where the graffiti is located.
Chapter 88 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 88
88-3
B. The total cost for abating the graffiti, including any damage to property caused by the removal, as confirmed by the Town Council, shall constitute a special assessment against the respective lot or parcel of land to which it relates, and upon recordation in the Circuit Court of a notice of lien, shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of such assessment.
C. After such confirmation and recordation, a copy shall be filed with the assessor and tax collector of the Town, in order that said officials may add the amounts of the respective assessments to the next regular tax bills levied against the respective lots and parcels of land, and thereafter said amount shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same procedure under foreclosure and sale in the case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes.
D. After such recordation, such lien may be foreclosed by judicial or other sale in the manner and means provided by law.
88-7 PUBLICATION OF NOTICE AND ABATEMENT BY TOWN WHEN NOTICE CANNOT BE SERVED ON OWNER, OCCUPANT, OR PERSON RESPONSIBLE
In case no owner or occupant or person responsible for the graffiti can be found on whom to serve the notice provided for in this article, the Town, after giving five (5) days notice in the newspapers of the Town, shall return to the Treasurer an amount of the expense incurred, and the Treasurer shall proceed to collect the amount of the account.
88-8 COMMUNITY SERVICE PROVISIONS
A. Any parent or other legal guardian of a child under the age of eighteen (I 8) years shall be personally liable for any and all costs to the Town or to any person incurred in connection with the removal of graffiti caused by said child, and for all attorney’s fees and court costs incurred in connection with the civil prosecution of any claim for damages.
B. In lieu of prosecuting a violation of this chapter as a crime, the Circuit Court, the General District Court, or the Juvenile & Domestic Relations District Court, may offer said minor or adult an option to perform such community service as the court deems appropriate. Community service shall include, but not be limited to, the following m elements:
1. The minor shall perform at least thirty (30) hours of community service.
2. At least one of the custodial parents, or if none, guardians, shall be in attendance, at least fifty (50) percent of the period of assigned community service.
3. The entire period of community service shall be performed under the supervision service provider approved by the court.
4. Reasonable effort shall be made to assign the subject minor or adult to a type of community service that is reasonably expected to have the most rehabilitative effect on the minor or adult. To the extent that the offense giving rise to the offer of community service
Chapter 88 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 88
88-4
constitutes a violation of this chapter, reasonable effort shall be made by the courts to assign the minor to community service which constitutes in significant part the removal of the graffiti.
88-9 SEVERABLILITY
If any section, sub-section, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this article is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. The Town Council declares that it would have adopted each section, sub-section, sentence, clause, phrase, portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, sub-sections, clauses, phrases, or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional.
(Ord. No. 11-01 Added Entire Chapter 9-10-01)
Chapter 98 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 98
98-1
Chapter 98
BUSINESS, PROFESSIONAL AND OCCUPATIONAL LICENSING
Sections:
GENERAL PROVISIONS
98-1 OVERRIDING CONFLICTING ORDINANCES
98-2 DEFINITIONS
98-3 LICENSE REQUIREMENT
98-3.5 DUE DATES AND PENALTIES
98-4 SITUS OF GROSS RECEIPTS
98-5 LIMITATIONS AND EXTENSIONS, APPEALS AND AUDITS
98-6 RECORDKEEPING AND AUDITS
98-7 EXCLUSIONS AND DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS RECEIPTS
98-8 TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
98-9 REFUSAL TO PERMIT RECORD EXAMINATION, FAILURE TO PRODUCE RECORDS; REFUSAL TO PERMIT AUDIT
98-10 INTERROGATORIES TO BE ANSWERED BY APPLICANT
98-11 FALSE INFORMATION IN SUBMISSION
98-12 ASSESSMENT AND PENALTY FOR REPORTING INCORRECT INFORMATION, REPORTS OR RETURNS
98-13 ZONING COMPLIANCE REQUIRED
98-14 WHEN CERTIFICATE OR PERMIT REQUIRED
98-15 KEEPING AND EXHIBITING OF LICENSE
98-16 (RESERVED)
98-17 LIMITATION ON GROSS RECEIPTS
98-18 BUSINESSES EXEMPT FROM LICENSE TAX
98-19 COMBINATION OF SERVICE OCCUPATIONS
98-20 THROUGH 27 (RESERVED)
98-28 FAILURE TO OBTAIN LICENSE
98-29 TRANSFERABILITY; VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
98-30 TAX COLLECTED HELD IN TRUST
98-31 THROUGH 34 (RESERVED)
FLAT RATES
98-35 AGRICULTURAL FAIRS
98-36 DOG KENNELS
98-37 THROUGH 38 (RESERVED)
98-39 BUYERS OF OLD GOLD AND SILVER
98-40 (RESERVED)
98-41 FINANCE COMPANIES
98-42 FORTUNETELLERS AND SIMILAR BUSINESSES
98-43 (RESERVED)
98-44 INDUSTRIAL LOAN ASSOCIATIONS
98-45 LICENSING - COMMERCIAL SOLICITORS
Chapter 98 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 98
98-2
98-46 FLEA MARKETS
98-47 TRADING IN SECONDHAND ARTICLES
98-48 MANUFACTURERS’ SALES AGENTS
98-49 THROUGH 51 (RESERVED)
98-52 PAWNBROKERS
98-53 THROUGH 55 (RESERVED)
98-56 SAVINGS INSTITUTIONS AND CREDIT UNIONS
98-57 SHOWS, CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS
98-58 SMALL LOAN COMPANIES
98-59 YARD SALES
98-60 COIN-OPERATED VENDING OR SLOT MACHINES
98-61 LICENSING – PEDDLERS AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS
GROSS RECEIPTS BASIS
98-62 AMUSEMENTS
98-63 (RESERVED)
98-64 BUSINESS SERVICE OCCUPATIONS
98-65 CONTRACTORS AND CONTRACTING
98-66 HEAT, LIGHT AND POWER COMPANIES
98-67 TELEPHONE AND TELEGRAPH COMPANIES
98-67.1 CABLE TELEVISION COMPANIES
98-68 PERSONAL SERVICE OCCUPATIONS
98-69 PROFESSIONAL SERVICES
98-70 REPAIR SERVICE OCCUPATIONS
98-71 RETAIL MERCHANTS
98-72 TAXICABS
98-73 WHOLESALE MERCHANTS
98-74 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
98-75 GOING OUT OF BUSINESS SALES
Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal 3-11-85 (Chapter 15 of the 1965 Code including the following amendments: amended “Alcohol” 12-23-68; amended 98-7 “Failure to Obtain License” 11-13-72; 98-71(C) added 12-11-72; 98-39 “Buyers of Gold & Silver” Amended 2-9-81;Added “Yard Sales” 10-26-81; Ord. No. 3-84 Amended 98-61 “Peddlers” 4-23-84; Ord. No. 10-84 Amended “Contractors/Contracting 8-13-84). Amended former “Time for Payment of License Taxes;Extension”; former 98-20 “Abatement/Proration of License Tax”; 98-23 “Expiration of Licenses” and 98-26 “Records and Report of Gross Receipts” 9-30-85. Amended 98-61 “Solicitors” 7-28-86; 7-27-92 and 2-12-96. Ord. No. 13-96 amended 98-45 and 98-61 “Commercial Solicitors” 12-16-96. Ord. No. 4-98 amended 98-61 “Peddlers” 2-9-98. 98-61 (E-G) “Solicitors” was removed 3-21-16. 98-61 “Peddlers” was amended in its entirety 3-21-16. Other amendments noted where applicable.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
98-1 OVERRIDING CONFLICTING ORDINANCES
Except as may be otherwise provided by the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia, and notwithstanding any other current ordinances or resolutions enacted by the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia, whether or not compiled in the Code of this jurisdiction, to the extent of any conflict, the following provisions shall be applicable to the levy, assessment, and
Chapter 98 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 98
98-3
collection of licenses required and taxes imposed on businesses, trades, professions and callings and upon the persons, firms and corporations engaged therein within the Town of Front Royal, Virginia.
(Ord. No. 2-96 Added 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
98-2 DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this ordinance, unless otherwise required by the context:
AFFILIATED GROUP means:
1. One or more chains of corporations subject to inclusion connected through stock ownership with a common parent corporation which is a corporation subject to inclusion if:
a. Stock possessing at least eighty percent (80%) of the voting power of all classes of stock and at least eighty percent (80%) of each class of the nonvoting stock of each of the corporations subject to inclusion, except the common parent corporation, is owned directly by one or more of the other corporations subject to inclusion; and
b. The common parent corporation directly owns stock possessing at least eighty percent (80%) of the voting power of all classes of stock and at least eighty percent (80%) of each class of the nonvoting stock of at least one of the other subject to inclusion corporations. As used in this subsection, the term "stock" does not include nonvoting stock which is limited and preferred as to dividends; the phrase "corporation subject to inclusion" means any corporation within the affiliated group irrespective of the state or country of its incorporation; and the term "receipts" includes gross receipts and gross income.
(Ord. No. 13-96 Amended (1) 12-16-96-Effective Upon Passage)
2. Two or more corporations if five or fewer persons who are individuals, estates or trusts own stock possessing:
a. At least eighty percent (80%) of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote or at least eighty percent (80%) of the total value of shares of all classes of the stock of each corporation, and
b. More than fifty percent (50%) of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote or more than fifty percent of the total value of shares of all classes of stock of each corporation, taking into account the stock ownership of each such person only to the extent such stock ownership is identical with respect to each such corporation.
When one or more of the corporations subject to inclusion, including the common parent corporation, is a non-stock corporation, the term "stock" as used in this subsection shall refer to the non-stock corporation membership or membership voting rights, as is appropriate to the context. (Ord. No. 13-96 Amended 12-16-96-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 98 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 98
98-4
ASSESSMENT means a determination as to the proper rate of tax, the measure to which the tax rate is applied, and ultimately the amount of tax, including additional or omitted tax, that is due. An assessment shall include a written assessment made pursuant to notice by the assessing official or a self-assessment made by a taxpayer upon the filing of a return or otherwise not pursuant to notice. Assessment shall be deemed made by an assessing official when a written notice of assessment is delivered to the taxpayer by the assessing official or an employee of the assessing official, or mailed to the taxpayer at his last known address. Self-assessments shall be deemed made when a return is filed, or if no return is required, when the tax is paid. A return filed or tax paid before the last day prescribed by ordinance for the filing or payment thereof shall be deemed to be filed or paid on the last day specified for the filing of a return or the payment of tax, as the case may be.
ASSESSOR OR ASSESSING OFFICIAL means the Finance Director of this jurisdiction.
BASE YEAR means the calendar year preceding the license year, except for contractors subject to the provisions of Section 58.1-3715 of the Code of Virginia, as amended. A business may use the same fiscal year as for federal income tax purposes, as the period for measuring the gross receipts of the business.
(Ord. No. 13-96 Amended 12-16-96-Effective Upon Passage)
BUSINESS means a course of dealing which requires the time, attention and labor of the person so engaged for the purpose of earning a livelihood or profit. It implies a continuous and regular course of dealing, rather than an irregular or isolated transaction. A person may be engaged in more than one business. The following acts shall create a rebuttable presumption that a person is engaged in a business: (i) advertising or otherwise holding oneself out to the public as being engaged in a particular business; or (ii) filing tax returns, schedules and documents that are required only of persons engaged in a trade or business.
CONTRACTOR shall have the meaning prescribed in Virginia Code Section 58.1-3714.B, whether such work is done or offered to be done by day labor, general contract or subcontract.
DEFINITE PLACE OF BUSINESS means an office or a location at which occurs a regular and continuous course of dealing for thirty (30) consecutive days or more. A definite place of business for a person engaged in business may include a location leased or otherwise obtained from another person on a temporary or seasonal basis; and real property leased to another. A person's residence shall be deemed to be a definite place of business if there is no definite place of business maintained elsewhere and the person is not licensable as a peddler or itinerant merchant.
FINANCIAL SERVICES means the buying, selling, handling, managing, investing, and providing of advice regarding money, credit, securities, or other investments.
(Ord. No. 13-96 Amended 12-16-96-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 98 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 98
98-5
Broker shall mean an agent of a buyer or a seller who buys or sells stocks, bonds, commodities, or services, usually on a commission basis.
Commodity shall mean staples such as wool, cotton, etc. which are traded on a commodity exchange and on which there is trading in futures.
Dealer for purposes of this ordinance shall mean any person engaged in the business of buying and selling securities for his own account, but does not include a bank, or any person insofar as he buys or sells securities for his own account, either individually or in some fiduciary capacity, but not as part of a regular business
Security for purposes of this ordinance shall have the same meaning as in the Securities Act (Section 13.1-501, et seq.) of the Code of Virginia, or in similar laws of the United States regulating the sale of securities.
Those engaged in rendering financial services include, but without limitation, the following:
Buying installment receivables
Chattel mortgage financing
Consumer financing
Credit card services
Credit Unions
Factors
Financing accounts receivable
Industrial loan companies
Installment financing
Inventory financing
Loan or mortgage brokers
Loan or mortgage companies
Safety deposit box companies
Security and commodity brokers and services
Stockbroker
Working capital financing
FUEL SALE OR FUEL SALES shall mean retail sales of alternative fuel, blended fuel, diesel fuel, gasohol or gasoline as such terms are defined in Section 58.1-2201 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended.
(Ord. No. 06-06 Added 6-26-06-Effective 7-1-06)
GAS RETAILER means a person or entity engaged in business as a retailer offering to sell at retail on a daily basis alternative fuel, blended fuel, diesel fuel, gasohol or gasoline as such terms are defined in Section 58.1-2201 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended.
(Ord. No. 06-06 Added 6-26-06-Effective 7-1-06)
Chapter 98 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 98
98-6
GROSS RECEIPTS means the whole, entire, total receipts, without deduction, except as may be limited by the provisions of Chapter 37 of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia.
(Ord. No. 13-96 Amended 12-16-96-Effective Upon Passage)
LICENSE YEAR means the calendar year for which a license is issued for the privilege of engaging in business.
PERSONAL SERVICES shall mean rendering for compensation any repair, personal, business or other services not specifically classified as "financial, real estate or professional service" under this ordinance, or rendered in any other business or occupation not specifically classified in this ordinance unless exempted from local license tax by Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia.
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES means services performed by architects, attorneys-at-law, certified public accountants, dentists, engineers, land surveyors, surgeons, veterinarians, and practitioners of the healing arts (the arts and sciences dealing with the prevention, diagnosis, treatment and cure or alleviation of human physical or mental ailments, conditions, diseases, pain or infirmities) and such occupations, and no others, as the Virginia Department of Taxation may list in the BPOL guidelines promulgated pursuant to Virginia Code Section 58.1-3700.1 and Section 58.1-3701. The word "profession" implies attainments in professional knowledge as distinguished from mere skill, and the application of knowledge to uses for others rather than for personal profit.
(Ord. No. 13-96 Amended 12-16-96-Effective Upon Passage)
PURCHASES means all goods, wares and merchandise received for sale at each definite place of business of a wholesale merchant. The term shall also include the cost of manufacture of all goods, wares and merchandise manufactured by any wholesale merchant and sold or offered for sale. A wholesale merchant may elect to report the gross receipts from the sale of manufactured goods, wares and merchandise if it cannot determine the cost of manufacture or chooses not to disclose the cost of manufacture.
(Ord. No. 13-96 Amended 12-16-96-Effective Upon Passage)
REAL ESTATE SERVICES means providing a service with respect to the purchase, sale, lease, rental, or appraisal of real property. Unless the service is otherwise specifically provided for in this ordinance, such services include, but are not limited to, the following:
(Ord. No. 13-96 Amended 12-16-96-Effective Upon Passage)
Appraisers of real estate
Escrow agents, real estate
Fiduciaries, real estate
Lessors of real property
Real estate agents, brokers and managers
Real estate selling agents
Rental agents for real estate
Chapter 98 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 98
98-7
RETAILER OR RETAIL MERCHANT shall mean any person or merchant who sells goods, wares and merchandise for use or consumption by the purchaser or for any purpose other than resale by the purchaser, but does not include sales at wholesale to institutional, commercial and industrial users.
SERVICES shall mean things purchased by a customer which do not have physical characteristics, or which are not goods, wares, or merchandise.
WHOLESALER OR WHOLESALE MERCHANT shall mean any person or merchant who sells wares and merchandise for resale by the purchaser, including sales when the goods, wares and merchandise will be incorporated into goods and services for sale, and also includes sales to institutional, commercial, government and industrial users which because of the quantity, price, or other terms indicate that they are consistent with sales at wholesale.
(Ord. No. 2-96 Amended Entire Section 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
98-3 LICENSE REQUIREMENT
Every person shall apply for a license for each business, trade, profession, occupation or calling (collectively hereinafter "a business"), unless otherwise exempted by law, when engaging in a business in the Town of Front Royal if (i) the person has a definite place of business in this jurisdiction; (ii) there is no definite place of business anywhere and the person resides in this jurisdiction; or (iii) there is no definite place of business in this jurisdiction but the person operates amusement machines or is classified as an itinerant merchant, peddler, carnival, circus, contractor subject to Virginia Code Section 58.1-3715, or public service corporation. A separate license shall be required for each definite place of business and for each business. A person engaged in two or more businesses or professions carried on at the same place of business may elect to obtain one license for all such businesses and professions if all of the following criteria are satisfied: (i) each business or profession is subject to licensure at the location and has satisfied any requirements imposed by state law or other provisions of the ordinances of the Town of Front Royal; (ii) all of the businesses or professions are subject to the same tax rate, or, if subject to different tax rates, the licensee agrees to be taxed on all businesses and professions at the highest rate; and (iii) the taxpayer agrees to supply such information as the assessor may require concerning the nature of the several businesses and their gross receipts.
Every person and business entity engaged in any business in the Town of Front Royal shall obtain a license from the Town of Front Royal Department of Finance before the commencement of such business, the minimum fee for which shall be ten dollars ($10.00), unless exempt from licensing. Each year thereafter, such persons and entities shall pay an annual minimum license fee of ten dollars ($10.00). In no instance shall this minimum fee create a refund.
(Ord. No. 2-96 Amended Entire Section 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 13-96 Amended 12-16-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended by adding minimum fee 7-13-15-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 98 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 98
98-8
98-3.5 DUE DATES AND PENALTIES
A. Each person subject to a license tax shall apply for a license prior to beginning business if he was not subject to licensure in this jurisdiction on or before January 1 of the license year, or no later than March 1 of the license year if he has been issued a license for the preceding year. The application shall be on forms prescribed by the assessing official.
(Ord. No. 13-96 Added New Section # & Amended from former (98-3) 12-16-96-Effective Upon Passage)
B. The tax shall be paid with the application in the case of any license not based on gross receipts. If the tax is measured by the gross receipts of the business, the tax shall be paid on or before March 1; or thirty (30) days after beginning business for businesses not subject to licensure in this jurisdiction on or before January 1 of the license year.
(Ord. No. 13-96 Added New Section # & Amended from former (98-3) 12-16-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 5-01 Amended 6-25-01-Effective Upon Passage)
C. The assessing official may grant an extension of time in which to file an application for a license, for reasonable cause. The extension shall be conditioned upon the timely payment of a reasonable estimate of the appropriate tax; the tax is then subject to adjustment to the correct tax at the end of the extension, together with interest from the due date until the date paid and, if the estimate submitted with the extension is found to be unreasonable under the circumstances, with a penalty of ten percent of the portion paid after the due date.
(Ord. No. 13-96 Added New Section # & Amended from former (98-3) 12-16-96-Effective Upon Passage)
D. A penalty of ten percent of the tax may be imposed upon the failure to file an application or the failure to pay the tax by the appropriate due date. Only the late filing penalty shall be imposed by the assessing official if both the application and payment are late; however, both penalties may be assessed if the assessing official determines that the taxpayer has a history of noncompliance. In the case of an assessment of additional tax made by the assessing official, if the application and, if applicable, the return were made in good faith and the understatement of the tax was not due to any fraud, reckless or intentional disregard of the law by the taxpayer, there shall be no late payment penalty assessed with the additional tax. If any assessment of tax by the assessing official is not paid within thirty days, the treasurer or Finance Director may impose a ten percent late payment penalty. If the failure to file or pay was not the fault of the taxpayer, the penalties shall not be imposed, or if imposed, shall be abated by the official who assessed them. In order to demonstrate lack of fault, the taxpayer must show that he acted responsibly and that the failure was due to events beyond his control.
Acted Responsibly means that: (i) the taxpayer exercised the level of reasonable care that a prudent person would exercise under the circumstances in determining the filing obligations for the business and (ii) the taxpayer undertook significant steps to avoid or mitigate the failure, such as requesting appropriate extensions (where applicable), attempting to prevent a foreseeable impediment, acting to remove an impediment once it occurred, and promptly rectifying a failure once the impediment was removed or the failure discovered.
Chapter 98 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 98
98-9
"Events Beyond the Taxpayer's Control" include, but are not limited to, the unavailability of records due to fire or other casualty; the unavoidable absence (e.g., due to death or serious illness) of the person with the sole responsibility for tax compliance; or the taxpayer's reasonable reliance in good faith upon erroneous written information from the assessing official who was aware of the relevant facts relating to the taxpayer's business when he provided the erroneous information.
E. Interest shall be charged on the late payment of the tax from the due date until the date paid without regard to fault or other reason for the late payment. Whenever an assessment of additional or omitted tax by the assessing official is found to be erroneous, all interest and penalty charged and collected on the amount of the assessment found to be erroneous shall be refunded together with interest on the refund from the date of payment or the due date, whichever is later. Interest shall be paid on the refund of any license tax, assessed pursuant to this Chapter, from the date of payment or due date, whichever is later, whether attributable to an amended return or other reason. Interest on any refund shall be paid at the same rate charged under Virginia Code Section 58.1-3916.
No interest shall accrue on an adjustment of estimated tax liability to actual liability at the conclusion of a base year. No interest shall be paid on a refund or charged on a late payment, provided the refund or the late payment is made not more than thirty days from the date of the payment that created the refund or the due date of the tax, whichever is later.
(Ord. No. 2-96 had Amended Entire Section as (98-3) 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 13-96 Added New Section # & Amended from former (98-3) 12-16-96-Effective Upon Passage)
98-4 SITUS OF GROSS RECEIPTS
A. General Rule. Whenever the tax imposed by this ordinance is measured by gross receipts, the gross receipts included in the taxable measure shall be only those gross receipts attributed to the exercise of a privilege subject to licensure at a definite place of business within the Town of Front Royal. In the case of activities conducted outside of a definite place of business, such as during a visit to a customer location, the gross receipts shall be attributed to the definite place of business from which such activities are initiated, directed, or controlled. The situs of gross receipts for different classifications of business shall be attributed to one or more definite places of business or offices as follows:
1. The gross receipts of a contractor shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which his services are performed, or if his services are not performed at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which his services are directed or controlled, unless the contractor is subject to the provisions of Virginia Code Section 58.1-3715;
2. The gross receipts of a retailer or wholesaler shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which sales solicitation activities occur, or if sales solicitation activities do not occur at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which sales solicitation activities are directed or controlled; however, a wholesaler or distribution house subject to a license tax measured by purchases shall determine the situs
Chapter 98 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 98
98-10
of its purchases by the definite place of business at which or from which deliveries of the purchased goods, wares and merchandise are made to customers. Any wholesaler who is subject to license tax in two or more localities and who is subject to multiple taxation because the localities use different measures, may apply to the Virginia Department of Taxation for a determination as to the proper measure of purchases and gross receipts subject to license tax in each locality;
(Ord. No. 13-96 Amended 12-16-96-Effective Upon Passage)
3. The gross receipts of a business renting tangible personal property shall be attributed to the definite place of business from which the tangible personal property is rented or, if the property is not rented from any definite place of business, then to the definite place of business at which the rental of such property is managed; and
4. The gross receipts from the performance of services shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which the services are performed or, if not performed at any definite place of business, then to the definite place of business from which the services are directed or controlled.
B. Apportionment. If the licensee has more than one definite place of business and it is impractical or impossible to determine to which definite place of business gross receipts should be attributed under the general rule; and the affected jurisdictions are unable to reach an apportionment agreement, and except as to circumstances set forth in Virginia Code Section 58.1-3709; the gross receipts of the business shall be apportioned between the definite places of businesses in the basis of payroll. Gross receipts shall not be apportioned to a definite place of business unless some activities under the applicable general rule occurred at, or were controlled from, such definite place of business. Gross receipts attributable to a definite place of business in another jurisdiction shall not be attributed to this jurisdiction solely because the other jurisdiction does not impose a tax on the gross receipts attributable to the definite place of business in such other jurisdiction.
(Ord. No. 13-96 Amended 12-16-96-Effective Upon Passage)
C. Agreements. The assessor may enter into agreements with any other political subdivisions of Virginia concerning the manner in which gross receipts shall be apportioned among definite places of business. However, the sum of the gross receipts apportioned by the agreement shall not exceed the total gross receipts attributable to all of the definite places of business affected by the agreement. Upon being notified by a taxpayer that its method of attributing gross receipts is fundamentally inconsistent with the method of one or more political subdivisions in which the taxpayer is licensed to engage in business and that the difference has, or is likely to, result in taxes on more than 100 percent of its gross receipts from all locations in the affected jurisdictions, the assessor shall make a good faith effort to reach an apportionment agreement with the other political subdivisions involved.
If an agreement cannot be reached, either the assessor or taxpayer may seek an advisory opinion from the Virginia Department of Taxation pursuant to Virginia Code Section 58.1-3701; notice of the request shall be given to the other party. Notwithstanding the provisions of Virginia Code
Chapter 98 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 98
98-11
Section 58.1-3993, when a taxpayer has demonstrated to a court that two or more political subdivisions of Virginia have assessed taxes on gross receipts that may create a double assessment within the meaning of Virginia Code Section 58.1-3986, the court shall enter such orders pending resolution of the litigation as may be necessary to ensure that the taxpayer is not required to pay multiple assessments even though it is not then known which assessment is correct and which is erroneous.
(Ord. No. 9-85 Amended (former “Applicability”) 9-30-85-Effective 7-1-86)
(Ord. No. 2-96 Amended Entire Section 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 13-96 Amended (C) by Adding 2nd Paragraph 12-16-96-Effective Upon Passage)
98-5 LIMITATIONS AND EXTENSIONS, APPEALS AND AUDITS
A. Limitations and Extensions.
1. Where, before the expiration of the time prescribed for the assessment of any license tax imposed pursuant to this ordinance, both the assessing official and the taxpayer have consented in writing to its assessment after such time, the tax may be assessed at any time prior to the expiration of the period agreed upon. The period so agreed upon may be extended by subsequent agreements in writing made before the expiration of the period previously agreed upon.
2. Notwithstanding Virginia Code Section 58.1-3903, the assessing official shall assess the local license tax omitted because of fraud or failure to apply for a license for the current license year and the six preceding license years.
3. The period for collecting any local license tax shall not expire prior to the period specified in Virginia Code Section 58.1-3940, two years after the date of assessment if the period for assessment has been extended pursuant to this subdivision of the ordinance, two years after the final determination of an appeal for which collection has been stayed pursuant to subdivision B.2. or B.4. of Section 98-5 of this ordinance, or two years after the final decision in a court application pursuant to Virginia Code Section 58.1-3984 or similar law for which collection has been stayed, whichever is later.
B. Appeals and rulings.
1. Any person assessed with a local license tax as a result of an audit may apply within ninety days from the date of such assessment to the assessor for a correction of the assessment. The application must be filed in good faith and sufficiently identify the taxpayer, audit period, remedy sought, each alleged error in the assessment, the grounds upon which the taxpayer relies, and any other facts relevant to the taxpayer's contention. The assessor may hold a conference with the taxpayer if requested by the taxpayer, or require submission of additional information and documents, a further audit, or other evidence deemed necessary for a proper and equitable determination of the application. The assessment shall be deemed prima facie correct. The assessor shall undertake a full review of the taxpayer's claims and issue a determination to the taxpayer setting forth its position. Every assessment pursuant to an audit shall be accompanied by a
Chapter 98 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 98
98-12
written explanation of the taxpayer's right to seek correction and the specific procedure to be followed (e.g., the name and address to which an application should be directed).
2. Provided a timely and complete application is made, collection activity shall be suspended until a final determination is issued by the assessor, unless the assessor determines that collection would be jeopardized by delay or that the taxpayer has not responded to a request for relevant information after a reasonable time. Interest shall accrue in accordance with the provisions of subdivision E. of Section 98-3.5, but no further penalty shall be imposed while collection action is suspended. The term "jeopardized by delay" includes a finding that the application is frivolous, or that a taxpayer desires to (i) depart quickly from the locality, (ii) remove his property therefrom, (iii) conceal himself or his property therein, or (iv) do any other act tending to prejudice, or to render wholly or partially ineffectual, proceedings to collect the tax for the period in question.
3. Any person assessed with a license tax, pursuant to this Chapter, as a result of an audit may apply within ninety days of the determination by the assessing official on an application pursuant to subdivision B.1. of Section 98-5, to the Virginia Tax Commissioner for a correction of such assessment. The Virginia Tax Commissioner shall issue a determination to the taxpayer within ninety days of receipt of the taxpayer's application, unless the taxpayer and the assessing official are notified that a longer period will be required. The application shall be treated as an application pursuant to Virginia Code Section 58.1-1821, and the Virginia Tax Commissioner may issue an order correcting such assessment pursuant to Virginia Code Section 58.1-1822. Following such an order, either the taxpayer or the assessing official may apply to the appropriate circuit court pursuant to Virginia Code Section 58.1-3984. However, the burden shall be on the party making the application to show that the ruling of the Virginia Tax Commissioner is erroneous. Neither the Virginia Tax Commissioner nor the Virginia Department of Taxation shall be made a party to an application to correct an assessment merely because the Virginia Tax Commissioner has ruled on it.
4. On receipt of a notice of intent to file an appeal to the Virginia Tax Commissioner under subdivision B.) 3.) of Section 98-5, the assessing official shall further suspend collection activity until a final determination is issued by the Virginia Tax Commissioner, unless the assessor determines that collection would be jeopardized by delay or that the taxpayer has not responded to a request for relevant information after a reasonable time. Interest shall accrue in accordance with the provisions of subdivision E. of Section 98-3.5, but no further penalty shall be imposed while collection action is suspended. The term "jeopardized by delay" shall have the same meaning as set forth in subdivision B. 2. of Section 98-5 above.
5. Any taxpayer may request a written ruling regarding the application of a license tax to a specific situation from the assessor. Any person requesting such a ruling must provide all the relevant facts for the situation and may present a rationale for the basis of an interpretation of the law most favorable to the taxpayer. Any misrepresentation or change in the applicable law or the factual situation as presented in the ruling request shall invalidate any such ruling issued. A written ruling may be revoked or amended
Chapter 98 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 98
98-13
prospectively if (i) there is a change in the law, a court decision, or the guidelines issued by the Virginia Department of Taxation upon which the ruling was based or (ii) the assessor notifies the taxpayer of a change in the policy or interpretation upon which the ruling was based. However, any person who acts on a written ruling which later becomes invalid shall be deemed to have acted in good faith during the period in which such ruling was in effect.
(Ord. No. 9-85 Amended (former “Levy of License Taxes”) 9-30-85-Effective 7-1-86)
(Ord. No. 2-96 Amended Entire Section 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 13-96 Amended Entire Section 12-16-96-Effective Upon Passage)
98-6 RECORDKEEPING AND AUDITS
Every person who is assessable with a local license tax shall keep sufficient records to enable the assessor to verify the correctness of the tax paid for the license years assessable and to enable the assessor to ascertain what is the correct amount of tax that was assessable for each of those years. All such records, books of accounts and other information shall be open to inspection and examination by the assessor in order to allow the assessor to establish whether a particular receipt is directly attributable to the taxable privilege exercised within this jurisdiction. The assessor shall provide the taxpayer with the option to conduct the audit in the taxpayer's local business office, if the records are maintained there. In the event the records are maintained outside this jurisdiction, copies of the appropriate books and records shall be sent to the assessor's office upon demand.
(Ord. No. 2-96 Amended Entire Section 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
98-7 EXCLUSIONS AND DEDUCTIONS FROM "GROSS RECEIPTS”
A. General Rule. Gross receipts for license tax purposes shall not include any amount not derived from the exercise of the licensed privilege to engage in a business or profession in the ordinary course of business.
B. The following items shall be excluded from gross receipts:
1. Amounts received and paid to the United States, the Commonwealth or any county, city or town for the Virginia retail sales or use tax, for any local sales tax or any local excise tax on cigarettes, for any federal or state excise taxes on motor fuels.
2. Any amount representing the liquidation of a debt or conversion of another asset to the extent that the amount is attributable to a transaction previously taxed (e.g., the factoring of accounts receivable created by sales which have been included in taxable receipts even though the creation of such debt and factoring are a regular part of its business).
3. Any amount representing returns and allowances granted by the business to its customer.
4. Receipts which are the proceeds of a loan transaction in which the licensee is the obligor.
Chapter 98 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 98
98-14
5. Receipts representing the return of principal of a loan transaction in which the licensee is the creditor, or the return of principal or basis upon the sale of a capital asset.
6. Rebates and discounts taken or received on account of purchases by the licensee. A rebate or other incentive offered to induce the recipient to purchase certain goods or services from a person other than the offeror, and which the recipient assigns to the licensee in consideration of the sale of goods and services shall not be considered a rebate or discount to the licensee, but shall be included in the licensee's gross receipts together with any handling or other fees related to the incentive.
7. Withdrawals from inventory for purposes other than sale or distribution and for which no consideration is received and the occasional sale or exchange of assets other than inventory whether or not a gain or loss is recognized for federal income tax purposes.
(Ord. No. 13-96 Amended 12-16-96-Effective Upon Passage)
8. Investment income not directly related to the privilege exercised by a business subject to licensure not classified as rendering financial services. This exclusion shall apply to interest on bank accounts of the business, and to interest, dividends and other income derived from the investment of its own funds in securities and other types of investments unrelated to the licensed privilege. This exclusion shall not apply to interest, late fees and similar income attributable to an installment sale or other transaction that occurred in the regular course of business.
(Ord. No. 13-96 Amended 12-16-96-Effective Upon Passage)
C. The following shall be deducted from gross receipts or gross purchases that would otherwise be taxable:
1. Any amount paid for computer hardware and software that are sold to a United States federal or state government entity provided that such property was purchased within two years of the sale to said entity by the original purchaser who shall have been contractually obligated at the time of purchase to resell such property to a state or federal government entity. This deduction shall not occur until the time of resale and shall apply to only the original cost of the property and not to its resale price, and the deduction shall not apply to any of the tangible personal property which was the subject of the original resale contract if it is not resold to a state or federal government entity in accordance with the original contract obligation.
2. Any receipts attributable to business conducted in another state or foreign country in which the taxpayer is liable for an income or other tax based upon income.
(Ord. No. 2-96 Amended Entire Section 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 13-96 Added (C) 12-16-96-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 98 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 98
98-15
98-8 TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
1. March 1 of the calendar year is adopted as the due date for license applications. No license tax shall be required to be prorated to reflect a license year of less than twelve months, whether the tax is a flat amount or measured by gross receipts, provided that no change is made in the taxable year for measuring gross receipts.
2. The provisions of this Chapter relating to penalties, interest, and administrative and judicial review of an assessment shall be applicable to assessments made on and after January 1, 1997, even if for an earlier license year. The provisions relating to agreements extending the period for assessing tax shall be effective for agreements entered into on and after July 1, 1996. The provisions permitting an assessment of license tax for up to six preceding years in certain circumstances shall not be construed to permit the assessment of tax for a license year beginning before January 1, 1997.
(Ord. No. 2-96 (Reserved) Section 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 13-96 Added Entire Section 12-16-96-Effective Upon Passage)
98-9 REFUSAL TO PERMIT RECORD EXAMINATION, FAILURE TO PRODUCE RECORDS; REFUSAL TO PERMIT AUDIT.
A. Any person who shall refuse to permit the assessing official or his authorized agent to examine and audit his or its records, books and papers pertaining to the gross receipts of such person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, Penalties, of this Code.
(Ord. No. 9-85 Amended (former “Tax Based on Estimated Gross Receipts for Businesses Begun after Jan 1”) 9-30-85-Effective 7-1-86)
(Ord. No. 13-96 Amended 12-16-96-Effective Upon Passage)
B. Any person who shall fail to appear before the proper enforcement officer of the town and produce his records, books and papers pertinent to license tax assessments, when duly summoned, or shall refuse to permit such proper enforcement officer to make or cause to be made such other and further investigation and audit of such books and papers shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, Penalties, of this Code.
(Ord. No. 2-96 Amended Entire Section 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
98-10 INTERROGATORIES TO BE ANSWERED BY APPLICANT
A. As one of the means of ascertaining the amount of any license tax, the assessing official may propound interrogatories of an applicant for a license under this chapter and may use such other evidence as he may procure. Such interrogatories shall be answered under oath.
Chapter 98 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 98
98-16
B. Any applicant refusing to answer an interrogatory under oath, as required by Subsection A of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, Penalties, of this Code.
(Ord. No. 2-96 Amended Entire Section 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
98-11 FALSE INFORMATION IN SUBMISSION
If any person required to file an application, statement or interrogatory; or maintain a record; as provided in Sections 98-3, 98-6 or 98-10, shall give false information in such application, statement, interrogatory, or record he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, Penalties, of this Code.
(Ord. No. 2-96 Amended Entire Section 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
98-12 ASSESSMENT AND PENALTY FOR REPORTING INCORRECT INFORMATION, REPORTS OR RETURNS.
If it shall appear that the gross receipts or other matters pertinent to license tax assessment have been willfully reported incorrectly or returned incorrectly to the assessing official, the person making such report or return shall pay, in addition to the increase license tax assessed as provided in Section 98-3.5, a penalty of twenty-five percent (25%) of such increased assessment; provided, further, that any incorrect report or return shall be deemed prima facia willful.
(Ord. No. 2-96 Amended Entire Section 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 13-96 Amended by adding 98-3.5 12-16-96-Effective Upon Passage)
98-13 ZONING COMPLIANCE REQUIRED
The assessing official shall not issue, under the provisions of this Chapter, a license for conducting any business, trade or occupation at a location where the conduct of such business, trade or occupation at such location is prohibited by Chapter 175, relative to zoning.
(Ord. No. 2-96 Amended Entire Section 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
98-14 WHEN CERTIFICATE OR PERMIT REQUIRED
If a business, trade, profession, occupation or calling for which a license is required is one which can be granted only on the certificate of a court or other official, or the granting of a permit, then such license shall not be valid or effective until such certificate or permit shall be obtained. It is the responsibility of the person applying for such license to determine is any such certificate or permit is otherwise required by law.
(Ord. No. 2-96 Amended Entire Section 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 98 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 98
98-17
98-15 KEEPING AND EXHIBITING OF LICENSE
Every person or business required to obtain a license shall keep the license in a place where it may be exhibited immediately upon demand of any representative of the Town. No license measured by volume of business shall be required to be publicly displayed. Failure to obtain or to exhibit the license upon demand of a Town representative or failing to display properly any license tag required under this chapter or Chapter 37 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, Penalties, of this Code.
(Amended 7-13-15 by adding “to obtain or”-Effective Upon Passage)
98-16 (RESERVED)
(Ord. No. 2-96 Reserved Section 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
98-17 LIMITATION ON GROSS RECEIPTS
Gross receipts of real estate brokers for license tax purposes, under Chapter 37 (Section 58.1-3700, et seq.) of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia and this Chapter, shall not include amounts received by any broker which arise from real estate sales transactions to the extent that such amounts are paid to a real estate agent as a commission on any real estate sales transaction and the agent is subject to the business license tax on such receipts. The broker claiming the exclusion shall identify on its license application each agent to whom the excluded receipts have been paid, and the jurisdiction in the Commonwealth of Virginia to which the agent is subject to business license taxes.
(Ord. No. 2-96 Amended by Reserving Section 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 13-96 Added Entire Section 12-16-96-Effective Upon Passage)
98-18 BUSINESSES EXEMPT FROM LICENSE TAX
No license fee or license tax is imposed or levied on any of the following businesses:
1. On any public service corporation except as provided in Virginia Code Section 58.1-3731 or as permitted by other provisions of law;
2. For selling farm or domestic products or nursery products, ornamental or otherwise, or for the planting of nursery products, as an incident to the sale thereof, outside of the regular market houses and sheds of this Town; provided, such products are grown or produced by the person offering such products for sale;
3. Upon the privilege or right of printing or publishing any newspaper, magazine, newsletter or other publication issued daily or regularly at average intervals not exceeding three months, provided the publication's subscription sales are exempt from state sales tax, or for the privilege or right of operating or conducting any radio or television broadcasting station or service;
Chapter 98 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 98
98-18
4. On a manufacturer for the privilege of manufacturing and selling goods, wares and merchandise at wholesale at the place of manufacture;
5. On a person engaged in the business of severing minerals from the earth for the privilege of selling the severed mineral at wholesale at the place of severance, except as provided in Virginia Code Section 58.1-3712 and Section 58.1-3713;
6. Upon a wholesaler for the privilege of selling goods, wares and merchandise to other persons for resale unless such wholesaler has a definite place of business or store in the Town. This subdivision shall not be construed as prohibiting the Town from imposing a local license tax on a peddler at wholesale pursuant to Virginia Code Section 58.1-3718;
7. Upon any person, firm or corporation for engaging in the business of renting, as the owner of such property, real property other than hotels, motels, motor lodges, auto courts, tourist courts, travel trailer parks, lodging houses, rooming houses and boardinghouses; however, if the Town was imposing such a license tax on January 1, 1974, the Town shall not be precluded from the levy of such tax by the provisions of this subdivision;
8. Upon a wholesaler or retailer for the privilege of selling bicentennial medals on a nonprofit basis for the benefit of the Virginia Independence Bicentennial Commission or any local bicentennial commission;
9. On or measured by receipts for management, accounting, or administrative services provided on a group basis under a nonprofit cost-sharing agreement by a corporation which is an agricultural cooperative association under the provisions of Chapter 3, Article 2 (Section 13.1-312, et seq.), Title 13.1, of the Code of Virginia or a member or subsidiary or affiliated association thereof, to other members of the same group. This exemption shall not exempt any such corporation from such license or other tax measured by receipts from outside the group;
10. On or measured by receipts or purchases by a corporation which is a member of an affiliated group of corporations from other members of the same affiliated group. This exclusion shall not exempt affiliated corporations from such license or other tax measured by receipts or purchases from outside the affiliated group. This exclusion also shall not preclude the Town from levying a wholesale merchant's license tax on an affiliated corporation on those sales by the affiliated corporation to a non-affiliated person, company, or corporation, notwithstanding the fact that the wholesale merchant's license tax would be based upon purchases from an affiliated corporation. Such tax shall be based on the purchase price of the goods sold to the non- affiliated person, company, or corporation. As used in this subdivision the term "sales by the affiliated corporation to a non-affiliated person, company or corporation" shall mean sales by the affiliated corporation to a non- affiliated person, company or corporation where goods sold by the affiliated corporation or its agent are manufactured or stored in the Commonwealth prior to their delivery to the non-affiliated person, company or corporation;
11. On any insurance company subject to taxation under Chapter 25 (Section 58.1-2500, et seq.) of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia or on any agent of such company;
Chapter 98 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 98
98-19
12. On any bank or trust company subject to taxation in Chapter 12 (Section 58.1-1200, et seq.) of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia;
13. Upon a taxicab driver, if the Town has imposed a license tax upon the taxicab company for which the taxicab driver operates;
14. On any blind person operating a vending stand or other business enterprise under the jurisdiction of the Department for the Visually Handicapped, or a nominee of the Department, as set forth in Virginia Code Section 63.1-164;
15. On any hospital, college, university, or other institution of learning not organized or conducted for pecuniary profit which by reason of its purposes or activities is exempt from income tax under the laws of the United States unless such tax was enacted by the Town prior to January 15, 1991. The provisions of this subdivision shall expire on July 1, 1997;
16. On an accredited religious practitioner in the practice of the religious tenets of any church or religious denomination. "Accredited religious practitioner" shall be defined as one who is engaged solely in praying for others upon accreditation by such church or religious denomination;
17. a. On or measured by receipts of a charitable nonprofit organization except to the extent the organization has receipts from an unrelated trade or business the income of which is taxable under Internal Revenue Code Section 511, et seq. For the purpose of this subdivision, "charitable nonprofit organization" means an organization which is described in Internal Revenue Code Section 501 (c) (3) and to which contributions are deductible by the contributor under Internal Revenue Code Section 170, except that educational institutions shall be limited to schools, colleges and other similar institutions of learning.
b. On or measured by gifts, contributions, and membership dues of a nonprofit organization. Activities conducted for consideration which are similar to activities conducted for consideration by for-profit businesses shall be presumed to be activities that are part of a business subject to licensure. For the purpose of this subdivision, "nonprofit organization" means an organization exempt from federal income tax under Internal Revenue Code Section 501 other than charitable nonprofit organizations; or
18. On any venture capital fund or other investment fund, except commissions and fees of such funds. Gross receipts from the sale and rental of real estate and buildings located in the Town remain taxable by the Town provided the Town is otherwise authorized to tax such businesses and rental of real estate.
(Ord. No. 2-96 Amended by Reserving Section 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 13-96 Added Entire Section 12-16-96-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 98 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 98
98-20
98-19 COMBINATION OF SERVICE OCCUPATIONS
Those businesses described in this Chapter as Business Service Occupations, Section 98-64; Personal Service Occupations, Section 98-68; and Repair Service Occupations, Section 98-70 are combined for licensing and taxing purposes pursuant to this Chapter and for administrative purposes into a single Service Occupations category.
(Ord. No. 2-96 Amended by Reserving Section 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 13-96 Added Entire Section 12-16-96-Effective Upon Passage)
98-20 THROUGH 27 (RESERVED)
(Ord. No. 2-96 Reserved Sections 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
98-28 FAILURE TO OBTAIN LICENSE
Any person conducting a business, profession, trade, calling or occupation; or doing other things for which a license tax is required under this chapter; without first having obtained the requisite license or without having obtained any tag or sign required under this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, Penalties, of this Code. Such conviction shall not relieve any such person from the payment of any license tax imposed by this chapter.
(Ord. No. 2-96 Amended Entire Section 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 13-96 Amended 12-16-96-Effective Upon Passage)
98-29 TRANSFERABILITY; VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
A. Licenses issued under this chapter shall be transferable, except where otherwise provided, but in no case shall any transfer of license be legal or valid unless and until notice, in writing, of such transfer shall have been given to the assessing official, who shall have approved such transfer, in writing, on such license. Such notice shall state the time of the transfer and the place of business and name of the person to whom transferred.
B. The assessing official shall keep a record of such transfers and shall submit a copy of each such transfer to the proper enforcement officer.
C. Any person transferring or attempting to transfer any license contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, Penalties, of this Code.
(Ord. No. 2-96 Amended Entire Section 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
98-30 TAX COLLECTED HELD IN TRUST
A motor vehicle dealer who, pursuant to Virginia Code Section 58.1-3734, 1950, as amended, separately states the amount of tax applicable to each sale of a motor vehicle and adds such tax to
Chapter 98 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 98
98-21
the sales price of the motor vehicle, shall be deemed to have collected such tax on behalf of the Town and such tax shall be held in trust for the Town. Any tax collected by the motor vehicle dealer in excess of the tax due shall be returned to the purchaser of the motor vehicle or if not returned forthwith, remitted to the Town. The failure of such merchant to recover the tax from the purchaser shall not relieve such merchant from the obligation to pay the tax to the Town.
(Ord. No. 2-96 Amended Entire Section 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
98-31 THROUGH 34 (RESERVED)
FLAT RATES
98-35 AGRICULTURAL FAIRS
For every license to operate an agricultural fair in the Town for the benefit of the Town and surrounding territory and not operated for profit for the owners or stockholders thereof, there shall be paid a license tax of twenty-five dollars ($25.) per day for each day such fair is held.
98-36 DOG KENNELS
A. Every person who maintains a kennel within the Town of Front Royal annually between January 1st and January 31st shall pay a license tax of fifty dollars ($50.00).
B. For the purpose of this section a kennel shall include and mean any establishment in which ten (10) or more canines, felines, or hybrids of either are kept for the purpose of breeding, hunting, training, renting, buying, boarding, selling, or showing.
(Ord. No. 13-96 Amended by Reserving Section 12-16-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 1-03 Added Entire Section 4-14-03-Effective Upon Passage)
98-37 THROUGH 98-38 (RESERVED)
(Ord. No. 13-96 Amended by Reserving Sections 12-16-96-Effective Upon Passage)
98-39 BUYERS OF OLD GOLD AND SILVER
A. Every person, with a definite place of business in the Town of Front Royal, conducting, operating or engaging in the buying of gold or silver shall pay an annual license tax of ten dollars ($10.00).
B. Every itinerant buyer of gold or silver, which shall mean any person, whether principal, agent or employee, who engages in temporary or transient business in the Town of Front Royal and who, for the purpose of carrying out such business, hires, leases, or occupies any building, structure, site, vehicle, or railroad car on a single-day, day-to-day, or week-to-week basis, shall pay a license tax in the amount of thirty dollars ($30.00) per day.
(Ord. No. 2-96 Amended Amount 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 4-98 Amended 2-9-98-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 98 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 98
98-22
98-40 (RESERVED)
(Ord. No. 13-96 Reserved Section 12-16-96-Effective Upon Passage)
98-41 FINANCE COMPANIES
For every license to do business as a finance company charging a rate of interest not exceeding six percent (6%) per annum, there shall be paid a license tax of thirty dollars ($30.).
(Ord. No. 2-96 Amended Amount 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
98-42 FORTUNETELLERS AND SIMILAR BUSINESSES
For every license for a person engaged in business as a fortuneteller, clairvoyant, phrenologist, spirit medium, astrologist, hypnotist or palmist, there shall be paid a license tax of four hundred dollars ($400.) a year. Such license tax shall not be proratable. A license for a fortuneteller, clairvoyant, phrenologist, spirit medium, astrologist, hypnotist or palmist shall not be transferable.
98-43 (RESERVED)
(Ord. No. 2-96 Reserved Section 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
98-44 INDUSTRIAL LOAN ASSOCIATIONS
For every license for conducting an industrial loan association, there shall be paid a license tax of sixteen cents ($0.16) per $100.00 of actual deposits. Such license tax shall not exceed $500.00 nor be prorated.
(Ord. No. 2-96 Amended by Adding “$500.00” 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 13-96 Amended Flat Rate Amount 12-16-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 4-98 Removed Flat Rate Amount 2-9-98-Effective Upon Passage)
98-45 LICENSING – COMMERCIAL SOLICITORS
Any commercial solicitor as defined by Town Code Chapter 138 shall be subject to the following license taxes:
A. Commercial Solicitor License Tax
1. All Commercial Solicitors - $50.00 per week, up to a maximum of $200.00 per calendar year.
2. Any non-profit civic, charitable, or educational organization may receive a waiver of license tax upon application to and approval of the Front Royal Town Council.
Chapter 98 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 98
98-23
B. Violation
Any commercial solicitor who shall solicit sales without a license shall be guilty of a Class I Misdemeanor and shall be fined not less that fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each offense, and in addition, shall be required to obtain the appropriate license from the Town.
C. Enforcement
It shall be the duty of the police officers and other officers of the Town to enforce the provisions of this section and to have warrants issued against any person committing a violation.
(Added Entire Section/Repealed “Itinerant Vendors” 7-28-86-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended (C) 2-9-98-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended Entire Section “A-C” 3-14-16-Effective Upon Passage)
98-46 FLEA MARKETS
A. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
FLEA MARKET - An assembly of vendors, selling new or used goods in the open air or within temporary structures, who display and sell their wares on the lands of another for a consideration.
B. The proprietor of any flea market shall be required to purchase a license and display the license in a prominent place visible to the public. For such license, there shall be paid a license tax of $500.00 per calendar year. Every vendor of new goods at the flea market shall be deemed a peddler or itinerant merchant and shall pay such license tax as is applicable to peddlers under the provisions of Section 98-61. Such license taxes shall not be prorated. Upon application to and approval by the Town Council, no license shall be required of a nonprofit organization that sells or displays goods at a flea market so long as the proceeds of sale are retained by the nonprofit organization and not shared with other persons, businesses or organizations. The following regulations shall govern the conduct of flea markets:
(Ord. No. 12-86 Added “Peddler”7-28-86-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 13-96 Added “Itinerant Merchant” 12-16-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended to add $500.00 10-10-17-Effective Upon Passage)
1. Goods and wares may be left on premises on Friday and Saturday nights only and on Sunday night if Monday is a holiday.
(Added “Friday” 10-10-17-Effective Upon Passage)
2. A night watchman may be allowed on weekends.
3. No overnight trailers are allowed.
Chapter 98 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 98
98-24
4. The owner or lessee of the premises shall keep the flea market grounds clean and free of refuse and shall provide trash containers in sufficient numbers to serve the customers and vendors on the flea market site.
5. The owner or lessee of the premises shall rent no space to any flea market vendor, except those representing nonprofit organizations, unless the vendor first produces a valid and current license issued by the Town of Front Royal or a daily license permit for the sale and display of goods at a flea market.
(Ord. No. 6-2-82 Added Entire Section 6-28-82-Effective Upon Passage)
98-47 TRADING IN SECONDHAND ARTICLES
A. For every license for trading in any kind of secondhand articles, junk, old metal, rags or other like commodities, there shall be paid a license tax of thirty dollars ($30.).
(Ord. No. 2-96 Amended Amount 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
B. On every license for a canvasser or agent canvassing the Town for the purpose of buying junk or other matter, for junk dealers or for themselves, there shall be paid a license tax of twenty-five dollars ($25.). Any person doing business under this section shall give bond in the penalty of two hundred dollars ($200.) for his faithful compliance with the law, and such bond shall be delivered to the Assessor upon issuance of the license.
98-48 MANUFACTURERS' SALES AGENTS
For every license for acting or doing business as a manufacturer's sales agent, there shall be paid a license tax of fifty dollars ($50.). Such license tax shall not be prorated. No such license tax shall be collected from a "peddler at wholesale" as defined in Virginia Code Section 58.1-3718, contrary to the terms of Section 58.1-3718. The tax levied on a "peddler at wholesale" shall not be greater than the tax imposed on a wholesale merchant, as defined in Chapter 37 of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia, selling similar goods, wares or merchandise at a definite place of business.
(Ord. No. 2-96 Amended 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
98-49 THROUGH 51 (RESERVED)
(Ord. No. 13-96 Reserved Sections 12-16-96-Effective Upon Passage)
98-52 PAWNBROKERS
A. No person shall engage in the business of a pawnbroker within the Town of Front Royal without a valid license issued by the Town, nor in any location other than the one designated within his license. Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class I Misdemeanor.
Chapter 98 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 98
98-25
B. No person shall be licensed as a pawnbroker without having in existence a bond with surety in the minimum amount of $50,000.00 to secure the payment of any judgment recovered under the provisions of Section 54.1-4003(B) of the Code of Virginia.
C. For every license for engaging in business as a pawnbroker there shall be paid a license tax of thirty dollars ($30.00). Such license tax shall not be prorated.
(Ord. No. 2-96 Amended Amount 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
D. No license shall be granted to any person to operate or conduct more than one (1) pawnshop or pawnbroker's sales store in the Town of Front Royal; provided, however, this provision shall not apply to any person who owns and is licensed to operate or conduct more than one (1) pawnshop or pawnbroker's sales store in the Town of Front Royal on the date this ordinance becomes effective but no license shall be granted after the effective date of this ordinance to any such person to operate or conduct any additional pawnshop or pawnbroker's sales store in excess of the number of pawnshops or pawnbroker's sales store operated or conducted by such person on the date this ordinance becomes effective.
(Ord. No. 12-2001 Amended Entire Section/Added “A,B,D” 9-24-01-Effective Upon Passage)
98-53 THROUGH 98-55 (RESERVED)
(Ord. No. 13-96 Reserved Sections 12-16-96-Effective Upon Passage)
98-56 SAVINGS INSTITUTIONS AND CREDIT UNIONS
Every savings institution and credit union having their main office in the Town shall pay a license tax of fifty dollars ($50.).
(Ord. No. 2-96 Amended Entire Section 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 13-96 Amended to “Credit Union” 12-16-96-Effective Upon Passage)
98-57 SHOWS, CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS
A. For every license to operate a show, circus or other like performance, when the price charged for general admission thereto is more than twenty-five cents ($.25) for adults, there shall be paid a license tax of fifty dollars ($50.) per day, and when the price charged for general admission thereto is twenty-five cents ($.25) or less, there shall be paid a license tax of twenty-five dollars ($25.) per day. In addition, there shall be paid a license tax of five dollars ($5.) on each sideshow under a separate tent or enclosure or for admission to which a separate charge is made.
B. For every license to operate a carnival or other similar organization, there shall be paid a license tax of fifty dollars ($50.) for each day an exhibition is given in the Town; provided, however, that when a license is taken out for a week or six (6) days and the amount required is paid in advance of proper officials, the tax for the same shall be two hundred dollars ($200.).
C. For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
Chapter 98 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 98
98-26
CARNIVAL - Includes any lawful business performance or amusement to be given in the tents or enclosed grounds occupied by the management of the carnival in question.
98-58 SMALL LOAN COMPANIES
For every license to do business under Code of Virginia Section 6-274 to 6-338, there shall be paid a license tax of thirty dollars ($30.). Such license tax shall not be prorated.
(Ord. No. 2-96 Amended Amount 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
98-59 YARD SALES
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
PARCEL – A taxable lot of real estate, of record in the Clerk’s Office of the Circuit Court of Warren County, Virginia.
(Added 11-13-12-Effective Upon Passage)
YARD SALE - A sale of personal property, which has been used generally in the household of the vendor and has not been acquired for resale, conducted at the personal residence of the vendor. For licensure of sales of this material and other items by churches or non-profit institutions, see Chapter 72 of the Code.
(Ord. No. 11-11 Amended 7-11-11-Effective Upon Passage)
B. A business license shall be required to operate a yard sale in the Town of Front Royal. A separate license is required for each day a yard sale is conducted at a parcel.
(Amended 11-13-12-Effective Upon Passage)
C. No more than six (6) days of yard sales shall be allowed in any given calendar year at a parcel. On an annual basis, for the first two (2) business licenses of the year to operate a yard sale at a parcel, there shall be no license tax required. Thereafter, for each business license there shall be paid a license tax of five dollars ($5.).
(Ord. No. 3-99 Amended (C) 3-22-99-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended 11-13-12-Effective Upon Passage)
D. The license tax shall be computed annually based on the number of licenses issued to a particular parcel, regardless of the applicant, unless satisfactory evidence is produced by the applicant showing that title to the residence has been changed by valid deed.
(Amended 11-13-12-Effective Upon Passage)
E. Applications to operate a yard sale for Two-Family, Condominiums, and Multi-Family dwellings shall include written consent from the owner. (Added (E) 11-13-12-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 98 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 98
98-27
F. There shall be no license tax required for the first two (2) business licenses obtained for a yard sale during the calendar year. Thereafter, for each additional yard sale, up to the maximum number allowed, as specified above under subsection C, there shall be paid a license tax of five dollars ($5.00).
(Added (F) 11-13-12-Effective Upon Passage)
98-60 COIN-OPERATED VENDING OR SLOT MACHINES
A. Tax on coin-operated machines or devices.
1. Any person having anywhere in the Town a coin-operated machine or device of any description into which is inserted coins to dispose of articles of merchandise or for the purpose of operating devices that operate in the coin-in-slot principle, used for gain, shall pay for every such coin-operated machine or device, as the case may be, a license tax of twenty-five dollars ($25.) per year, which license shall not be prorated or transferable, except that:
a. On each coin-operated music machine, unit or device, the tax shall be ten dollars ($10.).
b. On each coin-operated pinball machine, unit or device, the tax shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.).
c. On each coin-operated radio or television machine, the tax shall be five dollars ($5.).
(Ord. No. 2-96 Amended (1) 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
2. This section shall not apply to coin-operated machines that are used solely for the purpose of selling individual sanitary drinking cups or sanitary drinking cups and natural water; or to machines vending sanitary napkins; or for the delivery of newspapers; or weighing machines; or automatic baggage or parcel checking machines or receptacles; or to vending machines that vend only goods, wares, or merchandise; or postage stamps machines; or machines that provide service only; or viewing machines; or photomat machines; or machines affording rides to children.
3. No license tax shall be imposed by the Town on or on account of any candy vending machine under the ownership and supervision of any state commission or state agency.
4. Regularly licensed retail merchants paying retail merchant's license tax on their sales at retail shall not be required to have any separate vending machine license on such coin-operated machines which are located on the premises of their place of business.
B. Amusement operations. (Ord. No. 12-13-82 Added 12-13-82-Effective Upon Passage)
1. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
Chapter 98 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 98
98-28
AMUSEMENT OPERATOR - Any person, selling, leasing, renting or otherwise furnishing or providing a coin-operated amusement machine in the Town; however, the term amusement operator shall not include any person owning less than three (3) such machines and operating such machines on property owned or leased by such person.
AMUSEMENT MACHINE - Any coin-operated machine not listed in Section 58.1-3721, Code of Virginia 1950, as amended.
2. A license tax in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.) per year is hereby imposed on any amusement operator for the operation of ten (10) or more coin-operated amusement machines in the Town of Front Royal.
3. An annual license tax of twenty dollars ($20.) per machine is hereby imposed on any amusement operator for the operation of fewer than ten (10) coin-operated amusement machines in the Town of Front Royal.
4. In addition, the share of gross receipts actually received by any amusement operator from coin-operated amusement machines operated within the Town of Front Royal shall be subject to a gross receipts tax as provided in Section 98-62 of the Code of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia.
98-61 LICENSING – PEDDLERS AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS
Any peddler or itinerant vendor as defined by Town Code Chapter 138 shall be subject to the following license taxes:
A. Itinerant Merchant License Tax
1. Christmas Tree and Fireworks Vendors - $100.00 per calendar year.
2. Fresh Farm Product Vendors – farm grown by merchant exempt per Va. Code § 58.1-3717; if product is purchased by merchant and resold, merchant is considered an Itinerant Merchant.
3. All Other Itinerant Merchants - $250.00 per calendar year. The tax shall be pro-rated based upon the date of issuance.
4. Any non-profit civic, charitable, or bona-fide educational organization may receive a waiver of license tax upon application to and approval of the Front Royal Town Council.
5. Merchants selling food and merchandise during a Special Event that has been issued a permit by the Town shall be exempt from the license tax.
Chapter 98 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 98
98-29
B. Peddler License Tax
1. Fresh Farm Product Vendors – farm grown by merchant exempt per Va. Code §58.1-3717; if product is purchased by merchant and resold, merchant is considered a peddler.
2. All Other Peddlers - $500.00 per calendar year.
3. Any non-profit civic, charitable, or bona-fide educational organization may receive a waiver of license tax upon application to and approval of the Front Royal Town Council
4. The license tax authorized by this subsection shall not apply to a peddler who sells to licensed dealers or retailers only; a regular wholesaler dealer who shall at the same time sell or deliver merchandise to retail merchants; a distributor or vendor of motor fuels and petroleum products or seafood; or a manufacturer who is subject to Virginia tax on intangible personal property and who peddles only the goods, wares, or merchandise manufactured by him at a plant whose intangible personal property is taxed by the Commonwealth of Virginia.
5. Delivery of food or merchandise ordered by phone, internet, or mail from a fixed place of business issued a business license for operation shall be exempt from the license tax.
C. Violation
Any peddler or itinerant merchant who shall offer for sale or sell or barter without a license shall be guilty of a Class I Misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) no more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each offense, and in addition, shall be required to purchase the appropriate license from the Town.
D. Enforcement
It shall be the duty of the police officers and the officers of the Town to enforce the provisions of the section and to have warrants issued against any person committing a violation.
(Amended Entire Section 3-14-16-Effective Upon Passage)
GROSS RECEIPTS BASIS
98-62 AMUSEMENTS
A. Every person conducting, operating or engaging regularly in any of the businesses, trades or occupations enumerated in this section shall pay an annual license tax equal to twenty four cents ($0.24) per $100.00 of his gross receipts, in such business, trade or occupation for the preceding calendar year. This license tax shall be in addition to any other tax imposed by the town.
(Ord. No. 2-96 Amended Amount 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 4-98 Amended by Removing Amount 2-9-98-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 98 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 98
98-30
B. The businesses, trades or occupations referred to in Subsection A of this section shall be as follows:
Arcade or building devoted to general amusement or entertaining
Auditorium
Coliseum
Dance hall
Gardens, display or amusement
Golf driving range
Miniature golf courses
Movie Theater
Parks; athletic fields (operated for profit)
Pool and billiard tables
Skating rink
Theater
Other amusements and entertainments
(Ord. No. 4-98 Removed “Bowling Alleys” 2-9-98-Effective Upon Passage)
C. The license tax on any permanent coliseum having a maximum seating capacity in excess of 10,000 persons and open to the public shall be no greater than $1,000 per year.
(Ord. No. 2-96 Added (C) 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
98-63 (RESERVED)
(Ord. No. 4-98 Reserved Section 2-9-98-Effective Upon Passage)
98-64 BUSINESS SERVICE OCCUPATIONS
Any person conducting, operating, or engaging in any service occupation shall pay an annual license tax equal to twenty cents ($0.20) per $100.00 of his gross receipts, in such occupation during the preceding year; provided, however, that business licenses for photographers shall not exceed thirty dollars ($30.00) per year.
(Ord. No. 2-96 Amended 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 13-96 Amended Entire Section 12-16-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 4-98 Amended Entire Section 2-9-98-Effective Upon Passage)
98-65 CONTRACTORS AND CONTRACTING
A. Any person conducting, operating, or engaging in the business of contracting or the occupation of contractor shall pay an annual license tax equal to eight cents ($0.08) per $100.00 of his gross receipts, in such business, trade or occupation during the preceding calendar year.
(Ord. No. 4-98 Amended (A) 2-9-98-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 98 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 98
98-31
B. Prior to the issuance of a business license for the purpose of engaging in the business of home improvement, electrical, plumbing, heating or air-conditioning contracting or the business of constructing single- or multi-family dwellings in the Town of Front Royal, each applicant shall first be required to obtain a certificate of competency in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 60 of the Town Code, unless otherwise exempt under said section.
(Ord. No. 13-96 Amended (B) 12-16-96-Effective Upon Passage)
98-66 HEAT, LIGHT AND POWER COMPANIES
Any person, firm or corporation who shall engage in the business of furnishing heat, light or power, whether by means of electricity or gas in the Town, shall pay a license tax equal to 40 cents per $100.00 of the gross annual receipts accruing to such person, firm or corporation from such business in the Town; provided, however, that there shall be deducted any sum or sums paid by such person, firm or corporation to the Town as a merchant's license tax and license taxes, except motor vehicle license taxes.
(Ord. No. 8-14-72 Added Entire Section 8-14-72-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 13-96 Amended Amount 12-16-96-Effective Upon Passage)
98-67 TELEPHONE AND TELEGRAPH COMPANIES
A. Every incorporated telephone or telegraph company owning or operating telephone or telegraph lines within the Town shall pay a license tax equal to 50 cents per $100.00 of the gross receipts of such business accruing to such corporation from business within the Town, provided that charges for long distance telephone calls shall not be considered receipts of business in the Town.
(Ord. No. 13-96 Amended Amount 12-16-96-Effective Upon Passage)
B. The license tax required under this section shall be due and payable on or before October 1, 1972, and each year thereafter it shall be due and payable as provided in this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 8-14-72 Added Entire Section 8-14-72-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 2-96 Amended 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
98-67.1 CABLE TELEVISION COMPANIES
Any person, firm or corporation who shall engage in the business of furnishing cable television service in the Town shall pay a license tax equal to 36 cents per $100.00 of the gross annual receipts accruing to such person, firm or corporation from its business conducted in the Town.
(Ord. No. 18-90 Added Entire Section 9-24-90-Effective 1-1-91)
(Ord. No. 2-96 Amended Amount 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 98 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 98
98-32
98-68 PERSONAL SERVICE OCCUPATIONS
Any person conducting, operating or engaging in a service occupation shall pay an annual license tax equal to twenty cents ($0.20) per $100.00 of his gross receipts, in such business, trade or occupation during the preceding year.
(Ord. No. 2-96 Amended 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 13-96 Amended Entire Section 12-16-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 4-98 Amended Entire Section 2-9-98-Effective Upon Passage)
98-69 PROFESSIONAL SERVICES
Any person conducting, operating, or engaging in any professional service shall pay an annual license tax equal to thirty six cents ($0.36) per $100.00 of his gross receipts, in such business, trade or occupation during the preceding year.
(Ord. No. 2-96 Amended 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 13-96 Amended Entire Section 12-16-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 4-98 Amended Entire Section 2-9-98-Effective Upon Passage)
98-70 REPAIR SERVICE OCCUPATIONS
Any person conducting, operating, or engaging in any service occupation shall pay an annual license tax equal to twenty cents ($0.20) per $100.00 of his gross receipts is such business, trade or occupation during the preceding year.
(Ord. No. 2-96 Amended 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 13-96 Amended Entire Section 12-16-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 4-98 Amended Entire Section 2-9-98-Effective Upon Passage)
98-71 RETAIL MERCHANTS
A. Any person conducting, operating, or engaging in any of the businesses of a retail merchant shall pay an annual license tax equal to twelve cents ($0.12) per $100.00 of his gross receipts in such business, trade or occupation for the preceding year. However, no such license tax shall be collected from a "direct seller" as defined in Virginia Code Section 58.1-3719.1, contrary to the terms of Virginia Code Section 58.1-3719.1. The tax shall be levied on a "direct seller" whose total sales exceed $4,000 per year.
(Ord. No. 2-96 Amended 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 4-98 Amended (A) & Removed “Exemptions” in Title 2-9-98-Effective Upon Passage)
B. Any person who shall sell upon his own premises property of his own, not purchased for that purpose, for less than ten (10) days per year shall, upon application to the Assessor, be granted an exemption from purchasing a retail merchant's license. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, Penalties, of this Code, and each day's violation hereof shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 13-96 Amended (B) 12-16-96-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 98 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 98
98-33
C. In any case in which the Department of Mines, Minerals and Energy determines that the weekly U.S. Retail Gasoline price (regular grade) for PADD 1C (Petroleum Administration for Defense District - Lower Atlantic Region) has increased by 20% or greater in any one-week period over the immediately preceding one-week period and does not fall below the increased rate for at least 28 consecutive days immediately following the week of such increase, then, notwithstanding any tax rate on retailers imposed by the local ordinance, the gross receipts taxes on fuel sales of a gas retailer made in the following license year shall not exceed 110% of the gross receipts taxes on fuel sales made by such retailer in the license year of such increase. For license years beginning on or after January 1, 2006, every gas retailer shall maintain separate records for fuel sales and nonfuel sales and shall make such records available upon request by the local tax official.
The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any person or entity (i) not conducting business as a gas retailer in the Town for the entire license year immediately preceding the license year of such increase or (ii) that was subject to a license fee in the Town pursuant to 58.1-3703 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended for the license year immediately preceding the license year of such increase.
(Ord. No. 13-96 Removed (C) 12-16-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 06-06 Added (C) 6-26-06-Effective 7-1-06)
98-72 TAXICABS
For every license for the privilege of transporting baggage or passengers for hire along the public streets and highways of the Town by means of wagons, carts, drays, trucks, automobiles or other wheeled vehicles, not operated over fixed routes or by schedules, there shall be paid a license tax of ten dollars ($10.) for each vehicle used for passengers or baggage.
(Ord. No. 2-96 Amended by Removing (B) 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
98-73 WHOLESALE MERCHANTS
A. Any person conducting, operating or engaging in any of the businesses of a wholesale merchant shall pay an annual license tax equal to eight cents ($0.08) per $100.00 of his gross receipts in such business, trade or occupation during the preceding year.
(Ord. No. 4-98 Amended (A) 2-9-98-Effective Upon Passage)
B. The businesses, trades or occupations referred to in Subsection A of this section shall include the distribution of the following:
Alcohol (Ord. No. 4-98 Added “Alcohol” 2-9-98-Effective Upon Passage)
Automotive parts and supplies
Chemicals
Clothing and furnishings
Coal and coke
Commission merchants who take title (others are classed as brokers)
Drugs
Chapter 98 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 98
98-34
Dry goods
Electrical and plumbing goods
Farm products or supplies
Furniture and house furnishings
Groceries and foods
Hardware
Jewelry
Lumber, paint and construction materials
Machinery, equipment and supplies
Metals and metal work
Paper and paper products
Petroleum and petroleum products
Seafood
Soft drinks
Sporting goods
Tobacco and tobacco products, except leaf tobacco
Waste materials
Other goods, wares and merchandise
Other wholesale merchants
98-74 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BEER - Includes porter, ale, stout and other like beverages, but not vinous beverages.
B. Bottling business. For each license to a person to do a bottling business as defined in Title 4.1, Code of Virginia, the license tax shall be one hundred sixty dollars ($160.), plus two dollars ($2.) per one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.) of gross receipts in excess of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.), not to exceed a license tax of $500.
(Ord. No. 2-96 Amended State Code Section 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
C. Selling beer at wholesale. For each license to a person to sell beer by wholesale, in the manner prescribed in Title 4.1, Code of Virginia, the license tax shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.).
(Ord. No. 2-96 Amended State Code Section 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
D. Distributing wine at wholesale. For each wholesale wine distributor's license authorizing a person to distribute wine, in accordance with the terms of Title 4.1, Code of Virginia, the license tax shall be fifty dollars ($50.).
(Ord. No. 2-96 Amended State Code Section 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
E. Selling wine for consumption on and off premises by persons conducting hotel, etc. For each license to a person conducting a hotel, restaurant or club to sell wine for consumption both on
Chapter 98 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 98
98-35
and off the premises, as defined and regulated by Title 4.1, Code of Virginia, the license tax shall be ten dollars ($10.), plus twelve-hundredths of one percent (12/100 of 1%) of gross receipts, not to exceed a license tax of $37.50.
(Ord. No. 2-96 Amended State Code Section 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
F. Selling beer for consumption on and off premises by person conducting hotel, etc. For each license to a person conducting a hotel, restaurant or club to sell beer for the consumption both on and off the premises, in the manner defined and regulated by Section 4-25, Code of Virginia, the license tax shall be ten dollars ($10.), plus twelve-hundredths of one percent (12/100 of 1%) of gross receipts, not to exceed a license tax of $37.50.
(Ord. No. 2-96 Amended 2-12-96-Effective Upon Passage)
G. State license prerequisite to issuance of license. No license shall be issued to any person, the license tax for which is set out in this section, unless the applicant therefor holds at the same time or simultaneously procures a state license from the Alcoholic Beverage Control Board.
H. Inspection of premises. All dining rooms, restaurants, lunch rooms and club rooms, wherein the beverages referred to in this section are sold for consumption on the premises, shall at all times be open to inspection by the State Police and the police powers of the county and of the town. Any storeroom or other building from which deliveries are made, either at wholesale or retail by bottlers, wholesalers or retailers, shall at all times be open to like inspection by such police powers. Any violation of the terms of this subsection shall be sufficient grounds for the revocation of the license issued relative to the premises in question.
I. Expiration date of licenses. All licenses, the license taxes for which are set out in this section, shall expire on the 30th day of June.
J. Mixed-beverage restaurant license required; rates and proration of tax.
1. Every person holding a state mixed-beverage restaurant license for an establishment located within the Town shall pay a license tax to the town in the following sums:
a. Persons operating restaurants, including restaurants located on premises of and operated by hotels or motels:
[1] One hundred dollars ($100.) per annum for each restaurant with a seating capacity at tables for fifty (50) to one hundred (100) persons.
[2] One hundred seventy-five dollars ($175.) per annum for each restaurant with a seating capacity at tables for more than one hundred (100) but not more than one hundred fifty (150) persons.
[3] Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.) per annum for each restaurant with a seating capacity at tables for more than one hundred fifty (150) persons.
Chapter 98 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 98
98-36
b. Private nonprofit club operating a restaurant located on the premises of such club: one hundred seventy-five ($175.) per annum.
2. Expiration date. All licenses shall expire on the 31st day of December next following the date on which they are issued.
3. Proration of tax. The tax on each such license shall be subject to proration to the following extent: If the license issued in the second quarter of any year, the tax shall be decreased by one-fourth (1/4); if issued in the third quarter of any year, the tax shall be decreased by one-half (1/2); and if issued in the fourth quarter of any year, the tax be decreased by three-fourths (3/4).
4. Tax additional to other taxes. The license tax herein imposed shall be in addition to every other tax imposed by this Code.
5. State license required. Before any person shall sell or serve any mixed beverage in the town, he shall make application to the Assessor for the license required by the subsection and pay the tax imposed thereby.
98-75 GOING OUT OF BUSINESS SALES
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise, or conduct, a sale for the purpose of discontinuing a retail business, or to modify the word "sale" in any advertisement with the words "going out of business" or any other words which tend to insinuate that the retail business is to be discontinued and the merchandise liquidated, unless such person obtains a permit to conduct such sale from the Town of Front Royal Finance Department.
1. All applications for special sale permits shall be accompanied by an inventory, including the kind and quantity of all goods which are to be offered for sale during the sale, and only the goods specified in the inventory list may be advertised or sold during the sale period.
2. Goods not included on the inventory of special sale goods shall not be commingled with or added to the special sale goods. The Town shall have the right to revoke a special sale permit upon proof that goods not appearing on the original inventory of special sale goods have been commingled with or added to the special sale goods.
3. Each special sale permit shall be valid for a period of no longer than sixty days, and any extension of that time shall constitute a new special sale and shall require an additional permit and inventory. A maximum of one permit beyond the initial sixty-day permit may be granted solely for the purpose of liquidating only those goods contained in the initial inventory list which remain unsold.
4. Any person who advertises such sale shall conspicuously include in the advertisement the permit number assigned for the sale by the Town and the effective dates of the sale as authorized in the permit.
(Ord. No. 4-98 Added Entire Section 2-9-98-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 102 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 102
102-1
Chapter 102
MASSAGE BUSINESS
Sections:
102-1 LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY; PURPOSE
102-2 POLICY
102-3 DEFINITIONS
102-4 VIOLATION OF CHAPTER
102-5 STATE LICENSING REQUIRED; VIOLATION
102-6 SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS
Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal 3-8-76. (Chapter 19 of the 1965 Code) Definitions for “Massage Establishment”; “Out-Call Massage Services”; “Massage Therapist”; “Genital Area” and “Client” was removed 4-8-96. Other amendments noted where applicable.
102-1 LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY; PURPOSE
This Chapter is enacted pursuant to the provisions of Section 18, Subparagraphs (9) and (25) of the Charter of the Town for the purpose of securing and promoting the health, safety and general welfare of the people of the Town.
(Ord. No. 3-96 Amended 4-8-96-Effective Upon Passage)
102-2 POLICY
It is hereby declared that the Commonwealth of Virginia, by its Boards of Medicine and Nursing, has provided for all necessary qualification, licensing and regulation of certified massage therapists and other health care providers who may provide the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the Town of Front Royal. That is proper to limit the performance of such massage service for compensation to such persons qualified, licensed and regulated by the Commonwealth of Virginia.
(Ord. No. 3-96 Amended 4-8-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 13-98 Amended 7-27-98-Effective Upon Passage)
102-3 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
(Ord. No. 3-96 Amended 4-8-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 13-98 Amended 7-27-98-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 102 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 102
102-2
MASSAGE BUSINESS - Is the commercial venture, occupation or profession of providing the service of massage by a person or establishment for pay or other promise of financial compensation. Any self-employed person engaged in providing massage is also a massage business. If massage is an ancillary or incidental function of the business or occupation, the term massage business does not include:
(Ord. No. 13-98 Amended 7-27-98-Effective Upon Passage)
A. Barbershops and beauty parlors where massages are administered to the head, neck and shoulder areas of the body only.
B. Hospitals; nursing homes; medical clinics; or the operations of physicians, surgeons, osteopaths, physical therapists or chiropractors; if they currently hold a valid, unrevoked license issued by the Board of Medicine of Nursing of the Commonwealth of Virginia.
MASSAGE - For pay or other promise of financial compensation; the touching, holding, positioning, manipulation or movement of skin, muscles and other soft tissue of the human body; by rubbing, stroking, tapping, kneading, vibration, compression, friction or any similar method; either by hand or by any instrument. And, the application of oils, topical preparations, salt glows, hot and cold packs, or special baths including: tub, shower, vapor or steam baths.
(Ord. No. 13-98 Added 7-27-98-Effective Upon Passage)
MASSAGE BUSINESS OPERATOR OR EMPLOYEE - A masseur, masseuse or other person who practices any one or more of the arts of massage or massage therapy for pay or other promise of financial compensation. Any person who gives or offers to give any massage or solicits to provide a massage, for pay or other promise of financial compensation.
(Ord. No. 3-96 Amended 4-8-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 13-98 Added 7-27-98-Effective Upon Passage)
102-4 VIOLATION OF CHAPTER
The violation of any provision of this Chapter shall be punished as a misdemeanor as provided in the Town of Front Royal Charter, Section 21 and Code, Section 1-15.
(Ord. No. 3-96 Amended 4-8-96-Effective Upon Passage)
102-5 STATE LICENSING REQUIRED; VIOLATION
A. No massage business shall operate unless the massage business is a hospital; nursing home; medical clinic; or, is controlled and operated by physician, surgeon, osteopath, physical therapist, chiropractor, registered nurse, licensed practical nurse or certified massage therapist; currently holding a valid, unrevoked license issued by the Board of Medicine or Nursing of the Commonwealth of Virginia.
Chapter 102 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 102
102-3
B. No massage business operator or employee may practice his or her occupation, or person provide massage, except where all massage service is rendered only by a physician, surgeon, osteopath, or chiropractor validly licensed by the Board of Medicine of the Commonwealth of Virginia; or is rendered only by a registered nurse, licensed practical nurse, physical therapist, physical therapist assistant, or certified massage therapist currently and validly licensed by the Board of Medicine of Nursing of the Commonwealth of Virginia.
(Ord. No. 3-96 Amended 4-8-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 13-98 Amended/Changed Title from “Permits”7-27-98-Eff. Upon Passage)
102-6 SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS
All massage businesses, establishments, or persons engaged in providing massage services must obtain all required business, professional or occupational licenses, issued pursuant to Chapter 98 of this Code. Massage businesses and massage therapists shall be taxed at the same rate as any other professional service for purposes of Chapter 98.
(Ord. No. 3-96 Amended 4-8-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 3-96 Amended Sections (1 – 13) and Enacted New Sections (1 -14)- 7-27-98-Effective Upon Passage
(Ord. No. 13-98 Amended/Changed Title from “Training Requirements for a Massage Therapist” 7-27-98-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 13-98 Amended Sections (1 – 6) and Removed Sections (7-14)-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 106 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 106
106-1
Chapter 106
NOISE
Sections:
106-1 THROUGH 106-4 (RESERVED)
106-5 DECLARATION OF FINDINGS AND POLICY
106-6 DEFINITIONS
106-7 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
106-8 PROHIBITED NOISE
106-9 MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE SOUND LEVELS FROM NOISE SOURCES
106-10OPERATOR OF SOUND-PRODUCING DEVICES IN PLACE OF PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT OR ASSEMBLY
106-11 USE OF LOUDSPEAKERS FOR A DVERTISING PURPOSES
106-12 PROHIBITED NOISE FROM MOTOR VEHICLE SOUND SYSTEM
106-13RESPONSIBILITY OF THE PROPERTY OWNER
106-14 EXCEPTIONS FROM CHAPTER
106-15 BUILDING, UTILITY, ROAD CONSTRUCTION AND EXCAVATION OPERATIONS
106-16 TESTING OF METERING DEVICES
106-17 PENALTIES
106-18 SEVARABILITY
Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal 3-11-85. 106-1 through 106-4 were repealed by Ordinance No. 12-04 on 10-11-04. Amendments noted where applicable.
106-1 THROUGH 106-4 (RESERVED)
(Ord. No. 12-04 Repealed 10-11-04-Effective Upon Passage)
106-5 DECLARATION OF FINDINGS AND POLICY
The Town Council hereby finds and declares that excessive sound is a serious hazard to the public health, welfare, peace, safety, and the quality of life; that a substantial body of science and technology exits by which excessive sound may be substantially abated; that the people have a right to and should be ensured an environment free from excessive sound that may jeopardize the public health, welfare, peace, and safety or degrade the quality of life; and that it is the policy of the Town of Front Royal to prevent such excessive sound.
(Ord. No. 12-04 Added 10-11-04-Effective Upon Passage)
106-6 DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this ordinance, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this subsection.
Chapter 106 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 106
106-2
A. A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL. The sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level so read is designated dB(a) or dBA.
B. DAYTIME The local time of day between the hours of 7:00 A.M. and 10:00 P.M.
C. DECIBEL (dB). A unit for measuring the volume of a sound equal to twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base ten (10) of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is twenty (20) micropascals (twenty micronewtons per square meter).
D. dBA shall mean the sound pressure level as measured on a sound meter set to slow response to the A-weighted scale to approximate the frequency response of the human auditory system.
E. EMERGENCY WORK shall mean work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity, or work required to protect persons or property from immediate exposure to danger, including work performed by public service companies when emergency inspection, repair of facilities or restoration of services is required for the immediate health, safety or welfare of the community.
F. NIGHTTIME. The local time between the hours of 10:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M.
G. NOISE shall mean any sound which may cause or tend to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on human beings.
H. NOISE SOURCE shall mean any equipment, motor vehicle, motorcycle or facility, fixed or movable, capable of emitting sound beyond the property boundary of the property on which the equipment is used, but not including motor vehicles or motorcycles operated on public rights-of-way.
I. SOUND. An oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity or other physical parameter in a medium with internal forces that causes compression and rarefaction of that medium. The description of sound may include any characteristic of such sound including duration, intensity, and frequency.
J. SOUND LEVEL. The weighted sound pressure level obtained by the use of an approved sound level meter and the A-frequency weighting network, as specified in American National Standards Institute specifications for sound level meters.
K. SOUND LEVEL METER shall mean an instrument to measure sound pressure levels which shall meet or exceed performance standards for a "type two" meter as specified by the American National Standards Institute.
L. SOUND PRESSURE shall mean the instantaneous difference between the actual pressure and the average or barometric pressure at a given point in space.
(Ord. No. 12-04 Added 10-11-04-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 106 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 106
106-3
106-7 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
The noise control program established by this section shall be enforced and administered by the Chief of Police with the assistance of other Town departments as required.
(Ord. No. 12-04 Added 10-11-04-Effective Upon Passage)
106-8 PROHIBITED NOISE
A. Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to create any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise. Noise of such character, intensity and duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of any person or unreasonably to disturb or annoy the quiet, comfort or repose of any person is hereby prohibited.
B. Specific Acts as Noise Disturbances.
The following acts are declared to be noise disturbances in violation of this Chapter, provided that the acts so specified shall not be deemed to be an exclusive enumeration of those acts which may constitute a noise disturbance under Section 106-8(A):
1. Operating or causing to be operated any equipment used in construction, repair, alteration or demolition work on buildings, structures, streets, alleys, drainage or public utility systems or parts thereof, and appurtenances thereto in the outdoors between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day, except as provided in Section 106-15.
2. Repairing, rebuilding or modifying any motor vehicle or other mechanical device in residential use districts between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day.
3. The collection of trash or refuse in residential use districts between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day.
4. Loading or unloading trucks in the outdoors within one hundred (100) yards of a residence between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day; provided that this subsection shall not apply to any business that has been in operation at its current location since prior to January 1, 1980.
(Ord. No. 01-06 amended 1-23-06-Effective Upon Passage)
5. Sounding the horn or warning device of a vehicle, except when necessary as a warning during the operation of the vehicle. Sounding of such horn or other device more than once every two (2) minutes in any one town block and with a duration of more than five (5) seconds for any single emission shall be prima face evidence of violation of this section.
6. Operating or permitting the use or operation of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, television, phonograph or any other device for the production of sound, between the hours of
Chapter 106 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 106
106-4
10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the following day, in such a manner as to be plainly audible across property boundaries or through partitions common to two (2) residences within a building
7. Operating or permitting the operation of any radio, tape player, compact disc player or other device for the production of sound on a public right-of-way or in a public place in such a way that the sound is plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet from such device, whether or not the device is situated within a motor vehicle.
8. Owning, keeping, possessing or harboring any animal which frequently or habitually howls, barks, meows, squawks or makes such other noise as is plainly audible across property boundaries or through partitions common to two (2) residences within a building.
9. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or operated in such a manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noises.
10. The discharge of the exhaust of any internal combustion engine into the open air except through a device which will effectively prohibit loud and explosive noises.
(Ord. No. 12-04 Added 10-11-04-Effective Upon Passage)
106-9 MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE SOUND LEVELS FROM NOISE SOURCES
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or permit to be operated, any noise source in such a manner that the noise source emits a sound pressure level which exceeds the limits set forth below when measured on property other than that on which the noise source is located. The category of applicable sound pressure limits shall be determined by the zoning district classification of the property on which the noise is produced. Property which has been specifically determined by the Planning Commission to be within an area designated on the Comprehensive Plan for industrial use shall be deemed to fall into the industrial classification for the purposes of this ordinance, even if the property has not yet been re-zoned.
(Ord. 01-06 Amended 1-23-06-Effective Upon Passage)
Land Use Designation Where
Noise is Measured.
Maximum Allowed Noise in Daytime (in dBA)
Maximum Allowed Noise in Nighttime (in dBA)
Agricultural & Residential Zones, A-1,R-1,R1-A,R-2,R-3
60
50
Commercial Zones
C-l, C-2, C-3
70
65
Industrial Zones 1-1,1-2
80
80
(Ord. No. 12-04 Added 10-11-04-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 106 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 106
106-5
106-10 OPERATOR OF SOUND-PRODUCING DEVICES IN PLACES OF PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT OR ASSEMBLY.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or permit to be operated, any loudspeaker or other device for the production of sound in any place of public entertainment or other place of public assembly which produces sound measure levels of ninety (90) dBA of greater at any point that is normally occupied by a person, unless conspicuous and legible signs are located outside such place, near the entrance, stating "WARNING, EXPOSURE TO SOUND ENVIRONMENT WITHIN MAY CAUSE HEARING IMPAIRMENT."
(Ord. No. 12-04 Added 10-11-04-Effective Upon Passage)
106-11 USE OF LOUDSPEAKERS FOR ADVERTISING PURPOSES
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate for commercial advertising purposes any loudspeaker or other like device or mechanism used to emit sound of any kind, which loudspeaker or other like device or mechanism is attached to or installed in any vehicle, when the vehicle is being driven, drawn, or parked along or upon the streets of the Town.
(Ord. No. 12-04 Added 10-11-04-Effective Upon Passage)
106-12 PROHIBITED NOISE FROM MOTOR VEHICLE SOUND SYSTEM
No person within the Town limits shall operate or permit the use or operation of any radio, tape player, compact disc player, or any other device which produces, reproduces, or amplifies sound in a motor vehicle, in such a manner that the sound can be heard more than fifty (50) feet from the motor vehicle.
(Ord. No. 12-04 Added 10-11-04-Effective Upon Passage)
106-13 RESPONSIBILITY OF THE PROPERTY OWNER
It shall be unlawful for a property owner knowingly to allow the creation of noise prohibited by this Chapter, within the boundaries of his or her property.
(Ord. No. 12-04 Added 10-11-04-Effective Upon Passage)
106-14 EXCEPTIONS FROM CHAPTER
The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to the following activities:
1. The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency or to the emission of sound in the performance of emergency work;
2. Noise caused by or arising out of activities related to repair, maintenance, replacement or alteration of public utility systems or parts thereof, public drainage systems or parts thereof, or streets and highways or parts thereof, and appurtenances thereto, where such activity is
Chapter 106 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 106
106-6
reasonably necessary to further a public safety interest and/or to minimize disruption in the provision of public services, e.g., water, sewer and electric service; or
3. Parades, fireworks displays, and other organized public activities authorized by permit issued by an official of the Town.
(Ord. No. 12-04 Added 10-11-04-Effective Upon Passage)
106-15 BUILDING, UTILITY, ROADCONSTRUCTION AND EXCAVATION OPERATIONS.
A. The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any building in a residential or business district, the performance of any work on a public utility, the performance of any work relating to road construction, and any excavation work on January 1 st (New Year's Day), the last Monday in May (Memorial Day), July 4th (Independence Day), the first Monday in September (Labor Day), the fourth Thursday in November (Thanksgiving Day), and December 25th (Christmas Day), or other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, is prohibited, except in cases of necessity in the interest, public health, safety and welfare, and then only with a permit from the Town Manager or his designee. This prohibition does not apply to Town employees or to contractors performing work in compliance with the terms and requirements of a Town contract.
B. When one of the regular holidays mentioned in Subsection (a) of this section falls on a Saturday, the preceding Friday shall be declared the holiday. When one of the regular holidays falls on a Sunday, the following Monday shall be declared the holiday.
C. Construction. Notwithstanding any other provision in this Chapter, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, construction, alteration or repair activities that are authorized by a valid Town permit shall be allowed if they meet at least one of the following noise limitations:
1. No individual piece of equipment shall produce a noise level exceeding 85 dB(A) at a distance of twenty-five (25) feet. If the device is housed within a structure on property, the measurement shall be made outside the structure at a distance as close to twenty-five (25) feet from the equipment as possible.
2. The noise level at any point outside of the property planes of the project shall not exceed 90 dBA.
(Ord. No. 12-04 Added 10-11-04-Effective Upon Passage)
16-16 TESTING OF METERING DEVICES
In order to implement and enforce this section effectively, the Chief of Police shall, within a reasonable time after the effective date of same, develop and promulgate standards and procedures for testing and validating sound level meters used in enforcement of this section.
Chapter 106 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 106
106-7
(Ord. No. 12-04 Added 10-11-04-Effective Upon Passage)
106-17 PENALTIES
A. Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter shall be deemed to be guilty of a Class III misdemeanor.
B. Each violation and/or day of violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a separate offense.
C. The imposition of one (1) penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue.
(Ord. No. 12-04 Added 10-11-04-Effective Upon Passage)
106-18 SEVERABILITY
If any provision of this Chapter should be determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such determination shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions of this Chapter.
(Ord. No. 12-04 Added 10-11-04-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 107 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 107
107-1
Chapter 107
NUISANCES
Sections:
107-1 CHAPTER TO BE SUPPLEMENTAL
107-2 PROHIBITION
107-3 RESPONSIBILITY OF REAL PROPERTY OWNERS OR OCCUPANTS
107-4 CONDITION OF PROPERTY
107-5 ENUMERATION OF NUISANCES
107-6 INSPECTIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS
107-7 RIGHT OF ENTRY
107-8 NOTICE TO CEASE AND DESIST
107-9 NOTICE TO ABATE
107-10 PROCEDURE UPON FAILURE OF OWNER TO ABATE
107-11 EFFECT OF CHAPTER ON ARREST FOR MAINTENANCE OF NUISANCE
Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal as Chapter 107 of the Town Code by Ordinance No. 17-99 on 10-25-99
107-1 CHAPTER TO BE SUPPLEMENTAL
Various nuisances are defined and prohibited in other Chapter of this Code, and it is the intent of the Town Council in enacting this Chapter to make this Chapter supplemental to those other chapters in which nuisances are defined and prohibited; and the provisions of this Chapter relating to the abatement of nuisances shall be regarded as alternative methods and procedures for the abatement of nuisances in those instances where other methods and procedures for abatement are provided.
107-2 PROHIBITION
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, harbor, commit or maintain or to suffer to be caused, harbored, committed, or maintained any nuisance, as defined by the statue or common law of this state or as defined by this Code or other ordinance of the Town Council, at any place within the Town.
107-3 RESPONSIBILITY OF REAL PROPERTY OWNERS OR OCCUPANTS
Each owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or person in charge of any real property within the Town and each agent or representative of any such person is hereby charged with responsibility for the maintenance and use of such real property in such manner that no use of or activity or condition upon or within such real property shall constitute a nuisance; and all such persons are hereby charged with the duty of observing all of the provisions of this Chapter, but such responsibility
Chapter 107 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 107
107-2
shall not be construed to permit any other person not charged with such responsibility to commit or maintain any nuisance upon or within any real property in the Town.
107-4 CONDITION OF PROPERTY
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog to knowingly or willfully allow his dog to urinate or defecate on public property; provided, that urination by a dog on curbs of streets and in alleys, streets or areas posted by the Town Manager as dog exercise areas shall not constitute a violation of this section; and provided, further, that defecation by a dog on public property out of doors shall not constitute a violation of this section if the owner of the dog immediately removes the material defecated and disposes of it in a manner not inconsistent with the provisions of this section.
107-5 ENUMERATION OF NUISANCES
A. The following acts when committed or conditions when existing within the Town are hereby defined and declared to be nuisances:
1. An act done or committed or aided or assisted to be done or committed by any person or any substance, being or thing kept, maintained, placed or found in or upon any private place which is injurious or dangerous to the public health or safety.
2. All buildings, bridges, or other structures of whatever character kept or maintained or which are permitted by any person owning or having control thereof to be kept or maintained in a condition unsafe, dangerous, unhealthy, injurious or annoying to the public.
3. All trees and other appendages of or to realty kept or maintained or which are permitted by any person owning or having control thereof to be kept or maintained in a condition unsafe, dangerous, unhealthy, injurious or annoying to the public.
4. All standing water, animal matter, or vegetable matter, or other substance that is or is liable to become putrid, offensive, annoying, baneful, or unhealthy.
5. All obstructions caused or permitted on any street or sidewalk to the danger or annoyance of the public and all stones, rubbish, dirt, filth, slops, vegetable matter or other article thrown or placed by any person on or in any street, sidewalk or other public place which in any way may cause any injury or annoyance to the public.
6. All stables, cattle yards, hog, sheep or cow pens or yards for poultry permitted by the owner thereof or the person responsible therefor to be in such a condition as to become offensive, annoying or injurious to the public.
7. All structures and places where explosive or combustible substances, liquids or gasses are stored or used in such manner as to constitute a hazard to the safety or health of persons or a hazard to property.
Chapter 107 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 107
107-3
B. The nuisances described in this section shall not be construed as exclusive, and any act or commission or omission and any condition which constitutes a nuisance by statue or common law of the state, when committed, omitted or existing within the Town, is hereby declared to constitute a nuisance.
107-6 INSPECTIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS
It shall be the duty of the Town Manager or his designee to cause inspections to be made from time to time of all portions of the Town to determine whether any condition exists or activity is being practiced which constitutes a nuisance; and the Town Manager or his designee shall cause an investigation to be made upon complaint made by any responsible person.
107-7 RIGHT OF ENTRY
The Town Manager or his designee and, when appropriate, the County Health Officer and his assistants shall have the right to enter upon private premises for the purposes specified in Section 107-6, upon compliance with all applicable provisions of law. [Unless it appears probable that advance warning would defeat the purpose of such entry, occupants or premises to be entered shall be given reasonable notice in advance, and in any case it shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant to prevent such entry which is sought to be made in compliance with law.
107-8 NOTICE TO CEASE AND DESIST
If at any time the Town Manager or his designee or the County Health Officer shall find than activity or practice which constitutes a nuisance is occurring within the Town, he shall promptly and by the most expeditious means notify the violator to cease and desist forthwith.
107-9 NOTICE TO ABATE
If at any time the Town Manager or his designee or the Health Officer shall find that a condition which constitutes a nuisance exists within the Town, he shall give notice, in writing, to the owner, occupant or person in charge of the premises upon which condition exits, stating therein the condition which constitutes a nuisance and directing such addressee to remedy the condition within the time stated in such notice, which shall be not more than ten (10) days; and it shall be unlawful for any such owner, occupant or person in charge to fail to comply with the terms of such notice, provided that any owner, occupant or person in charge may, within two (2) days from the service thereof, appeal to the Town Council, in which case the terms of such notice shall be stayed pending action of the Town Council, which shall be final; provided, further, that if the Health Officer shall state in such notice that the condition which constitutes a nuisance is such as to be an imminent hazard to the health, safety or welfare of the public or any person within or near the premises upon which such nuisance exits, then the addressee shall comply with the terms of such notice.
Chapter 107 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 107
107-4
107-10 PROCEDURE UPON FAILURE OF OWNER TO ABATE
A. Upon failure of any person to whom notice has been given pursuant to § 107-9 to comply with the terms of such notice or with the terms imposed by the Town Council on appeal, as the case may be, the Town Manager shall forthwith direct the appropriate Town officer to remedy the condition which is the subject of such notice, and the expense incurred by the Town in so doing shall be charged to the addressee of such notice, to be collected in the same manner as county taxes or in any other manner authorized by law.
B. Abatement by the county of any condition which constitutes a nuisance and reimbursement to the county of expenses incurred thereby shall not bar prosecution for maintenance of a nuisance.
107-11 EFFECT OF CHAPTER ON ARREST FOR MAINTENANCE OF NUISANCE
Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to prohibit any police officer from arresting any person for committing or maintaining a nuisance when such arrest is made pursuant to law.
Chapter 110 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 110
110-1
Chapter 110
OFFENSES
Sections:
110-1 ABUSIVE LANGUAGE
110-2 (RESERVED)
110-3 ADVERTISEMENTS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY WITHOUT CONSENT OF PROPERTY OWNER
110-4 UNTRUE, DECEPTIVE OR MISLEADING ADVERTISEMENTS
110-5 SUMMONING OF EMERGENCY APPARATUS WITHOUT JUST CAUSE
110-6 REMOVAL OF FIRE APPARATUS WITHOUT CONSENT
110-7 ASSAULT AND BATTERY GENERALLY
110-8 ASSAULT AND BATTERY UPON POLICE OFFICIALS
110-9 ATTEMPTS TO COMMIT MISDEMEANORS
110-10 SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO MINORS
110-11UNLAWFUL OPERATION OF COIN-OPERATED DEVICES
110-12VENDING MACHINES USED TO SELL DRUGS OR DEVICES TO PREVENT VENEREAL DISEASES
110-13 (RESERVED)
110-14DANCEHALLS
110-15 DISORDERLY CONDUCT
110-16 DISTURBANCE OF RELIGIOUS WORSHIP
110-17 (RESERVED)
110-18 DISCARDED OR ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS
110-19 (RESERVED)
110-20 (RESERVED)
110-21NOISE RELATED TO SOLICITATION OF BUSINESS
110-22 PROHIBITIONS WITH REGARD TO TOWN OFFICERS
110-23 PAWNBROKERS, JUNK DEALERS, DEALERS IN SECONDHAND ARTICLES
110-24 POOLROOMS AND GAME ROOMS
110-25 (RESERVED)
110-26 INTERFERENCE WITH RADIO AND TELEVISION RECEPTION
110-27 (RESERVED)
110-28 SWIMMING POOL FENCING REQUIRED
110-29 (RESERVED)
110-30 (RESERVED)
110-31UNLAWFUL ACTS WITH REGARD TO VEHICLES, BOATS AND VESSELS
110-32WELLS
110-33 URINATING IN PUBLIC
110-34 UNLAWFUL CROSSING OF PUBLIC STREETS
Chapter 110 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 110
110-2
Revised/Re-codified 3-11-85 (Formerly Chapter 19 of the 1965 Code Section 19-17, 19.18, 19-18.1”Disorderly Conduct on Public Conveyances, Public Streets, Public Meetings” amended 11-9-70 and consolidated into 19-17on 3-12-84; 19-7.1 “Assault or Battery Upon Police Officials” was enacted 3-10-75, amended 7-9-79; 19-17 “Disorderly Conduct” amended 3-12-84; 19-34 “Pawnbrokers, Junk Dealers, Etc., Weekly Report” was enacted 10-11-48, amended entire section 1-26-81; 19-35 “Poolrooms, Gamerooms – Hours of Operation” amended entire section 10-10-83; 19-49 Added “Swimming Pools-Fence Required” 1-27-69. As part of the recodification 3-11-85 the following Sections were deleted: 19-2 “Adultery & Fornication”; 19-22 “Lewd & Lascivious Cohabitation”; 19-23 “Loitering, etc About Private Premises”; 19-24 “Noise-Generally”; 19-38 “Profane, Swearing”; 19-40 “Slander and Libel”; 19-41 “Unlawful Assemblages”; 19-42 “Vagrants-Persons Deemed Vagrant; 19-15 “Curfew for Minors Under Eighteen Years of Age” was included as Chapter 62 of this Code). Other amendments noted where applicable.
110-1 ABUSIVE LANGUAGE
If any person shall, in the presence or hearing of another, curse or abuse such person or use any violent abusive language to such person concerning himself or any of his relations or otherwise use such language under circumstances reasonably calculated to provoke a breach of the peace, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, on conviction, fined a sum of not more than five hundred dollars. ($500.).
110-2 (RESERVED)
110-3 ADVERTISEMENTS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY WITHOUT CONSENT OF PROPERTY OWNER
Any person who posts any show bill, notice or advertisement or brands, writes, marks or paints any signs, letters or characters upon the building, wall, fences or property of another person without first obtaining the consent of the owner of such property shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
110-4 UNTRUE, DECEPTIVE OR MISLEADING ADVERTISEMENTS
Any person who, with intent to sell or in any way dispose of merchandise, securities, service or anything offered by such person, directly or indirectly, to the public for sale or distribution or with intent to increase the consumption thereof or to induce the public in any manner to enter into any obligation relating thereto or to acquire title thereto or any interest therein, makes, publishes, disseminates, circulates or places before the public or causes, directly or indirectly to be made, published, disseminated, circulated or placed before the public in this town, in a newspaper or other publication or in the form of a book, notice, handbill, poster, blueprint, map, bill, tag, label, circular, pamphlet or letter or in any other way, an advertisement of any sort regarding merchandise, securities, service, land, lot or anything so offered to the public, which advertisement contains any promise, assertion, representation or statement of fact which is untrue, deceptive or misleading shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The words "untrue, deceptive and misleading," as used in this section, shall be construed as including the advertising in any manner by any person of any goods, wares or merchandise as a bankrupt stock, receiver's stock or trustee's stock, if such stock contains any goods, wares or merchandise put therein subsequent to the date of the purchase by such advertiser of such stock contains any of the purchase by such
Chapter 110 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 110
110-3
advertiser of such stock, and if such advertisement of any stock fails to set forth the fact that such stock contains other goods, wares or merchandise put therein, subsequent to the date of the purchase by such advertiser of such stock in type as large as the type used in any other part of such advertisement, including the caption of the same, it shall be a violation of this section.
110-5 SUMMONING OF EMERGENCY APPARATUS WITHOUT JUST CAUSE
Any person who, without just cause therefor, calls or summons, by telephone or otherwise, any ambulance or fire-fighting apparatus shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
110-6 REMOVAL OF FIRE APPARATUS WITHOUT CONSENT
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove from the firehouse or premises, the fire engine, hose or any other apparatus owned or used by the Fire Department for the Town without the consent of the Chief of the Fire Department or without the consent of such deputies or assistants as he may designate. The names of those so designated shall be filed from time to time with the Mayor of the Town by the Chief of the Fire Department.
110-7 ASSAULT AND BATTERY GENERALLY
Any person who commits an unjustified assault or battery upon another, which does not amount to a felony, as defined by the laws of the state, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
110-8 ASSAULT AND BATTERY UPON POLICE OFFICIALS
Any person who commits an unjustified assault or battery upon a duly authorized police official while in the performance of his duties as an authorized official shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.) or more than five hundred dollars ($500.) or confined in jail not less than (10) days nor more than twelve (12) months, either or both. Any person convicted within a period of five (5) years of a second or other subsequent offense under this section shall be punished by a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1000.) and by confinement in jail for not less than thirty (30) days nor more than twelve (12) months. For the purpose of this section, a conviction or finding of not innocent in the case of a juvenile under the provisions of this section, or in the case of an adult or juvenile a conviction under the ordinance of any county, city or town in this state or the laws of any other state substantially similar to the provisions of this section, shall be considered a prior conviction.
110-9 ATTEMPTS TO COMMIT MISDEMEANORS
Every person who attempts to commit an offense which is a misdemeanor shall be confined in jail not exceeding six (6) months or fined not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.), either or both.
Chapter 110 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 110
110-4
110-10 SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO MINORS
If any person shall sell, barter, give or furnish or cause to be sold, bartered, given or furnished to any minor under sixteen (16) years of age cigarettes or tobacco in any form, having good cause to believe him to be a minor under sixteen (16) years of age, such person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.).
110-11 UNLAWFUL OPERATION OF COIN-OPERATED DEVICES
Any person who shall operate, cause to be operated or attempt to operate or cause to be operated any coin-box telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machine that operates on the coin-in-the-slot principle, whether of like kind or not, designed only to receive lawful coins of the United States of America in connection with the use or enjoyment of telephone or telegraph service, parking privileges or any other service or the sale of merchandise or other property, by means of a slug or any false, counterfeit, mutilated, sweated or foreign coin or by any means, method, trick or device whatsoever, not authorized by the owner, lessee or licensee of such coin-box telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machine; or who shall, within the municipality, obtain or receive telephone or telegraph service, parking privileges, merchandise or any other service or property from any such coin-box telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machines, designed only to receive lawful coins of the United States of America, without depositing in or surrendering to such coin-box telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machine lawful coins of the United States of America to the amount required therefor by the owner, lessee or licensee of such coin-box telephone, parking meter, vending machine or other machine, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
110-12 VENDING MACHINES USED TO SELL DRUGS OR DEVICES TO PREVENT VENEREAL DISEASES.
A. The offering for sale, distribution or other disposition by means of a vending machine or other automatic machine of any drug, medicinal preparation, device or other article intended or having special utility for the prevention of venereal disease is expressly prohibited.
B. Any such vending machine or other automatic machine shall be destroyed when found in violation hereof.
C. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
110-13 (RESERVED)
(Repealed 9-11-00 in its entirety “Concealment of Merchandise on Store Premises” – Effective Upon Passage)
110-14 DANCEHALLS
It shall be unlawful for any dance hall to remain open later than 2:00 a.m.
Chapter 110 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 110
110-5
110-15 DISORDERLY CONDUCT
A. A person is guilty of disorderly conduct if, with the intent to cause public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm or recklessly creating a risk thereof, he:
1. In any street, highway, public building or while in or on a public conveyance or public place engages in conduct having a direct tendency to cause acts of violence by the person or persons at whom, individually, such conduct is directed; provided, however, that such conduct shall not be deemed to include the utterance or display of any words; or
2. Willfully or being intoxicated, whether willfully or not, disrupts any meeting of the governing body of any political subdivision or a division or agency thereof or of any school, literary society or place of religious worship, if such disruption prevents or interferes with the orderly conduct of such meeting or had a direct tendency to cause acts of violence by the person or persons at whom individually, such disruption is directed; provided, however, that such conduct shall not be deemed to include the utterance or display of any words.
B. The person in charge of any such building, place, conveyance or meeting may eject therefrom any person who violates any provision of this section, with the aid, if necessary, of any person who may be called upon for such purpose.
C. Persons violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class I misdemeanor.
110-16 DISTURBANCE OF RELIGIOUS WORSHIP
If any person shall willfully interrupt or disturb any assembly met for the worship of God or, being intoxicated, disturb the same, whether willfully or not, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
110-17 (RESERVED)
(Repealed in its entirety “Fortunetelling or Practicing Magic Art” 8-25-14-effective upon passage)
110-18 DISCARDED OR ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to discard, abandon, leave or allow to remain in any place any icebox, refrigerator or other container, device or equipment of any kind with an interior storage area of more than two (2) cubic feet of clear space which is airtight, without first removing the door or doors or hinges from such icebox, refrigerator, container, device or equipment.
B. This section shall not apply to any icebox, refrigerator, container, device or equipment which is being used for the purpose for which it was originally designed or is being used for display purposes by any retail or wholesale merchant or is crated, strapped or locked to such an extent that it is impossible for a child to obtain access to any airtight compartment thereof.
Chapter 110 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 110
110-6
C. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be a misdemeanor.
110-19 (RESERVED)
110-20 (RESERVED)
110-21 NOISE RELATED TO SOLICITATION OF BUSINESS
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit business or patronage by hawking, barking or any other public outcry, noisemaking activity or device on the streets or other public places in the town. This section shall not be construed as to apply to farmers, hucksters and others who offer for sale family supplies of a perishable nature grown and produced by them and not purchased by them for sale.
110-22 PROHIBITIONS WITH REGARD TO TOWN OFFICERS
A. If any officer shall willfully and corruptly refuse to execute any lawful process requiring him to apprehend or confine a person convicted of or charged with an offense or willfully and corruptly omit or delay to execute such process, whereby such person shall escape and go at large, such officer shall be confined in jail not exceeding six (6) months and be fined not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.).
B. If any person, on being required by any sheriff or other officer, shall refuse or neglect to assist him in the execution of his office in a criminal case, in the preservation of the peace, the apprehending or securing of any person for a breach of the peace or in any case of escape or rescue, he shall be confined in jail not exceeding six (6) months and fined not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.)
C. If any officer for performing an official duty for which a fee or compensation is allowed or provided by law knowingly demands and receives a greater fee or compensation than is allowed or provided, he shall be fined not exceeding fifty ($50.)
D. If any person, authorized by law to charge fees for services performed by him and to issue bills therefor, shall fraudulently issue a fee bill for a service not performed by him or for more than he is entitled to, he shall be fined not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.)
E. If any officer of the town shall fraudulently make a false entry or erase, alter, secrete or destroy any record in his keeping and belonging to his office, he shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, Penalties, of this Code.
F. If any person, by threats or force, knowingly attempts to intimidate or impede a Judge, Magistrate, Justice, juror, witness or any law enforcement officer, lawfully engaged in his duties as such, or to obstruct or impede the administration of the justice in any court, he shall be deemed guilty of a Class I misdemeanor.
Chapter 110 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 110
110-7
G. Any person who shall falsely assume or exercise the functions, powers, duties and privileges incident to the office of sheriff, police officer, marshall or other peace officer or who shall falsely assume or pretend to be any such officer shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
110-23 PAWNBROKERS, JUNK DEALERS AND DEALERS IN SECONDHAND ARTICLES.
A. Every purchaser of or dealer in secondhand articles, junk dealers, keepers of pawnshops, buyers of gold and silver, precious metals and jewels shall make a written report to the Chief of Police for the Town of Front Royal covering transactions of the previous week or any lesser period, on or before Wednesday of each week, showing a list or description of all secondhand articles, gold, silver, precious metals and jewels bought or on which money or other thing of value is loaned and a description of the person from whom it is received, including his name, age, place of residence and occupation. If there is no such property received, he shall report that fact, and the word "none" shall be sufficient for that purpose.
B. Said dealers, purchasers and pawnbrokers shall ascertain the name, address and age of such sellers or pawnors who are unknown to them by requiring at least two (2) items of identification. Licensees shall record the time and date of the purchase or pawn and the price paid and shall include this information in their report to the Chief of Police. All such reports shall be confidential records and shall not be disseminated to persons or agencies other than the Front Royal Town Police and associated law enforcement agencies and personnel.
C. No purchases or pawns shall be made with anyone under the age of eighteen (18).
D. No secondhand articles, gold, silver, precious metals or jewels so purchased or received on pawn by such purchasers, dealers and pawnshop owners shall be sold, given away, melted down or otherwise disposed of or altered until three (3) days have elapsed after the above-described transaction report is submitted to the Chief of Police, except that nonmetallic matter may be removed from gold, silver and other precious metals, and gem stones may be removed from their settings in order to obtain a true weight.
E. This section shall not apply to legitimate transactions with coin collectors involving the purchase of coins for hobby purposes, as opposed to transactions involving the purchase of coins for the scrap value of the metal.
F. Violation of the terms of this section shall be a misdemeanor.
110-24 POOLROOMS AND GAME ROOMS
A. Hours of operation.
1. Public poolrooms and billiard rooms in the Town shall close not later than 2:00 a.m. and remain closed until 7:00 a.m. All other business in the Town of Front Royal which have
Chapter 110 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 110
110-8
upon their premises, available for public use, pool tables or billiard tables shall not permit said devices to be operated between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(Amended the times in (1) 1-8-07-Effective Upon Passage)
2. Public arcades, pinball and electronic game establishments in the Town shall close at 10:00 p.m. and remain closed until 10:00 a.m. the following day. All other businesses in the Town of Front Royal which have upon their premises, available for the public use, arcade game machines, pinball machines or electronic game machines, shall not permit said device to be operated between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. the following day.
(Amended the times in (2) 10-25-99-Effective Upon Passage)
3. Any owner or operator of a public poolroom, billiard room, arcade, pinball or electronic game establishment or such other business with said game devices upon the premises who violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
B. It shall be unlawful for the owner or manager of a poolroom, shooting gallery, bowling alley or other licensed place of similar or kindred games and amusements to paint or frost the windows or the glass in the doors or to place curtains, screens or blinds thereupon or thereabout or in any way obscure, shield or screen from view the interior of such room or any room adjoining or connecting there-with or any part thereof.
(Added (B) 1-8-07-Effective Upon Passage)
110-25 (RESERVED)
110-26 INTERFERENCE WITH RADIO AND TELEVISION RECEPTION
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate within the Town any machine, sign, device or equipment using or operated by electric power or current in a manner or under conditions causing interference with the use of radios or television sets or with the radio or television reception within the Town. Such unlawful use or maintenance of such machine, device or equipment being hereby expressly declared a nuisance, and any person violating this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
110-27 (RESERVED)
110-28 SWIMMING POOL FENCING REQUIRED
A. For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
FENCE - A close-type vertical barrier not less than four (4) feet in height above the ground surface. A woven steel wire, chain link, picket or solid board type fence or a fence of similar construction which will prevent the smallest of children from getting through shall be construed as within this definition.
Chapter 110 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 110
110-9
SWIMMING POOL- Any outdoor man-made structure, constructed from material other than natural earth or soil, designed or used to hold water for the purpose of providing a swimming or bathing place for any person or any such structure for the purpose of impounding water therein to a depth of more than two (2) feet.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, maintain, use, possess or control any swimming pool on any property in the Town without having completely around such swimming pool a fence as hereinabove defined. Every gate in such fence shall be capable of being fastened securely at a height of four (4) feet above ground level, and it shall be unlawful for any such gate to be allowed to remain unfastened while the pool is not in use. Such fence shall be constructed so as to come within two (2) inches of the ground at the bottom.
C. This section shall not apply to a one-piece, plastic-type, portable swimming pool, nor to a swimming pool constructed prior to the effective date of this section if it is enclosed by a fence approved by the State Health Commissioner.
D. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.) or by confinement in jail for not more than thirty (30) days, or both. Each day's violation shall be construed as a separate offense.
110-29 (RESERVED)
110-30 (RESERVED)
110-31 UNLAWFUL ACTS WITH REGARD TO VEHICLES, BOATS, AND VESSELS
A. Any person who shall individually or in association with one (1) or more others willfully break, injure, tamper with or remove any part of any vehicle, boat or vessel for the purpose of injuring, defacing or destroying such vehicle or temporarily or permanently preventing its useful operation or for any purpose against the will or without the consent of the owner of such vehicle, boat or vessel or who shall in any manner willfully or maliciously interfere with or prevent the running or operation of such vehicle, boat or vessel shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
B. Any person who shall without the consent of the owner or person in charge of a vehicle, boat or vessel, climb into or upon such vehicle, boat or vessel, with intent to commit any crime, malicious mischief or injury thereto or who, while a vehicle, boat or vessel is at threat and unattended, shall attempt to manipulate any of the levers and starting crank or other device, brakes or mechanism thereof or to set such vehicle, boat or vessel in motion, with the intent to commit any crime, malicious mischief or injury thereto, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, except that foregoing provision shall not apply when any such act is done in an emergency manner or in furtherance of public safety or by or under the direction of an officer in the regulation of traffic or performance of any other official duty.
Chapter 110 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 110
110-10
C. The provisions of Subsections A and B above shall not apply to a bona fide repossession of a vehicle, boat or vessel by a holder of a lien on such vehicle, boat or vessel, or by agents or employees of such lienholder.
110-32 WELLS
A. Abandonment.
1. Every owner, operator, proprietor, superintendent or conductor of any sawmill or other manufacturing plant or any other person who has cause to be dug on his own land or the land of another any well or pit for the use of such a sawmill, plant or person shall fill such well or pit with earth so that the same shall not be dangerous to human beings, animals or fowl at the time of or before such mill or plant shall be removed or such well or such pit otherwise abandoned; and any person owing land wherein any such well or pit is located shall in the same manner fill with earth any such well or pit which has been abandoned, provided that such person has knowledge of the existence of such well or pit.
2. Any person violating any provision of this subsection shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.).
B. Covers to be kept on.
1. Every person owning or occupying any land within the Town on which there is a well having a diameter greater than six (6) inches shall at all times keep the same covered in such a manner as not to be dangerous to human beings, animals or fowl.
2. Any person violating the provisions of this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
110-33 URINATING IN PUBLIC
It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate in a public place not specifically designated as a public rest room or a public bathroom. Violations shall be punished by a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.)
(Added 6-24-91-Effective Upon Passage)
110-34UNLAWFUL CROSSING OF PUBLIC STREETS
A. "Streets" means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way or place open to the use of the public for purposes of motor vehicular travel in the Town, including the public highways and roadways.
B. "Crosswalk" means that part of a public street at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the public street measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of the traversable public street; or any
Chapter 110 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 110
110-11
portion of a public street at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.
C. As a matter of public safety to pedestrians and motorists, pedestrians lawfully shall cross public streets, wherever possible, only at intersections, marked crosswalks, or at official pedestrian crossing signals; or as directed by a law enforcement officer.
D. When crossing public streets, it shall be unlawful for pedestrians to carelessly or maliciously interfere with the orderly passage of vehicles.
E. (1) Violations of this ordinance which are inadvertent or not likely to result in serious bodily harm to a pedestrian may be charged on a Town of Front Royal summons and shall be charged punished as a traffic infraction and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00); (2) Violations of this ordinance which are intentional and likely to result in serious bodily harm to a pedestrian or motorist may be charged on a Commonwealth summons or Commonwealth warrant and shall be punished as a Class 4 Misdemeanor.
(Added Entire Section 8-27-18-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 114 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 114
114-1
CHAPTER 114
PUBLIC-PRIVATE EDUCATION FACILITIES AND INFRASTRUCTURE ACT (PPEA) POLICY GUIDELINES
Sections:
114-1 INTRODUCTION
114-2 PURPOSE
114-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS
114-4 PROPOSAL PROVISIONS
114-5 SOLICITED PROPOSALS
114-6 UNSOLICITED PROPOSALS
114-7 PPEA PROPOSAL PREPARATION/SUBMISSION (UNSOLICITED/
SOLICITED)
114-8 PROPOSAL EVALUATION AND SELECTION CRITERIA
114-9 COMPREHENSIVE AND INTERIM AGREEMENTS
114-10 PROTESTS OF PPEA PROCUREMENTS
114-11 NOTICE AND POSTING REQUIREMENTS
114-12 VIOLATION NOT MISDEMEANOR
114-13 APPENDIX A, PROPOSER’S CERTIFICATION
114-14 APPENDIX B, NOTICE AND POSTING REQUIREMENTS, CHECKBOX
114-15 APPENDIX C, TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Policy Guidelines adopted 12-08-2014. Codified 3-23-15.
114-1 INTRODUCTION
These Policy Guidelines (“policy”, “Policy”, “Guidelines”, “guidelines”, “policy guidelines”, or “Policy Guidelines”) sets forth the legal authority and responsibility for projects proposed pursuant to the Public-Private Education Facilities and Infrastructure Act of 2002, as amended (Va. Code §§ 56-575.1 to 56-575.18) (“PPEA”), and serves as the required guidelines as referenced in §56-575.1 of the PPEA. Terms used in this policy shall have the definitions set forth in Appendix C to this policy.
114-2 PURPOSE
The Public-Private Education Facilities and Infrastructure Act of 2002, Va. Code §§ 56-575.1 to 56-575.18 (the “PPEA”, or the “Act”) grants the Town of Front Royal, Virginia (the “Town”), a
Chapter 114 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 114
114-2
responsible public entity as defined in the Act, the authority to create public-private partnerships for the development of a wide range of projects for public use if the Town determines there is a public need for the project and that private involvement may provide the project to the public in a timely or cost-effective fashion. Individually negotiated comprehensive agreements between a private entity, as defined in the Act, and the Town will define the respective rights and obligations of the Town and the private entity. Although guidance with regard to the application of the PPEA is provided herein, it will be incumbent upon the Town and all private entities to comply with the provisions of the PPEA as applicable and as may be amended. Further definition of terms is found in Appendix C.
114-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. Application
1. In order for a project to come under the terms of the PPEA, it must meet the definition of a "qualifying project" as defined in the Act as meaning (i) any education facility, including, but not limited to a school building, any functionally related and subordinate facility and land to a school building (including any stadium or other facility primarily used for school events), and any depreciable property provided for use in a school facility that is operated as part of the public school system or as an institution of higher education; (ii) any building or facility that meets a public purpose and is developed or operated by or for any public entity; (iii) any improvements, together with equipment, necessary to enhance public safety and security of buildings to be principally used by a public entity; (iv) utility and telecommunications and other communications infrastructure; (v) a recreational facility; (vi) technology infrastructure, services, and applications, including, but not limited to, telecommunications, automated data processing, word processing and management information systems, and related information, equipment, goods and services; (vii) any services designed to increase the productivity or efficiency of the responsible public entity through the use of technology or other means, (viii) any technology, equipment, or infrastructure designed to deploy wireless broadband services to schools, businesses, or residential areas; (ix) any improvements necessary or desirable to any unimproved locally- or state-owned real estate; or (x) any solid waste management facility as defined in Va. Code § 10.1-1400 that produces electric energy derived from solid waste.
2. The Act establishes requirements that the Town must adhere to when reviewing and approving proposals received pursuant to the PPEA. In addition, the Act specifies the criteria that must be used to select a proposal and the contents of the comprehensive agreement detailing the relationship between the Town and the private entity. Any proposal received or solicited by the Town pursuant to the PPEA will be reviewed in accordance with the provisions of the applicable Act and this policy as they may apply.
3. The Town has adopted these policy guidelines to implement the PPEA by Town of Front Royal Town Council resolution dated December 8, 2014. This policy applies to all
Chapter 114 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 114
114-3
procurements under the PPEA where the Town is the “responsible public entity” or where the Town is the “affected local jurisdiction” within the meaning of Va. Code § 56-575.1. For purposes of this policy, unless otherwise indicated, “Town Council” means the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia, as applicable, “Town Manager” means the Town Manager of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia, as applicable, and “Town” means the Town of Front Royal. Virginia, or the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia, depending upon the context, and as applicable.
4. The Town Manager, or if so decided by Town Council, the Town Council, are authorized to designate a working group to be responsible for evaluating proposals and negotiating the comprehensive agreement.
5. The individual designated by the Town Manager to serve as the point of contact for implementation of procedures, to receive proposals submitted under the PPEA and to respond to inquiries regarding the PPEA or this adopted policy shall be the Purchasing Agent; or such other person as shall be designated in writing from time to time by the Town Manager or the Town Council.
6. This policy may only be revised by an amendment adopted by the Town Council.
7. The Town Council shall have overall responsibility and be the primary contact for implementation of this policy.
B. Effective Date
Contracts entered into prior to passage of this policy shall continue to be governed by the policies and regulations of the Town and Commonwealth of Virginia in effect at the time those contracts were executed.
C. Severability
If any provision of this policy or any application thereof is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this policy which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this policy are declared to be severable.
114-4 PROPOSAL PROVISIONS
A. Proposal Submissions in General
1. A proposal under this Act may be either solicited by the Town (“Solicited Bid/Proposal”) or delivered by a private entity on an unsolicited basis (“Unsolicited Proposal”). In either case,
Chapter 114 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 114
114-4
any such proposal shall be clearly identified as a “PPEA Proposal”. Proposers (“Proposer” or “Proposers”) may be required to follow a two-part proposal submission process consisting of a conceptual phase and a detailed phase, as described herein.
2. The requirements for any particular Solicited Bid/Proposal shall be as specified in the solicitation by the Town for that particular proposal and shall be consistent with all applicable provisions of the PPEA.
3. The Act allows private entities to include innovative financing methods, including the imposition of user fees or service payments, in a proposal. Such financing arrangements may include the issuance of debt instruments, equity or other securities or obligations.
4. Proposals should be prepared simply and economically, following the format provided herein and providing a concise description of the Proposer's capabilities to complete the proposed qualifying project and the benefits to be derived from the project by the Town. Project benefits to be considered are those occurring during the construction, renovation, expansion or improvement phase and during the life cycle of the project. Proposals also should include a comprehensive scope of work and a financial plan for the project, containing enough detail to allow an analysis by the Town of the financial feasibility of the proposed project. The Town may, at any time, require the Proposer to provide additional information and clarification to the submission.
5. The Town may require that any proposal be clarified. Such clarification may include, but is not limited to, submission of additional documentation, responses to specific questions, and interviews with potential project participants.
B. Affected Local Jurisdictions
1. The term “affected local jurisdiction” means any county, city or town in which all or a portion of a qualifying project is located.
2. Any private entity requesting approval from or submitting a conceptual or detailed proposal to the Town must provide any other affected jurisdiction with a copy of the private entity's request or proposal by certified mail, express delivery or hand delivery within five (5) business days of submission of the proposal to the Town. The private entity is responsible for documenting evidence of the delivery of the request for proposals to any other affected local jurisdiction and providing same to the Town within five (5) business days of such delivery. Any affected jurisdiction shall have sixty (60) days from the receipt of the request or proposal to submit written comments to the Town and to indicate whether the proposed qualifying project is compatible with the (i) jurisdiction's comprehensive plan, (ii) jurisdiction's infrastructure development plans, and (iii) jurisdiction’s capital improvements budget or (iv) other government spending plan. Comments received within the sixty (60)-day period shall be
Chapter 114 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 114
114-5
given consideration by the Town, and no negative inference shall be drawn from the absence of comment by an affected jurisdiction. The Town may begin or continue its evaluation of any such proposal during the sixty (60)-day period for the receipt of comments from other affected local jurisdictions.
C. Proposal Review Fee
Unless otherwise specified by the Town, for unsolicited proposals and unsolicited competing proposals, the Town will require an initial processing fee of $5,000 with an additional proposal fee of $10,000 to be charged should the project proceed beyond the initial review. The initial processing fee shall be submitted with the initial proposal or competing proposal. The Town will refund any portion of fees paid in excess of its direct costs which include, but are not limited to, all staff costs, and outside consultants, financial advisors, engineers and attorney’s fees, associated with evaluating the proposal. In the event either the initial processing fee of $5,000 or the additional proposal fee of $10,000 is insufficient to cover all of the direct costs incurred by the Town, the Proposer shall pay such additional direct costs incurred by the Town in reviewing the proposal.
D. Freedom of Information Act
1. Generally, proposal documents submitted by private entities are subject to the Virginia Freedom of Information Act, Va. Code §§ 2.2-3700 to 2.2-3714 (“FOIA”). Except as provided by Va. Code § 2.2-3705.6 (11) of FOIA, such documents are subject to release by the Town if requested by a third party, except to the extent that they relate to (i) confidential proprietary records, voluntarily provided by private business pursuant to a promise of confidentiality from the Town, used by the public body for business, trade and tourism development or retention; and memoranda, working papers or other records related to businesses that are considering locating or expanding in Virginia, prepared by the Town, where competition or bargaining is involved and where, if such records are made public, the financial interest of the Town would be adversely affected.
2. Va. Code § 56-575.4 (G) of the PPEA imposes an obligation on the Town and any affected jurisdiction to take appropriate action to protect confidential and proprietary information submitted by a private entity or operator pursuant to Va. Code § 2.2-3705.6 (11). When the private entity requests that the Town not disclose information, the private entity must (i) invoke the exclusion when the data or materials are submitted to the Town or before such submission, (ii) identify the data and materials for which protection from disclosure is sought, and (iii) state why the exclusion from disclosure is necessary. A private entity may request and receive a determination from the Town as to the anticipated scope of protection prior to submitting the proposal. The Town is authorized and obligated to protect only confidential and proprietary information, and thus will not protect any portion of a proposal from disclosure if the entire
Chapter 114 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 114
114-6
proposal has been designated confidential and proprietary by the Proposer without reasonably differentiating between the proprietary and non-proprietary information contained therein.
3. Upon receipt of a request that designated portions of a proposal be protected from disclosure as confidential and proprietary, the Town shall determine whether such protection is appropriate under applicable law and, if appropriate, the scope of such appropriate protection, and shall communicate its determination to the Proposer. If the determination regarding protection or the scope thereof differs from the Proposer's request, then the Town will accord the Proposer a reasonable opportunity to clarify and justify its request. Upon a final determination by the Town to accord less protection than requested by the Proposer, the Proposer will be accorded an opportunity to withdraw its proposal. A proposal so withdrawn should be treated in the same manner as a proposal not accepted for publication and conceptual-phase consideration as provided below.
E. Use of Public Funds
Virginia constitutional and statutory requirements and Town ordinances and policies as they apply to appropriation and expenditure of public funds apply to any comprehensive agreement entered into under the Act. Accordingly, the processes and procedural requirements associated with the expenditure or obligation of public funds shall be incorporated into planning for any PPEA project or projects.
F. Posting of Proposals
Proposals (solicited or unsolicited) submitted in accordance with the requirements herein shall be posted by the Town within ten (10) business days after acceptance such proposals by the Board. Posting shall be on the Town’s website for a minimum of ten (10) calendar days, and by publication, in a newspaper of general circulation in the area in which the contract is to be performed with a summary of the proposal(s) and the location where copies of the proposal(s) are available for inspection. A copy of the proposal(s) may also be posted for public inspection on the Commonwealth of Virginia’s Department of General Service’s centralized electronic procurement website. Provided, however, trade secrets, financial records, or other records of the private entity excluded from disclosure under the provisions of Va. Code § 2.2-3705.6 (11) shall not be required to be posted, except as otherwise agreed by the responsible public entity and the private entity. Any inspection of procurement transaction records shall be subject to reasonable restrictions to ensure the security and integrity of the records.
G. Applicability of Other Laws
Nothing in the PPEA shall affect the duty of the Town to comply with all other applicable laws not in conflict with the PPEA. The applicability of the Virginia Public Procurement Act (the "VPPA") is as set forth in the PPEA.
Chapter 114 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 114
114-7
114-5 SOLICITED PROPOSALS
A. The Town may solicit proposals from private entities to develop, acquire, design, construct, improve, renovate, expand, equip, maintain or operate qualifying projects or qualifying transportation facilities. The Town may use a two-part process consisting of an initial conceptual phase and a detailed phase. The Town will set forth in the solicitation the format and supporting information that is required to be submitted, consistent with the provisions of the applicable Act.
B. The solicitation will specify, but not necessarily be limited to, information and documents that must accompany each proposal and the factors that will be used in evaluating the submitted proposals. The solicitation will be posted in such public areas as are normally used for posting of the Town’s notices, including the Town’s website. The solicitation will also contain or incorporate by reference other applicable terms and conditions, including any unique capabilities or qualifications that will be required of the private entities submitting proposals. Pre-proposal conferences may be held as deemed appropriate by the Town.
C. The requirements for any particular Bid/Proposal shall be as specified in the solicitation by the Town for that particular proposal and shall be consistent with all applicable provisions of the PPEA and any other applicable law. All such solicitations shall be by issuance of a written Invitation to Bid (“ITB”) or Request for Proposal (“RFP”) within the meaning of “competitive sealed bidding” and “competitive negotiation” as used in the Town of Front Royal Procedures For Purchasing and Procurement Manual and the Virginia Public Procurement Act, Va. Code §§ 2.2-4300 to 2.2-4377.
D. Any proposal submitted pursuant to the PPEA that is not received in response to the Town’s ITB or RFP shall be deemed an unsolicited proposal under this PPEA Policy, including but not limited to (a) proposals received in response to a notice of the prior receipt of another unsolicited proposal as provide for below in § IV “Unsolicited Proposals” below, and (b) proposals received in response to publicity by the Town concerning particular needs when the Town has not issued a corresponding ITB or RFP, even if the County otherwise has encouraged the submission of proposals pursuant to the PPEA that address those needs.
114-6 UNSOLICITED PROPOSALS
A. The PPEA permits the Town to receive and evaluate unsolicited proposals from private entities to acquire, design, construct, improve, renovate, expand, equip, maintain, or operate a qualifying project. The Town may publicize its needs and may encourage or notify interested parties to submit proposals subject to the terms and conditions of the PPEA. When such proposals are received without issuance of a solicitation, the proposal shall be treated as an unsolicited proposal.
B. Proposals should be prepared simply and economically, following the format provided herein and providing a concise description of the Proposer's capabilities to complete the proposed qualifying project and the benefits to be derived from the project by the Town. Project benefits to
Chapter 114 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 114
114-8
be considered are those occurring during the construction, renovation, expansion or improvement phase and during the life cycle of the project. Proposals also should include a comprehensive scope of work and a financial plan for the project, containing enough detail to allow an analysis by the Town of the financial feasibility of the proposed project. The Town may, at any time, require the Proposer to provide additional information and clarification to the submission.
C. An unsolicited proposal must contain the information required in § VII. “PPEA Proposal Preparation and Submission (Solicited and Unsolicited)” as set forth below.
D. The Town may require additional submissions to clarify information previously provided or to address other areas of concern to the Town.
E. All unsolicited proposals shall be submitted to the Town by delivering ten (10) complete copies. For unsolicited proposals and unsolicited competing proposals, the Town will require an initial processing fee of $5,000 with an additional proposal fee of $10,000 to be charged should the project proceed beyond the initial review. The initial processing fee shall be submitted with the initial proposal or competing proposal. The Town will refund any portion of fees paid in excess of its direct costs which include, but are not limited to, all staff costs, and outside consultants, financial advisors, engineers and attorney’s fees, associated with evaluating the proposal. In the event either the initial processing fee of $5,000 or the additional proposal fee of $10,000 is insufficient to cover all of the direct costs incurred by the Town, the Proposer shall pay such additional direct costs incurred by the Town in reviewing the proposal.
F. The Town may engage the services of qualified professionals, which may include but not be limited to architects, professional engineers, certified public accountants, not otherwise employed by the Town, to provide independent analysis regarding the specifics, advantages, disadvantages, and the long-and short-term costs of any request by an private entity for approval of a qualifying project, and the Town may apply the initial or any additional processing or proposal fee to the cost of the services of such qualified professionals, unless the Town determines that such analysis of a request for approval of a qualifying project shall be performed by an employee of the Town.
G. Upon receipt of any unsolicited proposal or group of proposals accompanied a payment of the required fee or fees by the Proposer or Proposers, the Town will determine whether to accept the unsolicited proposal for publication and conceptual-phase consideration. If the Town determines not to accept the proposal and not to proceed to publication and conceptual-phase consideration, it shall return the proposal, together with all fees and accompanying documentation, to the Proposer(s).
H. If the Town chooses to accept an unsolicited proposal for conceptual-phase consideration, it shall post a notice within ten (10) working days in a public area regularly used by the Town for posting of public notices for a period of not less than forty-five (45) days. The Town shall also publish the same notice in one or more newspapers or periodicals of general circulation in the
Chapter 114 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 114
114-9
Town to notify any parties that may be interested in submitting competing unsolicited proposals. Interested parties shall have forty-five (45) days from the date the notice is published to submit competing unsolicited proposals. The notice shall state that the Town (i) has received and accepted an unsolicited proposal under the PPEA, (ii) intends to evaluate the proposal, (iii) may negotiate a comprehensive agreement with the Proposer based on the proposal, and (iv) will accept for simultaneous consideration any competing proposals that comply with the policy adopted by the Town and the PPEA. The notice also shall summarize the proposed qualifying project or projects, and identify their proposed locations.
I. One copy of accepted unsolicited proposal(s) shall be made available for public inspection in accordance with the provisions of § IV.E, above.
J. The Town reserves the right to reject any and all proposals at any time. If the Town rejects a proposal by a private entity that purports to develop specific cost savings, the Town shall specify the basis for rejection.
114-7 PPEA PROPOSAL PREPARATION AND SUBMISSION (UNSOLICITED AND SOLICITED)
A. Format for Submissions at the Conceptual Stage
The Town will require that all proposals (both solicited and unsolicited) at the conceptual stage contain the following information in the following format plus such other information as the Town may reasonably request to complete its review or to comply with the requirements of the PPEA:
1. Completion and inclusion of a Proposer’s Certification which is found as Appendix A to this policy.
2. Qualifications and Experience
a. Identify the legal structure of the firm or consortium of firms making the proposal. Identify the organizational structure for the project, the management approach and how each partner and major subcontractor in the structure fits into the overall team.
b. Describe the experience of the firm or consortium of firms making the proposal, the key principals and project managers involved in the proposed project including experience with projects of comparable size and complexity, including prior experience bringing similar projects to completion on budget and in compliance with design, land use, service and other standards. Describe the length of time in business, business experience, public sector experience and other engagements of the firm or consortium of firms. Include the identity of any firms that will provide design, construction and completion guarantees and warranties and a description of such guarantees and warranties.
Chapter 114 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 114
114-10
c. Provide the names, prior experience, addresses, telephone numbers and e-mail addresses of persons within the firm or consortium of firms who will be directly involved in the project or who may be contacted for further information.
d. Provide a current or most recently audited financial statement of the firm or firms and each partner with an equity interest of twenty percent or greater.
e. Identify any persons known to the Proposer who would be obligated to disqualify themselves from participation in any transaction arising from or in connection to the project pursuant to The Virginia State and Local Government Conflict of Interest Act, Chapter 31 (Va. Code § 2.2-3100 et seq.) of Title 2.2 of the Code of Virginia.
3. Project Characteristics:
a. Provide a description of the project, including the conceptual design. Describe the proposed project in sufficient detail so that type and intent of the project, the location, and the communities that may be affected are clearly identified.
b. Identify and fully describe any work to be performed by the Town or any other public entity.
c. Include a list of all federal, state and local permits and approvals required for the project and a schedule for obtaining such permits and approvals.
d. Identify any anticipated adverse social, economic, environmental and transportation impacts of the project measured against the Town’s comprehensive land use plan and applicable ordinances and design standards. Specify the strategies or actions to mitigate known impacts of the project.
e. Identify the projected positive social, economic, environmental and transportation impacts of the project measured against the Town’s comprehensive land use plan and applicable ordinances and design standards.
f. Identify the proposed schedule for the work on the project, including sufficient time for the Town’s review and the estimated time for completion.
g. Propose allocation of risk and liability, and assurances for timely completion of the project.
h. State assumptions related to ownership, legal liability, law enforcement and operation of the project and the existence of any restrictions on the Town’s use of the project.
Chapter 114 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 114
114-11
i. Provide information relative to phased openings of the proposed project.
4. Project Financing
a. Provide a preliminary estimate and estimating methodology of the cost of the work by phase, segment, or both.
b. Submit a plan for the development, financing and operation of the project showing the anticipated schedule on which funds will be required. Describe the anticipated costs of and proposed sources and uses for such funds, including any anticipated debt service costs. The operational plan should include appropriate staffing levels and associated costs based upon any Town’s stated or adopted operational standards.
c. Include a list and discussion of assumptions underlying all major elements of the plan.
d. Identify the proposed risk factors and methods for dealing with these factors. Describe methods and remedies associated with any financial default.
e. Identify any local, state or federal resources that the Proposer contemplates requesting for the project along with an anticipated schedule of resource requirements. Describe the total commitment, if any, expected from governmental sources and the timing of any anticipated commitment, both one-time and on-going.
f. Identify the need, if any, for the Town to provide either its general obligation or moral obligation backing. The underlying assumptions should address this need and/or state that the credit would be via a “Service Agreement”, for example. Any debt issuance should be expected to receive an investment grade rating from a nationally recognized statistical rating agency. If the natural rating is not investment grade, the Town may require the use of credit enhancements.
g. Outline what impact, if any, a drop in interest rates would have on the ultimate annual project cost. Indicate if there is a method to refinance for cost savings or, conversely, if the firm is to receive the sole or primary benefit of this potential.
h. Outline the financial penalties, if any, that would result should the Town wish to terminate a project early or restructure the cash flows for some reason of its own choosing. The firm should be specific on this point.
i. Provide a breakout of the fees to any underwriting firm(s) and the type of obligation the firm(s) are using with a financing component. Be specific as to tax-exempt, taxable, floating rate, fixed rate, etc.
Chapter 114 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 114
114-12
5. Project Benefit and Compatibility
a. Identify who will benefit from the project, how they will benefit and how the project will benefit the Town and the overall community.
b. Identify any anticipated public support or opposition, as well as any anticipated government support or opposition (including that in any affected jurisdiction), for the project.
c. Explain the strategy and plans, including the anticipated timeline that will be carried out to involve and inform the general public, business community, and governmental agencies in areas affected by the project.
d. Describe any anticipated significant benefits to the community and the Town, including anticipated benefits to the economic, social, environmental, transportation, etc., condition of the Town and whether the project is critical to attracting or maintaining competitive industries and businesses to the Town.
e. Compatibility with the Town’s and/or affected jurisdiction’s local comprehensive plan (including related environmental, land use and facility standards ordinances, where applicable), infrastructure development plans, transportation plans, the capital improvements plan and capital budget or other government spending plan.
6. Additional material and information as the Town may reasonably request.
B. Format for Submissions at the Detailed Stage
If the Town decides to proceed to the detailed phase of review with one or more proposals, the following information should be provided by the private entity unless waived by the County:
1. A topographical map (1:2,000 or other appropriate scale) depicting the location of the proposed project or facility.
2. A description of the qualifying project, including the conceptual design of such facility or facilities or a conceptual plan for the provision of services or technology infrastructure, and a schedule for the initiation of and completion of the qualifying project to include the proposed major responsibilities and timeline for activities to be performed by both the public and private entity;
3. A list of public utility facilities, if any, that will be crossed by the qualifying project and a statement of the plans of the Proposer to accommodate such crossings.
Chapter 114 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 114
114-13
4. Information relating to the current plans for development of facilities to be used by a public entity that are similar to the qualifying project being proposed by the private entity, if any, of each affected jurisdiction.
5. A statement and strategy setting out the plans for securing all necessary property interests and/or easements required for the project. The statement must include the names and addresses, if known, of the current owners of the subject property as well as a list of any property the Proposer intends to request the Town or affected jurisdiction to condemn.
6. A detailed listing of all firms, along with their relevant experience and abilities, that will provide specific design, construction and completion guarantees and warranties, and a brief description of such guarantees and warranties along with a record of any prior defaults for performance.
7. If relevant, information relating to the current plans for development of facilities or technology infrastructure to be used by the Town that are similar to the qualifying project being proposed by the private entity, if any, of each affected local jurisdiction; 8. A list of all permits and approvals required for the qualifying project from local, state, or federal agencies and a projected schedule for obtaining such permits and approvals; 9. A statement setting forth the private entity's general plans for financing the qualifying project including the sources of the private entity's funds and identification of any dedicated revenue source or proposed debt or equity investment on the behalf of the private entity;
10. A total life-cycle cost, including maintenance, specifying methodology and assumptions of the project or projects including major building systems (e.g., electrical, mechanical, etc.), and the proposed project start date. Include anticipated commitment of all parties; equity, debt, and other financing mechanisms; and a schedule of project revenues and project costs. The life-cycle cost analysis should include, but not be limited to, a detailed analysis of the projected return, rate of return, or both, expected useful life of facility and estimated annual operating expenses using Town adopted service levels and standards.
11. A detailed discussion of assumptions about user fees or rates, lease payments and other service payments over the term of the interim or comprehensive agreement, and the methodology and circumstances for changes to such user fees, lease payments, and other service payments over time, and usage of the projects over the useful life of the projects.
12. Identification of any known government support or opposition, or general public support or opposition for the project. Government or public support should be demonstrated through resolution of official bodies, minutes of meetings, letters, or other official communications.
Chapter 114 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 114
114-14
13. Demonstration of consistency with appropriate Town and/or affected jurisdiction comprehensive plans (including related environmental, land use and facility standards ordinances, where applicable), infrastructure development plans, transportation plans, the capital improvement plan and capital budget, or indication of the steps required for acceptance into such plans.
14. Explanation of how the proposed project would impact the Town’s or affected jurisdiction’s (jurisdictions’) development plans.
15. The names and addresses of the persons who may be contacted for further information concerning the request;
16. Identification of any known conflicts of interest or other factors that may impact the Town’s consideration of the proposal, including the identification of any persons known to the Proposer who would be obligated to disqualify themselves from participation in any transaction arising from or in connection to the project pursuant to The Virginia State and Local Government Conflict of Interest Act, Chapter 31 (Va. Code § 2.2-3100 et seq.) of Title 2.2.
17. Additional material and information as the Town may reasonably request.
114-8 PROPOSAL EVALUATION AND SELECTION CRITERIA
A. Initial Review at the Conceptual Stage
1. Only proposals complying with the requirements of the PPEA that contain sufficient information for a meaningful evaluation and that are provided in an appropriate format will be considered by the Town for further review at the conceptual stage.
2. The Town will determine at this initial stage of review whether it will proceed using:
a. Standard “competitive sealed bidding” procurement procedures consistent with the VPPA; or
b. Procedures developed by the Town that are consistent with procurement of other than professional services through "competitive negotiation" as the term is defined in Va. Code § 2.2-4301. The Town may proceed using competitive negotiation procedures only if it makes a written determination that doing so is likely to be advantageous to the Town and the public based upon either (1) the probable scope, complexity or urgency of need, or (2) the risk sharing, added value, increase in funding or economic benefit from the project would otherwise not be available.
Chapter 114 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 114
114-15
3. After reviewing the original proposal(s) submitted during the appropriate notice period(s), the Town may determine:
a. not to proceed further with any proposal (solicited or unsolicited),
b. to proceed to the detailed phase of review with the original unsolicited proposal,
c. to proceed to the detailed phase with a competing unsolicited proposal, or
d. to proceed to the detailed phase with one or more solicited or unsolicited proposals.
B. In evaluating any request for proposal, the Town may rely upon internal staff reports or the advice of outside advisors or consultants. Some or all of the following items, along with the specified information required herein, shall be considered in the evaluation and selection of PPEA proposals. The Town, however, reserves and retains the right to reject any request for proposal at any time for any reason whatsoever.
1. Qualifications and Experience
Factors to be considered in either phase of the Town’s review to determine whether the Proposer possesses the requisite qualifications and experience may include, but are not necessarily limited to:
a. Experience with similar projects
b. Demonstration of ability to perform work
c. Leadership structure
d. Project manager's experience
e. Management approach
f. Financial condition
g. Project ownership
2. Project Characteristics
Factors to be considered in determining the project characteristics may include, along with the specified information required herein, but are not necessarily limited to, the following:
a. Project definition
b. Proposed project schedule
c. Operation of the project
d. Technology; technical feasibility
e. Conformity to State, Town or affected jurisdiction laws, regulations and standards
f. Environmental impacts
g. Condemnation impacts
h. State and local permits
i. Maintenance of the project
Chapter 114 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 114
114-16
3. Project Financing
Factors to be considered in determining whether the proposed project financing allows adequate access to the necessary capital to finance the project may include, along with the specified information required herein, but are not necessarily limited to, the following:
a. Cost and cost benefit to the Town;
b. Financing and the impact on the debt or debt burden of the Town
c. Financial plan including default implications;
d. Estimated cost; including debt source, operating costs, etc.; and
e. Life-cycle cost analysis.
4. Project Benefit and Compatibility
Factors to be considered in determining the proposed project's compatibility with the Town’s, affected jurisdiction’s or regional comprehensive or development plans may include, along with the specified information required herein, but are not necessarily limited to, the following
a. Community benefits;
b. Community support or opposition, or both;
c. Public involvement strategy;
d. Compatibility with existing and planned facilities;
e. Compatibility with Town, regional, and state economic development efforts; and
f. Compatibility with the land use and/or transportation plans of the Town and/or those of any affected jurisdiction.
114-9 COMPREHENSIVE AND INTERIM AGREEMENTS
A. At least thirty (30) days prior to entering into an interim or comprehensive agreement a public hearing must be held on the proposals. The Town shall give notice of such hearing by posting on the Town’s website and in a newspaper of general circulation in the area where the contract is to be performed, a summary of the proposed agreements and the location where copies of the proposals and proposed agreement are available for public inspection. The Notice shall be provided at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the public hearing.
B. Prior to acquiring, designing, constructing, improving, renovating, expanding, equipping, maintaining, or operating the qualifying project, the selected Proposer shall enter into a Comprehensive Agreement with the Town. Each contract shall define the rights and obligations of the Town and the selected Proposer with regard to the project.
C. The terms of the Comprehensive Agreement shall be tailored to address the specifics of the project and shall include but not be limited to
Chapter 114 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 114
114-17
1. The delivery of maintenance, performance and payment bonds or letters of credit in connection with any acquisition, design, construction, improvement, renovation, expansion, equipping, maintenance, or operation of the qualifying project; in a form and amount satisfactory to the County and on a form provided by the Town.
2. The review and approval of plans and specifications for the qualifying project by the Town;
3. The rights of the Town to inspect the qualifying project to ensure compliance with the contract;
4. The maintenance of a policy or policies of liability insurance or self-insurance reasonably sufficient to insure coverage of the project and the tort liability to the public and employees and to enable the continued operation of the qualifying project;
5. The monitoring of the practices of the operator by the Town to ensure proper maintenance, safety, use and management of the qualifying project;
6. The terms under which the operator will reimburse the Town for services provided;
7. The policy and procedures that will govern the rights and responsibilities of the Town and the operator in the event that the contract is terminated or there is a material default by the operator including the conditions governing assumption of the duties and responsibilities of the operator by the Town and the transfer or purchase of property or other interests of the operator by the Town;
8. The terms under which the operator will file appropriate financial statements on a periodic basis.
9. The mechanism by which user fees, lease payments, or service payments, if any, may be established from time to time upon agreement of the parties. Any payments or fees shall be the same for persons using the facility under like conditions and that will not materially discourage use of the qualifying project
a. A copy of any service contract shall be filed with the Town.
b. A schedule of the current user fees or lease payments shall be made available by the operator to any member of the public upon request.
c. Classifications according to reasonable categories for assessment of user fees may be made.
Chapter 114 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 114
114-18
10. The terms and conditions under which the Town will contribute financial resources, if any, for the qualifying project; and
11. Other requirements of the PPEA or provisions that the Town determines serve the public purpose of the PPEA.
D. Prior to or in connection with the negotiation of the comprehensive agreement, the Town may enter into an interim agreement with the private entity proposing the development or operation of the qualifying project. The scope of an interim agreement may include, but is not limited to
1. Project planning and development
2. Design and engineering;
3. Environmental analysis and mitigation
4. Survey
5. Ascertaining the availability of financing for the proposed facility through financial and revenue analysis
6. Establishing a process and timing of the negotiation of the comprehensive agreement; and
7. Any other provisions related to any aspect of the development or operation of a qualifying project that the parties may deem appropriate prior to the execution of a comprehensive agreement.
E. Once negotiations have concluded, the following shall occur:
1. The Town shall make the proposed agreement available on the Town’s website and in the offices of the Town Manager or the Town’s Finance Department for at least 10 business days prior to the public hearing to be held by the Town.
2. At least thirty (30) days prior to entering into an interim or comprehensive agreement a public hearing must be held on the proposals. Such hearing may coincide with a regularly scheduled meeting of the Town Council; comments may be submitted to the Town at any time during the notice period and prior to the public hearing. After the public hearing and the end of the public comment period, no additional posting shall be required based on any public comment received.
3. The proposed agreement shall be posted in the following manner:
Chapter 114 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 114
114-19
a. On the Town’s website.
b. In addition to the posting requirements, a copy of the proposals shall be made available for public inspection in the offices of the Town Manager or Town’s Finance Department. Trade secrets, financial records, or other records of the private entity excluded from disclosure under the provisions of subdivision 11 of Va. Code §2.2-3705.6 shall not be required to be posted, except as otherwise agreed to by the Town and the private entity.
c. Any studies and analyses considered by the Town in its review of a proposal shall be disclosed at some point prior to the execution of an interim or comprehensive agreement.
d. Once an interim agreement or a comprehensive agreement has been entered into, the Town shall make procurement records available for public inspection, upon request.
e. Such procurement records shall include documents protected from disclosure during the negotiation phase on the basis that the release of such documents.
F. Any comprehensive agreement, interim agreement, and any amendments thereto shall first be approved by the Town Council and then executed in writing by persons having the authority to do so. For a mixed project involving both public schools and other facilities, the Town Council, Warren County Board of Supervisors and Warren County School Board, may in their discretion, both enter into the same comprehensive agreement with the operator for the entire mixed project, with their respective responsibilities delineated in the agreement.
G. As required by Va. Code § 56-575.9.F., when the Town enters into an agreement pursuant to the PPEA, a copy should be submitted to the Auditor of Public Accounts within 30 days thereafter at the following address:
Audit of Public Accounts
P.O. Box 1295
Richmond, VA 23218
The copy should be sent by certified-mail, return receipt requested, with a copy of the forwarding letter and return-receipt kept in the procurement file.
114-10 PROTESTS OF PPEA PROCUREMENTS
The following are the exclusive procedures for contesting or challenging (protesting) (a) the terms or conditions of any solicitation of proposals by the Town pursuant to the PPEA, (b) nonselection of a PPEA proposal for further consideration, and (c) the selection of any PPEA proposal for entry into an Interim and/or Comprehensive agreement or the entry into an Interim and/or Comprehensive agreement under the PPEA:
Chapter 114 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 114
114-20
A. Any protest to any term or condition of a solicitation must be made in writing and delivered to the Town Manager so it is received by the Town Manager before proposals are due under the solicitation. Any protest not received in this manner shall be deemed to be waived.
B. A protest of a Town decision not to select a PPEA proposal for further consideration may only be made by the entity who submitted the proposal at issue. A protest of a Town decision to select a PPEA proposal for entry into an agreement or to enter into an agreement may only be made by an entity who submitted a proposal for the procurement at issue and who was reasonably likely to have its proposal accepted but for the Town's decision. Protests shall only be granted if (1) the protester has complied fully with this paragraph X and there has been a violation of law, this policy, or mandatory terms of the solicitation that clearly prejudiced the protestor in a material way, or (2) a statute requires voiding of the decision.
C. Any entity desiring to protest a Town decision not to select a PPEA proposal for further consideration, to select a PPEA proposal for entry into an agreement, or to enter into an agreement shall submit the protest in writing and deliver it so that it is received by the Town Manager not later than 10 business days after announcement of the decision. Any protest not received in this manner shall be deemed to be waived.
D. The Town Manager shall issue a written decision on a protest within 10 days of its receipt by the Town Manager.
E. If the protest is denied, the protester may only appeal the denial or otherwise contest or challenge the procurement by then filing suit in the Circuit Court of Warren County and serving the Town with such suit within 10 days of such denial. Otherwise, the protester's right to appeal the denial or to otherwise contest or challenge the procurement shall be deemed to be waived.
F. The exclusive relief allowed if a protest is granted is to void the decision being protested. Under no circumstances will any monetary relief be allowed.
G. Strictly following these procedures shall be a mandatory prerequisite for any challenge of any nature to a decision by the Town relating to terms and conditions of a PPEA solicitation, non-selection of a PPEA proposal for further consideration, selection of a PPEA proposal, or entry into an interim and/or comprehensive agreement. A failure to follow all these procedures strictly shall constitute a waiver of any right to challenge judicially a Town decision (a) as to terms or conditions in a PPEA solicitation, (b) not to select a PPEA proposal for further consideration, (c) to select a PPEA proposal, or (d) to enter into an interim and/or comprehensive agreement.
114-11 NOTICE AND POSTING REQUIREMENTS
See Section 114-13, Appendix B for an outline of these requirements and the associated timelines.
Chapter 114 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 114
114-21
114-12 VIOLATION NOT MISDEMEANOR
A violation of this Chapter 114 shall not by itself constitute a violation of any criminal ordinance, statute or law of any jurisdiction unless it shall independently violate such other criminal ordinance, statute or law notwithstanding any provision of this Chapter.
114-13 APPENDIX A – PROPOSER’S CERTIFICATION
Proposer’s Name: _______________________
_______________________
Proposer’s Address Proposer’s:
______________________________ Telephone No.: ________________
______________________________ Facsimile No.: ________________
______________________________ E-mail Address: ________________
Propos Proposer’s er’s, or Proposer’s Contractor’s Virginia Class A General Contractor’s License Number:
_____________________________________________________________________________
Proposer’s., or Proposer’s Architects, and Engineers Virginia Registration Numbers: ______________________________________________________________________________
After first being placed under oath, I hereby certify that I have authority to submit this proposal on behalf of the Proposer whose name appears above, that I am a principal of the Proposer, that the Proposer hereby agrees to all of the terms and conditions in the Town of Front Royal PPEA Policy, as amended, that neither the Proposer nor any member of its team or their principals is currently suspended or debarred from public contracting by any federal, state or local government entity, that I have taken reasonable steps to ascertain the accuracy of all the information contained in this proposal and this certification, and that the information in this proposal and certification is accurate to the best of my knowledge or information and belief.
Chapter 114 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 114
114-22
___________________________
Signature
____________________________
Printed/Typed Name
____________________________
Title (Principal of Proposer)
Commonwealth of Virginia :
: to wit
County/City of __________ :
On _____________________________, (same name as above) appeared before me, and after satisfying me of his/her identity and after being placed under oath, swore to the truthfulness of the above statement.
___________________________
Notary Public
My commission expires: _______________________
(If applicable) the Proposer acknowledges receipt of the following addenda:
Addendum No.: ______ Dated: ____________
Addendum No.: ______ Dated: ____________
Addendum No.: ______ Dated: ____________
Addendum No.: ______ Dated: ____________
Chapter 114 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 114
114-23
114-14 APPENDIX B – NOTICE AND POSTING REQUIREMENTS CHECKBOX
Requirement
Responsible Party
Unsolicited
Solicited
Provide any affected jurisdiction with a copy of proposal within five (5) business days of proposal to Town
Private Entity
?
Any affected jurisdiction shall have sixty (60) days from receipt of proposal to provide comments to the Town
Other affected jurisdictions
?
Town may begin or continue evaluation during the sixty (60) day review period
Town
?
Post proposals within ten (10) business days of acceptance
Town
?
?
Posting shall continue for ten (10) business days
Town
?
Posting shall continue for not less than forty-five (45) days
Town
?
Competing Proposals may be submitted within the forty-five (45) day posting window
Private Entities
?
Provide ten (10) day notice of public hearing required for entering into agreement
Town
?
?
Public hearing must be held at least thirty (30) days prior to entering into a comprehensive or interim agreement
Town
?
?
Chapter 114 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 114
114-24
Summary:
Acceptance of unsolicited proposals will generally require a minimum of 150 days from receipt of proposal to signature of interim or comprehensive agreement. This estimate does not include time required for review and evaluation of proposals.
Solicited proposals will generally require a minimum of 60 days from date of issuance of RFP to signature of interim or comprehensive agreement. This estimate does not include time required for creation of RFP, posting and distribution of RFP, receipt of proposals, review and evaluation of proposals.
114-15 APPENDIX C – TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
“Act” means the Public-Private Education Facilities and Infrastructure Act of 2002, as amended, Va. Code §§ 56-575.1 to 56-575.18.
"Affected jurisdiction" means any county, city, or town in which all or a portion of a qualifying project is located.
"Appropriating body" means the body responsible for appropriating or authorizing funding to pay for a qualifying project.
"Comprehensive agreement" means the comprehensive agreement between the private entity and the responsible public entity that is required prior to the development or operation of a qualifying project.
“Conceptual stage” means the initial phase of project evaluation when the public entity makes a determination whether the proposed project serves a public purpose, meets the criteria for a qualifying project, assesses the qualifications and experience of a private entity Proposer, reviews the project for financial feasibility, and warrants further pursuit.
“Cost-benefit analysis” means an analysis that weighs expected costs against expected benefits in order to choose the best option. For example, a city manager may compare the costs and benefits of constructing a new office building to those of renovating and maintaining an existing structure in order to select the most financially advantageous option.
“Detailed stage” means the second phase of project evaluation where the public entity has completed the conceptual stage and accepted the proposal and may request additional information regarding a proposed project prior to entering into competitive negotiations with one or more private entities to develop an interim or comprehensive agreement.
Chapter 114 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 114
114-25
"Develop" or "development" means to plan, design, develop, finance, lease, acquire, install, construct, or expand.
"Interim agreement" means an agreement between a private entity and a responsible public entity that provides for phasing of the development or operation, or both, of a qualifying project. Such phases may include, but are not limited to, design, planning, engineering, environmental analysis and mitigation, financial and revenue analysis, or any other phase of the project that constitutes activity on any part of the qualifying project.
"Lease payment" means any form of payment, including a land lease, by a public entity to the private entity for the use of a qualifying project.
“Lifecycle cost analysis” means an analysis that calculates cost of an asset over its entire life span and includes the cost of planning, constructing, operating, maintaining, replacing, and when applicable, salvaging the asset. Although one proposal may have a lower initial construction cost, it may not have the lowest lifecycle cost once maintenance, replacement, and salvage value is considered. Public-Private Education Facilities and Infrastructure Act of 2002, as amended, Commonwealth of Virginia Procedures Revised.
"Material default" means any default by the private entity in the performance of its duties that jeopardizes adequate service to the public from a qualifying project.
“Operate" means to finance, maintain, improve, equip, modify, repair, or operate.
“Opportunity cost” means the cost of passing up another choice when making a decision or the increase in costs due to delays in making a decision.
“PPEA” means the Public-Private Education Facilities and Infrastructure Act of 2002, as amended, Va. Code §§ 56-575.1 to 56-575.18.
"Private entity" means any natural person, corporation, general partnership, limited liability company, limited partnership, joint venture, business trust, public benefit corporation, nonprofit entity, or other business entity.
"Public entity" means the Commonwealth and any agency or authority thereof, any county, city or town and any other political subdivision of the Commonwealth, any public body politic and corporate, or any regional entity that serves a public purpose.
"Qualifying project" means (i) any education facility, including, but not limited to a school building, any functionally related and subordinate facility and land of a school building (including any stadium or other facility primarily used for school events), and any depreciable property provided for use in a school facility that is operated as part of the public school system or as an
Chapter 114 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 114
114-26
institution of higher education; (ii) any building or facility that meets a public purpose and is developed or operated by or for any public entity; (iii) any improvements, together with equipment, necessary to enhance public safety and security of buildings to be principally used by a public entity; (iv) utility and telecommunications and other communications infrastructure; (v) a recreational facility; (vi) technology infrastructure and services, including, but not limited to, telecommunications, automated data processing, word processing and management information systems, and related information, equipment, goods and services; (vii) any technology, equipment, or infrastructure designed to deploy wireless broadband services to schools, businesses, or residential areas; or (viii) any improvements necessary or desirable to any unimproved locally- or state-owned real estate.
"Responsible public entity" means a public entity that has the power to develop or operate the applicable qualifying project.
"Revenues" means all revenues, income, earnings, user fees, lease payments, or other service payments arising out of or in connection with supporting the development or operation of a qualifying project, including without limitation, money received as grants or otherwise from the United States of America, from any public entity, or from any agency or instrumentality of the foregoing in aid of such facility.
"Service contract" means a contract entered into between a public entity and the private entity pursuant to § 56-575.5.Public-Private Education Facilities and Infrastructure Act of 2002, as amended Commonwealth of Virginia Procedures Revised January 17, 2008 -30-
“Service payments” means payments to the private entity of a qualifying project pursuant to a service contract.
“State” means the Commonwealth of Virginia.
“Town” means the Town of Front Royal, Virginia, a municipal corporation and body politic.
“Town Council” means the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia.
“Town Manager” means the Town Manager of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia.
“User fees” " mean the rates, fees, or other charges imposed by the private entity of a qualifying project for use of all or a portion of such qualifying project pursuant to the comprehensive agreement pursuant to Va. Code § 56-575.9.
Chapter 118 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 118
118-1
Chapter 118
PLUMBING
Sections:
GENERAL PROVISIONS
118-1 DEFINITIONS
118-2 LIST OF JOURNEYMENT TO BE FILED
118-3 MASTER PLUMBER OR GAS FITTER NOT TO ALSO WORK AS JOURNEYMAN
118-4 APPROVAL OF PLAN AND ISSUANCE OF PERMIT REQUIRED
118-5 PERMITS RESTRICTED TO DULY CERTIFIED MASTER PLUMERS OR GAS FITTERS
118-6 SUPERVISION OF WORK
118-7 BOND
118-8 CERTIFICATE OF LIABILITY INSURANCE
118-9 TOWN MANAGER AS STATUTORY AGENT OR MASTER PLUMBER OR GAS FITTER
119-10 PAYMENT OF TAX REQUIRED
PLUMBING INSPECTOR
118-11 APPOINTMENT; POWERS AND DUTIES
118-12 (RESERVED)
118-13 RIGHT OF ENTRY
118-14 THROUGH 118-21 (RESERVED)
PLUMBING STANDARDS
118-22ADOPTION OF STANDARDS; MODIFICATIONS
118-23 PREVALENCE OF MORE STRINGENT PROVISIONS
118-24 AVAILABILITY OF COPIES
118-25 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
STANDARDS FOR INSTALLATION OF GASE APPLIANCES AND GAS PIPING
118-26ADOPTION OF STANDARDS; PREVALENCE OF MORE STINGENT PROVISIONS
118-27 AVAILABILITY OF COPIES
118-28 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal 3-11-85 (Chapter 21 of the 1965 Code. Sections 118-7A and 118-11 amended at time of adoption of Code. Certificate of Competence for plumbers and gas fitters, was repealed 8-13-84 by Ord. No. 9-84. For current provisions regarding certification of plumbers, electricians and building-related mechanical workers, see Chapter 60. Other amendments noted where applicable.
Chapter 118 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 118
118-2
GENERAL PROVISIONS
118-1 DEFINITIONS
For the operations of this chapter, the following definitions, except as or otherwise provided or when the context clearly requires a different meaning, shall apply:
GAS FITTING - The installation, extension and repair of any piping, tubing, fixtures or devices for the conveyance and consumption of gas for power, refrigeration, heating or illumination purposes, and all their attachments and appurtenances and the repair and maintenance of the same.
PLUMBING - The profession, art or trade of and all work done and all materials used in and for introducing, maintaining and extending a supply of water through a pipe or pipes, or any appurtenances thereof, in a building, lot, premise or establishment; and the installing, connecting or repairing any system of drainage whereby soil, foul waste, surplus water, gas, odor, vapor or fluid is discharged or proposed to be discharged through a pipe or pipes from any building, lot, premises or establishment into any main, public or private sewer, drain, pit, box, filter-bed, leaching well, septic tank or other receptacle or into any natural or artificial body of water of watercourse or any open ditch, on public or private property; and ventilating any building, sewer or fixture or appurtenances connected therewith; and the performing classes of work generally done by plumbers.
118-2 LIST OF JOURNEYMEN TO BE FILED
Each master plumber or master gas fitter shall file with the Plumbing Inspector the names of the licensed journeymen in his employ, and such file shall be kept up-to-date as changes in his organization may occur.
118-3 MASTER PLUMBER OR GAS FITTER NOT TO ALSO WORK AS JOURNEYMAN
A master plumber or gas fitter shall not work as a journeyman plumber or gas fitter and at the same carry on business in the town as master plumber or gas fitter.
118-4 APPROVAL OF PLAN AND ISSUANCE OF PERMIT REQUIRED
It shall be unlawful for any person to perform or undertake to perform any plumbing work or gas fitting in the town until the plan of the proposed work has been approved by the Plumbing Inspector for the town and a permit issued by him for the performance of such work.
Chapter 118 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 118
118-3
118-5 PERMITS RESTRICTED TO DULY CERTIFIED MASTER PLUMBERS OR GAS FITTERS.
No permit to perform plumbing work or gas fitting shall be issued, as provided in Section 118-4, to any person unless such person is already duly licensed and certified as a master plumber or gas fitter in accordance with the provisions of this Article.
118-6 SUPERVISION OF WORK
A. All plumbing work shall be done under the direct supervision of a master plumber, who shall be responsible for all work done under any permit issued to him, and none other than duly certified journeyman plumbers shall be employed in forming, fitting, placing or connecting any plumbing work as defined in this Article.
B. All gas fitting shall be done under the direct supervision of a master gas fitter, who shall be responsible for all work done under any permit issued to him, and none other than duly certified journeyman gas fitters shall be employed in forming, fitting, placing or connecting any gas fitting as defined in this Article.
118-7 BOND
A. Every master plumber holding a certificate of competence and every master gas fitter holding a certificate of competence shall give a surety bond payable to the town in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.), with the corporate surety, approved by the Town Attorney and conditioned to indemnify and save harmless the town, as well as any other person, from all expenses and damage that may be caused by any negligent, defective or inadequate work done in the town under any contract that such person may undertake and also conditioned upon the faithful performance of, and compliance with, all of the provisions of this chapter *.
B. Such master plumbers and such master gas fitters shall not engage in or carry on their trade or occupation until such bond has been given, nor shall any license be issued to such master plumber or master gas fitter under Chapter 98 until such bond shall have been given.
C. Such bond shall be for the license period and shall be renewed upon renewal of license.
D. The Plumbing Inspector and Town Manager shall have authority to declare such bond forfeited.
118-8 CERTIFICATE OF LIABILITY INSURANCE
A master plumber or master gas fitter of whom a bond is required in Section 118-7 may give a certificate of liability insurance in lieu of such bond. Such certificate of liability insurance shall be subject to all the terms, conditions and requirements of Section 118-7.
Chapter 118 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 118
118-4
118-9 TOWN MANAGER AS STATUTORY AGENT OF MASTER PLUMBER OR GAS FITTER.
A. It shall be provided in the surety bond, given as provided in Section 118-7, that the Town Manager shall be named as statutory agent of a master plumber or master gas fitter holding a certificate of competence issued under this chapter, for all purposes under the provisions of this chapter.
B. It shall be unlawful for any such master plumber or master gas fitter to fail, neglect or refuse to name the Town Manager as his statutory agent for all purpose under the provisions of this chapter.
118-10 PAYMENT OF TAX REQUIRED
No person shall engage in or carry on the trade or occupation of a master plumber or master gas fitter within the town without having paid the requisite license tax under Chapter 98.
PLUMBING INSPECTOR
118-11 APPOINTMENT; POWERS AND DUTIES
A Plumbing Inspector may be appointed by the Town Manager, who shall then enforce all provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the town relating to plumbers, plumbing, plumbing equipment, plumbing fixtures and appurtenances thereto, as well as those relating to gas fitters and the installation of gas appliances and gas piping.
118-12 (RESERVED)
118-13 RIGHT OF ENTRY
The Plumbing Inspector in the discharge of his official duties, and upon property identification, shall have authority to enter any building, structure or premises at any reasonable hour.
118-14 THROUGH 118-21 (RESERVED)
PLUMBING STANDARDS
118-22 ADOPTION OF STANDARDS; MODIFICATIONS
There is hereby adopted by the Council, for the purpose of regulating plumbing, plumbing equipment, plumbing fixtures and appurtenances thereto, that certain code known as the "State Plumbing Code," adopted by the State Board of Health on May 6, 1959, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which the Code of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia, shall take effect, the provisions thereof so adopted shall be controlling in the regulation of plumbing, plumbing equipment, plumbing fixtures and
Chapter 118 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 118
118-5
appurtenances thereto, in the town; provided, however, that the State Plumbing Code adopted in this section is amended, modified and changed as follows:
A. Paragraph 2.17.1 is amended to read as follows:
2.17.1 Sewers and water service piping shall be installed below the lowest recorded frost penetration, and in no case shall there be not less than two (2) feet of earth cover over sewers and not less than three (3) feet of earth cover over water service piping.
B. Paragraph 5.2.4 is deleted in its entirety.
C. Paragraph 5.3.6 is amended to read as follows:
5.3.6 Prohibited Traps.
a. No trap which depends on its seal upon the action of movable parts shall be used.
b. Bell traps are prohibited.
c. Crown-vented traps are prohibited.
d. Drum traps are prohibited.
D. Paragraph 5.4.9 is added to follow Paragraph 5.4.8, as follows:
5.4.9 Building Sewer Junction. There shall be a cast-iron forty-five-degree Y-branch cleanout at the junction of the building sewer with the public sewer (at the property line). The cleanout shall be extended with cast iron to the finished grade level.
E. Paragraph 7.13.1 is amended to read as follows:
7.13.1 Separate Connections. Domestic food-waste-disposal units shall be connected and trapped separately from any other fixture or compartment. Units may have either automatic or hand-operated water supply control. (See Paragraph 10.4).
F. Paragraph 10.10.2 is added to follow Paragraph 10.10.1, as follows:
10.10.2 Water-distributing pipes of copper shall be copper water tube Type L, conforming to ASTM B-88-58, or better when used inside, aboveground. Water-distributing pipes of copper shall be of copper water tube type K or better when used underground, inside or outside of building.
G. Paragraph 10.17.4 is added to follow Paragraph 10.17.3, as follows:
Chapter 118 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 118
118-6
10.17.4 Pockets or Low Places in Water-Distributing Pipes. All pockets or low places in water-distributing pipes shall be equipped with a drain valve or a removable screwed plug or cap in order that the entire water distribution piping may be drained.
H. Paragraph 11.1.3, is amended to read as follows:
11.1.3 Underground Piping within Building. All drains within buildings, when underground, shall be of cast-iron soil pipe. For buildings under three (3) stories in height, the pipe shall be service weight
For buildings three (3) stories or more in height, the pipe shall be of extra-heavy weight.
When approved by the administrative authority, the use of vitrified clay pipe with acid proof joint material may be used underground within the building, provided that it is encased or cradled with plan or reinforced concrete in such a manner as to sustain the anticipated overburden.
The following materials may be used underground when approved by the administrative authority: galvanized steel or galvanized ferrous alloy, lead or copper pipe or copper tubing. Where threaded joints are approved for use in underground, they shall be coated and wrapped after installation.
I. Paragraph 11.2.1 is amended to read as follows:
11.2.1 Generally. The building sewer shall be of cast-iron sewer pipe (service weight minimum) with leaded joints. Joints shall be watertight and root proof. The building sewer shall be tested with a ten-foot head of water or equivalent and found to be tight.
J. Paragraph 11.2.2 is deleted in its entirety.
K. Paragraph 11.2.3 is deleted in its entirety.
118-23 PREVALENCE OF MORE STRINGENT PROVISIONS
In the event of conflict or inconsistency between the provisions of the State Plumbing Code hereby adopted and the provisions of other ordinances of the town, the more stringent provisions shall be construed to control.
118-24 AVAILABILITY OF COPIES
Copies of the State Plumbing Code, adopted by Section 118-22, may be obtained at the office of the Plumbing Inspector in the town during regular business hours.
118-25 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Chapter 118 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 118
118-7
Any person failing, neglecting or refusing to comply with the State Plumbing Code, adopted by reference in Section 118-22, shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, Penalties, of this Code.
STANDARDS FOR INSTALLATION OF GAS APPLIANCES AND GAS PIPING
118-26 ADOPTION OF STANDARDS; PREVALENCE OF MORE STRINGENT PROVISIONS
There is hereby adopted by reference, as fully as if set out at length herein, by the Council, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the installation of gas appliances and gas piping, that certain pamphlet entitled "Standards of the National Board of Fire Underwriters for the Installation of Gas Appliances and Gas Piping," as recommended by the National Fire Protection Association, dated August 1959, being designated pamphlet NBFU No. 54, and such Standards of the National Board of Fire Underwriters for the Installation of Gas Appliances and Gas Piping are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which the Code of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia, shall take effect, the provisions thereof so adopted shall be controlling in the installation of gas appliances and gas piping within the town; provided, however, that in the event of conflict or inconsistency between the Standards of the National Board of Fire Underwriters for the Installation of Gas Appliances and Gas Piping hereby adopted and the provisions of other ordinances of the town, the more stringent provisions shall be construed to control.
118-27 AVAILABILITY OF COPIES
Copies of the pamphlet entitled "Standards of the National Board of Fire Underwriters for the Installation of Gas Appliances and Gas Piping," adopted by Section 118-26, may be obtained at the office of the Plumbing Inspector in the town during regular business hours.
118-28 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Any person failing, neglecting or refusing to comply with the pamphlet entitled "Standards of the National Board of Fire Underwriters for the Installation of Gas Appliances and Gas Piping," adopted by Section 118-26, shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, Penalties, of this Code.
Chapter 122 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 122
122-1
Chapter 122
PROPERTY DAMAGE
Sections:
122-1 PROHIBITIONS
Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal 3-11-85 (Chapter 24 of the 1965 Code). Other amendments noted where applicable.
122-1 PROHIBITIONS
A. Any person who willfully injures, tampers with, defaces, takes or removes any machinery, building, except as provided in Subsection D, wall, monument or base of same, fence or enclosure or any part thereof or any sign, gate, awning or other fixture or property not his own property shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, Penalties, of this Code.
B. Cemeteries; burial grounds.
1. If any person shall willfully and maliciously destroy, utilate, deface, injure or remove any tomb, monument, gravestone or other structure placed within any cemetery, graveyard or place of burial or within any lot belonging to any memorial or monumental association or any fence, railing or other work for the protection or ornament of any tomb, monument, gravestone or other structure aforesaid or of any cemetery lot within any cemetery; willfully or maliciously destroy, remove, cut, break or injure any tree, shrub or plant within any cemetery or lot of any memorial or monumental association; willfully or maliciously destroy, mutilate, injure or remove and carry away any flowers, wreaths, vases or other ornaments placed upon or around any grave, tomb, monument or lot in any cemetery, graveyard or other place of burial; or willfully obstruct proper ingress and egress to and from any cemetery or lot belonging to any memorial association, shall be fined not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.) or confined in jail not exceeding six (6) months.
2. This section shall not apply to any work which is done by the authorities of a church or congregation in the maintenance or improvement of any burial ground or cemetery belonging to it and under its management or control and which does not injure or result in the removal of a tomb, monument, gravestone, grave marker or vault.
C. If any person unlawfully, but not feloniously, shall take and carry away or destroy, deface or injure any property, real or personal, not his own or break down, destroy, deface, injure or remove any monument erected for the purpose of marking the site of any engagement fought during the War Between the States or for the purpose of designating the boundaries of the town or any tract of land, or any tree marked for that purpose, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Chapter 122 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 122
122-2
D. If any person shall willfully and maliciously break any window or door of the courthouse, house of public worship, college, schoolhouse, town hall or other public building or library or willfully and maliciously injure or deface any statuary in any public buildings or on any public grounds or willfully and maliciously injure or deface any courthouse, house of public worship or town hall or any other public building or willfully and maliciously destroy or carry away any furniture belonging to or in any of such buildings or willfully and unlawfully injure or deface any book, newspaper, pamphlet, map, picture, manuscript or other property belonging to any library, reading room, museum or other educational institution or unlawfully remove the same therefrom, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to pick, pull up, tear up, dig up, cut, break, injure, burn or destroy any tree, shrub, vine or turf growing or being upon the land of another or upon any land reserved, set aside or maintained by this town as a public park or as a refuge or sanctuary for wild animals, birds or fish, without having previously obtained the permission, in writing, of such owner, his agent, tenant or lessee or of the superintendent or custodian of such park, refuge or sanctuary so to do unless the same is done under the personal direction of such owner, his agent, tenant or lessee or the superintendent or custodian of such park, refuge or sanctuary. Any person violating this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor; provided, however, that the approval of the owner, his agent, tenant or lessee or the superintendent or custodian of such park or sanctuary afterwards given in writing or in open court, shall be a bar to further prosecution or suit.
Chapter 124 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 124
124-1
Chapter 124
PROPERTY, LOST OR ABANDONED
Sections:
124-1 DEFINITIONS
124-2 RIGHTS OF TOWN EMPLOYEES TO FOUND PROPERTY
124-3 EFFORT TO DETERMINE OWNERSHIP
124-4 PROCEDURE IF OWNER IS DETERMINED
124-5 DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS OF SALE OR LOST CURRENCY
Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal 3-11-85. Other amendments noted where applicable.
124-1 DEFINITIONS
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
LOST OR ABANDONED PROPERTY - Includes any lost, abandoned, mislaid, stolen or unclaimed personal property, including money, stocks and bonds, the owner or owners of which cannot be found.
124-2 RIGHTS OF TOWN EMPLOYEES TO FOUND PROPERTY
Any employee of the Town of Front Royal who, in the course of his duty, finds or takes possession of lost or abandoned property shall deliver said property to the Chief of Police, or his designated agent, and said employee shall have no legal right or claim to said property.
124-3 EFFORT TO DETERMINE OWNERSHIP
The Chief of Police shall make a reasonable effort to determine the owner or owners of the lost or abandoned property and to return the property to the legal owner or owners.
124-4 PROCEDURE IF OWNER CANNOT BE DETERMINED
A. If, after a period of ninety (90) days, the owner or owners of the lost or abandoned property cannot be found, said property may be sold at public auction, or, upon the vote of a majority of the members of the Town Council at a regularly scheduled meeting, the property may be sold at private sale.
B. At least seven (7) days but not more than thirty (30) days prior to sale at public auction, the Chief of Police or his designated agent shall advertise in a newspaper having local circulation a list of the lost or abandoned property to be sold at public auction. In the event, that the owner or owners of the lost or abandoned property come forward to claim said property prior to sale, said property shall be returned to the lawful owner or owners upon payment to the town of
Chapter 124 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 124
124-2
advertising, towing, and storage, as shall be determined by the Chief of Police or his designated agent.
C. If, after advertisement and auction, as set forth in paragraphs A & B preceding, personal property remains unsold, the Chief of Police or his designated agent, shall: (i) retain the property for future sale; or (ii) dispose of the property as he deems appropriate.
(Ord. No. 21-99 Added (C) 11-8-99-Effective Upon Passage)
D. Any bicycle or moped which has been in the possession of the Police Department, unclaimed, for more than thirty (30) days may, in the discretion of the Chief of Police, be sold pursuant to Subsection A. above or donated to a charitable organization. Prior to any such sale or donation the location and description of the bicycle or moped shall be published at least once a week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation within the Town in an effort to locate the bicycle's or moped's owner. In addition, if there is a license tag affixed to the bicycle or moped, the record owner shall be notified directly and permitted thirty (30) days to claim his or her bicycle or moped.
(Ord. No. 7-01 Added (D) 9-10-01-Effective Upon Passage)
124-5 DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS OF SALE OR LOST CURRENCY
Upon completion of sale of any lost or abandoned property, the proceeds of such sale shall become the property of the town and shall become a part of the general fund. Any lost or abandoned property in the form of United States currency shall become the property of the town and a part of the general fund upon expiration of the ninety-day period set out in Section 124-4A of this chapter.
Chapter 130 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 130
130-1
Chapter 130
RIGHT-OF-WAY UTILIZATION
Sections:
130-1 PURPOSE AND INTENT
130-2 UNLAWFUL CONSTRUCT WITHIN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
130-3 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION
130-4 STOP WORK FOR UNLAWFUL CONSTRUCTION
130-5 PERMIT APPLICATION
130-6 BOND PREREQUISITE
130-7 PERMIT ISSUANCE
Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal by Ord. No. 12-05 on 6-27-05. Other amendments noted where applicable.
130-1 PURPOSE AND INTENT
The Town Council finds that unauthorized construction within or use of public right-of-way may result in continued unsafe or restricted use of the public right-of-way by the general public. The Town Council further finds the need to administer the use of the public right-of-way to protect the public health, safety, and welfare by ensuring regulated use of the public right-of way. To this end:
130-2 UNLAWFUL CONSTRUCTION WITHIN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to break, dig up, bore under or open, or cause to be broke, dug up, bored under or opened any street, road, highway, alley, bridge, sidewalk, trail, or any other public right-of-way or disturb any portion thereof, lying within the Town for any reason, including, but not limited to, the laying or repairing of utility lines or conduits, installation of various appurtenances to such facilities, erecting or removing utility poles, or installation of other public improvements, without having first applied for and obtained a permit to do so from the Director of Planning, or if an issued permit has been suspended or revoked.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to temporarily restrict access to any street, road, highway, alley, bridge, sidewalk, trail, or any other public right-of-way to make improvements to public or private property without having first applied for and obtained a permit to do so from the Director of Planning.
C. In the event of an emergency that demands immediate action to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and for which a permit may not be reasonably or practicably obtained beforehand, a person may proceed with appropriate emergency actions, provided that notification shall be given to the Department of Public Works or during non-office hours to the Police Department. In such an event, application for a permit shall be made on the next business day, and such permit, when issued, shall be retroactive to the date when the work was
Chapter 130 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 130
130-2
begun. Emergency actions shall be undertaken under the same rules and regulations as required for permits under this section, including, but not limited to, requirements for marking of other utilities and for proper work zone safety.
130-3 PENALTY VIOLATION
Any person convicted of unlawful construction as described in Section 130-2 shall be guilty of a Class I misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided within Section 1-15 of the Front Royal Municipal Code.
130-4 STOP WORK FOR ULAWFUL CONSTRUCTION
The Director of Public Works, or designee, reserves the right to stop work at any time and at his sole discretion, complete any of the work covered under the permit, or any other work required to restore the public right-of-way to its condition prior to the start of work. Permittee, or the person undertaking work on the public right-of-way if no lawful permit exists, shall reimburse the Town for all costs incurred, including attorney’s fees and costs of litigation.
130-5 PERMIT APPLICATION
The Right-of-Way Utilization Permit shall be obtained and submitted to the Director of Planning prior to construction within or obstruction of a public right-of-way. All correspondence for this permit shall be directed to the Planning Department.
Before any permit required by this Chapter is granted, the applicant therefor shall pay a permit fee as set forth in the schedule of fees adopted by the Town Council. Copies of such schedule are on file in the Department of Finance and in the Department of Planning. The permit fee may be waived at the sole discretion of the Director of Planning, or designee, for work performed under contract to the Town, including contracts for Town water, sanitary sewer, and storm sewer utilities, and for state Department of Transportation contractors when performing publicly funded project within the Town, and as otherwise provided by this Code.
130-6 BOND PREREQUISITE
No person shall be granted a permit required by this article unless he shall first enter into a bond, with sufficient surety, or in lieu thereof, by a cash bond, payable to the Town and meeting all requirements of this Code. Such bond shall be conditioned upon the restoration of the public right-of-way to its prior condition, and the Director of Public Works shall be the sole judge of the adequacy of such restoration. The penal sum of the bond shall be in an amount to be determined by the Director of Public Works, and shall be such amount as will enable the Town to have such restoration done properly in the event that it is not done by the permit holder. In the event of a cash bond, such bond may be returned to the permit holder by the Director of Planning at such time as the bond conditions have been met. Bonds posted in accordance with franchises, licenses, or other agreements or for site developments shall be acceptable for meeting the intent of this section provided such bonds are first reviewed by the Town Attorney and contain no limitations in applicability to work under these permits.
Chapter 130 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 130
130-3
130-7 PERMIT ISSUANCE
Upon review and approval of the permit application and submittal of bond, the Director of Planning shall issue a Right-of-Way Utilization Permit to the applicant.
Any person doing any work regulated by this permit shall provide adequate construction zone work safety measures as are required and necessary for the protection of the public, including, but not limited to, adequate lighting for nighttime operations.
(Ord. No. 12-05 Added Entire Section 6-27-05 -Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-1
Chapter 134
SEWERS AND WATER
Sections:
GENERAL PROVISIONS
134-1 CONNECTIONS
PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO SEWERS AND PRETREATMENT OF WASTE
134-2 PURPOSE AND POLICY; OBJECTIVES; APPLICABILITY; ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
134-3 DEFINITIONS; ABBREVIATIONS
134-4 PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS
134-5 SPECIFIC POLLUTANT LIMITATIONS
134-6 VARIANCES AND AGREEMENTS
134-7 DILUTION RESTRICTED
134-8 FEDERAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS
134-9 PRETREATMENT MEASURES
134-10 SPILL PREVENTION PLANS
134-11 TENANT RESPONSIBILITY
134-12 HAULED WASTEWATER
134-13 WASTEWATER PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION; APPROVAL/ DENIAL; REISSUANCE
134-14 WASTEWATER PERMIT APPEALS
134-15 PERMIT PROVISIONS
134-16 PERMIT MODIFICATIONS AND TRANSFER
134-17 PERMIT REVOCATION; APPEAL
134-18 SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
134-19 ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
134-20 EMERGENCY SUSPENSIONS OR TERMINATION
134-21
134-22 SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGES
134-22.1 SANITARY SEWER SERVICE RATES
134-22.2 RESIDENTIAL SUMMER SEWER SERVICE RATES
134-22.3 SANITARY SEWER CONNECTIONS; FURNISHING AND REPAIR
134-22.4 SEWER SERVICE RATES-COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL LAUNDRIES
134-22.5 WATER NOT DISCHARGED TO SEWERS EXCLUDED FROM RATES
134-23 INDUSTRIAL WATER AND SEWER RATES AND CHARGES
134-24 RESIDENTIAL SEWER BACKUP PROTECTION PROGRAM
134-25 (RESERVED)
134-26 EXTENSIONS TO DEVELOPMENTS; RESPONSIBILITY TO INSTALL MAINS WITHIN SUBDIVISION
134-27 TESTING STANDARDS
134-28 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES; LIABILITIES
134-29 PUBLICATION OF SIGNIFICANT VIOLATORS
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-2
PROVISIONS APPLICABLE PARTICULARLY TO WATER
134-30 SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGES ESTABLISHED
134-31 APPLICATION FOR WATER SUPPLY; WATER SUPPLY SERVICE CONTRACT REQUIRED
134-31.1 WATER SERVICE RATES
134-31.2 WATER SERVICE RATES-COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL LAUNDRIES
134-32 FURNISHING OF WATER METERS AND APPURTENANCES; REPAIRS
134-33 (RESERVED)
134-34 COMPLIANCE AND APPROVAL REQUIRED
134-35 REMOVAL OR REPAIR OF METERS AND FIXTURES
134-36 REMOVAL OF METERS FOR TESTING; PAYMENT OF BILL WHEN COMPLAINT IN PROCESS
134-37 CHARGE FOR REINSPECTION OF METER
134-38 USE OF WATER BY SEVERAL CONSUMERS ON ONE METER
134-39 METERING WHEN MORE THAN ONE SERVICE PIPE SUPPLIES PREMISES
134-40 REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT OF METERS OR BOXES BECAUSE OF NEGLIGENCE OF CONSUMER
134-41 WATER TO BE TURNED ON ONLY BY AUTHORIZED AGENT
134-42 REPAIRING OF LEAKS
134-43 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE
134-44 WASTE, UNAUTHORIZED USE OF WATER
134-45 OPENING OF FIRE HYDRANTS
134-46 UNAUTHORIZED REMOVAL FROM HYDRANT, THROUGH, FOUNTAIN OR FIRE-SUPPRESSION SYSTEM
134-47 LOCATION OF EQUIPMENT FOR CUTTING OFF WATER
134-48 OBSTRUCTING OR INJURING FIXTURES
134-49 RESERVOIRS
134-50 APPOINTMENT OF SPECIAL POLICEMAN AT PUMPHOUSE
134-51 COVERS FOR METER BOXES
134-52 PIPE STANDARDS
134-53 CUTOFF VALVE REQUIRED
134-54 PIPE LAID OUTSIDE TOWN LIMITS
134-55 RULES AND REGULATIONS OF WATER DEPARTMENT
134-56 THROUGH 63 (RESERVED)
BILL AND CHARGES
134-64 COLLECTING OFFICE FOR BILL PAYMENT
134-65 CONTINUANCE OF RATES
134-66 EXEMPTIONS FROM CHARGES
134-67 WATER METER RENTAL CHARGES
134-68 CHARGE WHEN METER OUT OF ORDER
134-69 CHARGE TO BE MADE FOR ALL WATER PASSING THROUGH METER
134-70 REGULATIONS FOR PAYMENT OF WATER AND SEWER SERVICE BILLS
134-71 UTILITY ACCOUNTS-PAYMENTS/TERMINATION OF SERVICE
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-3
134-71.1 (RESERVED)
134-71.2 (RESERVED)
CROSS CONNECTION AND BACKFLOW CONTROL IN WATERWORKS
134-72 DEFINITIONS
134-73 RESPONSIBILITY FOR INSPECTIONS
134-74 RIGHT TO ENTER PROPERTY
134-75 DENIAL OR DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE FOR DEFICIENCIES
134-76 ENFORCEMENT; LABELING OF SUPPLIES THAT ARE UNSAFE FOR DRINKING
134-77 SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS
134-78 (RESERVED)
RAINWATER AND SURFACE WATER
134-79 DISCHARGE OF RAINWATER OR SURFACE WATER PROHIBITED
134-80 UTILITY INSPECTOR
CONSERVATION OF WATER
134-81 CONSERVATION OF WATER
Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal 3-11-85 (Chapter. 31 of the 1965 Code including 1-13-69;Resolution 6-13-78; 10-9-78; 7-9-79; 6-9-80; 2-9-81; 4-27-81; 2-14-83). Amendment by Resolution 6-23-86 re-134-79. Other amendments noted where applicable.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
134-1 CONNECTIONS
A. CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS: Every house used for human habitation and every place of business or manufacture where one (1) or more persons are employed shall be connected to the Town water system and to the Town sewer system when they are accessible, unless such house or place of business or manufacture is served by an adequate sewer system approved by the State Health Department. All methods of disposing of human excreta in these places of habitation, business or manufacture other than by a properly connected water closet are hereby declared to be unlawful.
When they become accessible, connection to the sewer and water mains shall be made within one (1) year after notification to the property owners by the Town Manager. Any person violating the provisions of this sections shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, Penalties, of this Code, and each week's failure to comply herewith shall constitute a separate offense.
B. SEWER CONNECTION REQUIREMENT: No premises may be connected to the Town sewer system unless the premises are connected to and use the Town water system to serve the premises.
(Added (B) 3-12-07-Effective Upon Passage; Amended 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-4
C. EXTENSION POLICY BEYOND TOWN LIMITS: To better serve the social and economic needs and the common good of Front Royal and Warren County, the Town Council of Front Royal has formulated these policies and procedures for the extension of water and sewer service to Warren County.
The Town has evaluated our resources and anticipated growth within the Town to determine the anticipated excess volume available for extension into Warren County for residential, commercial, or industrial use. This volume will be determined annually based upon conditions within the Town and County. Excess volume shall be defined as the current and projected volume required by the Town subtracted from the current permitted plant capacities.
1. The contact person for the Town is the Town Manager. Any request for water and/or sewer services must be made in writing to the Town accompanied by a joint request from the property owner and the County for the property to be boundary adjusted into the Town's corporate limits or justification to simply provide utility extension. Such request must be made prior to a rezoning or any other action by the County.
2. The Town Council will decide on a case-by-case basis whether to provide water and sewer to the proposed property(ies) as well as whether a boundary adjustment is appropriate.
3. Following a boundary adjustment, the Town will consider the appropriate zoning classification of the property to be boundary adjusted and will complete a rezoning of the property to the classification deemed appropriate through the standard zoning process. Boundary adjusted property(ies) shall be considered as part of the water volume allocated by the Town to the County.
4. In any case of rezoning by the Town, the Town Council will consider proffers deemed necessary to mitigate the impact of the development on County services, as well as what proffers are necessary for the Town. These decisions shall be made before the Town's rezoning of the property(ies) is completed.
5. The Town may elect to provide water and/or sewer services without a boundary adjustment where the Town Council determines it would not be feasible or appropriate to provide other Town services to the property.
6. Extension of utility service shall require development, submittal, and review of site development plans demonstrating the proposed utility locations, proposed usage, appropriate modeling demonstrating no impact to existing users, and construction standard complying with Town standards.
7. Design and construction standards for all utility extensions shall comply with the current standards and specifications adopted by the Town.
8. The Town presently has no intention of extending water and sewer lines into the unincorporated portion of the County at the Town's expense.
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-5
9. The Town presently has no desire to sell water for resale through a master meter to third parties.
10. Given the Town’s Inflow and Infiltration (I&I) issues associated with the sanitary sewer system, the Town has no desire to accept outside water sources into the Town’s sewer system. Future considerations to outside water sources will be evaluated as the I&I issues are addressed.
11. This Policy can be reviewed and updated by Town Council as necessary, but at a minimum annually.
(Added “C” 6-25-12-Effective Upon Passage)
D. EXTENSION MORATORIUM AREAS: Recognizing demonstrated service issues in providing utility service to certain areas within Warren County, a moratorium of utility connections and extensions to all undeveloped properties or lots not served by Town utilities as of the date of adoption of this Code Section is established that shall require sufficient studies and modeling prior to the Town’s consideration of additional connections or extensions with the exception of:
1. Property zoned commercial or industrial that is currently located within the Rt. 522 Corridor as defined in that “Amendment to an Agreement between the County of Warren and the Town of Front Royal Regarding the Provision of Water and Sewer Service by the Town in the U.S. Route 522/340 North Corridor and the Assumption of Full Funding and Responsibility by the County of Fire/Rescue, Parks/Recreation Operations, and Animal Control Services” dated August 9, 1999 entered into between the Town of Front Royal, Virginia, and County of Warren, Virginia as both sides of U.S. Routes 522/340 North of the Town of Front Royal, extending to Crooked Run on the West, the Norfolk Southern Railroad tracks on the East, and Fairground Road (SR 661) to the North ;
2. Blue Ridge Shadows Subdivision as platted on November 26, 2012.
3. McKay Property jointly owned by the Town and County as platted on November 26, 2012
4. Henselstone Subdivision as platted on November 26, 2012.
5. Guard Hill Rd parcels located within 100’ of existing water main on November 26, 2012
6. Harmony Hollow Road parcels located within 100’ of the existing water main on November 26, 2012.
(Added “D” 6-25-12-Effective Upon Passage; Amended 12-10-12-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-6
PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO SEWERS AND PRETREATMENT OF WASTE
134-2 PURPOSE & POLICY; OBJECTIVES; APPLICABILITY; ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
(Ord. No. 2-05 Amended Title 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
A. This Article sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect discharge of pollutants from domestic and industrial sources into the wastewater collection and treatment system for the Town of Front Royal, Virginia, and enables the Town to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq.), the general Federal Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR Part 403), and the VPDES Permit Regulation (9VAC25-31-10 et seq.).
(Added “VPDES Permit Regulations” 4-27-20-Effective Upon Passage)
B. The objectives of this Article are:
1. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into municipal wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system.
2. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal wastewater system which will pass through the system inadequately treated into receiving waters or the atmosphere or which otherwise will be incompatible with the system.
3. To ensure that the quality of the wastewater treatment plant sludge is maintained at a level which allows its marketability.
4. To protect municipal personnel who may come into contact with sewage, sludge and effluent in the course of their employment, as well as to protect the general public and the environment.
(Added “environment” 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
5. To preserve the hydraulic capacity of the municipal wastewater system.
6. To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge from the system.
7. To provide for a fair assessment and recovery of the costs of operation, maintenance and improvements to the municipal wastewater system.
8. To ensure that the Town of Front Royal complies with National and Virginia Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) / (VPDES) permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements and any other federal or state laws to which the municipal wastewater system is subject.
(Added “VPDES” 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-7
C. This Article provides for the regulation of discharge into the municipal wastewater collection system through the issuance of permits to certain nondomestic users and through the enforcement of general requirements for other users. This Article authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, establishes administrative review procedures, requires user reporting and provides for the setting of fees for the fair assessment of costs resulting from the program established herein.
D. This Article shall apply to users of the municipal wastewater system both within the Town of Front Royal and outside its corporate limits. By discharging wastewater into the municipal wastewater system, all users, industrial and otherwise, located beyond the Town limits agree to comply with the terms and conditions established in this Article, as well as any permits or orders issued hereunder.
E. Any industrial user located beyond the corporate limits of the Town of Front Royal, which would otherwise be subject to Categorical Pretreatment Standards as defined herein, shall as a condition of service enter into a written contract with the Town of Front Royal wherein said user shall agree to conform to the requirements of this Article.
F. Except as may otherwise be provided herein, the Administrator of the municipal wastewater system, or his designated agents, shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of the Article.
(Amended Entire Section 4-27-92-Effective Upon Passage)
134-3 DEFINITIONS; ABBREVIATIONS
(Amended Title 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
A. The definitions as used in Chapter 134, Sewers and Water, pertaining to sewer and water shall be as follows for both domestic and industrial users, unless otherwise specifically indicated:
ACT or THE ACT - The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the "Clean Water Act," as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER (ADMINISTRATOR) - The person designated by the Front Royal Town Manager, or his duly authorized deputy, to administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this Article.
(Added “Administrator” 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
APPROVAL AUTHORITY - The Virginia Department of Environmental Quality (Virginia DEQ).
(Amended “Approval Authority” 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-8
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE INDUSTRIAL USER:
1. Includes:
a. The President, Secretary, Treasurer or Vice President of a corporation in charge of a principal business function or any other person who performs similar policy-making or decision-making functions for the industrial user;
b. The manager of one (1) or more manufacturing, production or operation facilities, if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to that manager by binding written instrument;
c. The general partner or proprietor of a partnership, association or sole proprietorship;
d. The director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the activities of a federal, state or local government entity or a political subdivision thereof; or
e. The managing member or other member of a limited liability company.
(Amended “e” 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
2. The individuals described above may designate another authorized representative, if the authorization is in writing and the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates, or the authorization may specify the individual having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the user. All written authorizations must be submitted to the Town of Front Royal for inspection prior to any action being taken by an authorized representative.
(Deleted (2) 4-27-92-Effective Upon Passage; Added (2) 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) - Means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in Sec. 134-4 [40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b); 9VAC25-31-77A and 770.B]. BMPs include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
(Added 4-27-20-Effective Upon Passage)
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) - As determined by Standard Methods, the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure during a period of five (5) days expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter).
(Amended 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
BUILDING SEWER - That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system that receives the discharge from wastewater pipes and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the lateral sewer. (Added 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-9
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL STANDARD - Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1317) which applies to a specific category of users and which appears in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405 - 471.
CFR - Code of Federal Regulations.
(Added 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
COD (chemical oxygen demand) - The measure, expressed in mg/L of the oxygen consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in water or wastewater, expressing the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specific approved test, but not differentiating between stable and unstable organic matter and thus not necessarily correlating with biochemical oxygen demand.
(Added 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
COLLECTOR SEWER - A sewer designed and constructed to receive sewage from the building connections or laterals and other "collector sewers" and carry it to an interceptor sewer or the point of disposal. A "collector sewer" normally serves only a portion of one (1) drainage area or basin.
COLOR - The optical density at the visual wavelength of maximum absorption, relative to distilled water. One- hundred-percent transmittance is equivalent to zero (0) optical density.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE - The sample resulting from the combination of individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals (within a 24-hour period) based either on an increment of flow or time.
(Amended 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
CONTROL AUTHORITY - Refers to the Administrator of the municipal wastewater system.
(Amended 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
CONTROL MANHOLE - A manhole giving access to a building sewer at some point before the sewer discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer.
(Added 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
CONTROL POINT - A point of access to a source of discharge before the discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer.
(Added 4-27-92-Effective Upon Passage; 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
COOLING WATERS - The water discharge from any use, such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration or to which the only pollutant added is heat.
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-10
CUSTOMER- For purposes of sewer and water connections only, the term “customer” refers to the owner of the property, the owner’s contractor or other agent on behalf of the property owner who with the property owner’s permission is making or causing to be made the sewer and/or water connections to the property owner’s property. The term “customer” shall not refer to the property owner’s tenant(s) or to any other person other than the property owner or the person who on behalf of the property owner with the permission of the property owner is causing the sewer and/or water connections to be made to the property owner’s property.
(Added 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
DOMESTIC SEWAGE - Waterborne wastes normally discharging from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings and all other buildings and facilities, free from stormwater, surface water or industrial waste. "Domestic sewage" shall contain fewer than two hundred fifty (250) parts per million of BOD and three hundred (300) parts per million suspended solids and shall originate from the normal bathing, washing, cooking and toilet activities of individuals.
(Amended 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
DOMESTIC USER - A user of the Front Royal municipal wastewater system who discharges non-industrial, domestic wastes into said system.
EXISTING SOURCE - Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commences prior to the publication of public Categorical Pretreatment Standards under Sections 307(b) and (c) (33 U.S.C. Section 1317) of the Act which would be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Act.
GRAB SAMPLE - A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time.
GARBAGE - Animal and vegetable waste and residue from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, processing, storage and sale of food products and produce.
(Added 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
HAZARDOUS WASTE PHARMACEUTICAL - A pharmaceutical that is a solid waste, as defined in 40 CFR Part 261.2, and exhibits one or more characteristics identified in Part 261 Subpart C or is listed in Part 261 Subpart D. (Added 4-27-20-Effective Upon Passage)
HEALTHCARE FACILITY - Any person that is lawfully authorized to (1) provide preventative, diagnostic, therapeutic, rehabilitative, maintenance or palliative care, and counseling, service, assessment or procedure with respect to the physical or mental condition, or functional status, of a human or animal or that affects the structure or function of the human or animal body; or (2) distribute, sell, or dispense pharmaceuticals, including over-the-counter pharmaceuticals, dietary supplements, homeopathic drugs, or prescription pharmaceuticals.
(Added 4-27-20-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-11
HOLDING TANK WASTE - Any waste from holding tanks, such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum pump tank trucks.
(Amended 4-27-92-Effective Upon Passage; 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
INCOMPATIBLE WASTE - A waste which is not susceptible to adequate treatment by the wastewater treatment plant.
(Added 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE. The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source.
(Added 4-27-20-Effective Upon Passage)
INDUSTRIAL USER - A user of the Front Royal municipal wastewater system which discharges nondomestic, industrial wastes into said system, as regulated by Sections 307(b), (c) and (d) of the EPA Clean Water Act.
(Amended 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
INDUSTRIAL WASTE - All waterborne solids, liquids or gaseous wastes resulting from any industrial manufacturing or commercial or food-processing operation or process or from the development of any natural resource, or any mixture of these wastes with domestic sewage or water. Any sewage which does not meet the definition of domestic sewage shall be considered "industrial waste," regardless of the source.
INSTANTANEOUS LIMIT. The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
(Added 4-27-20-Effective Upon Passage)
INTERCEPTOR SEWER - A sewer designed and constructed to intercept or receive sewage from all collector sewers and laterals within one (1) or more drainage areas and carry it to a larger "interceptor sewer" or to the point of disposal.
INTERFERENCE - A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources either: (1) inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes, or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal: or (2) therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTWs NPDES/VPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with all applicable statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations), including but not limited to the following: Section 405 of the EPA Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (Including Title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, and including state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act),
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-12
the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act and the Marine Protection Research and Sanctuaries Act.
(Amended 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
LATERAL SEWER - See Sewer Lateral definition.
(Added 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
MEDICAL WASTE - Isolation waste, infectious agents, human blood and blood byproducts, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, etiologic agents, potentially contaminated laboratory waste and dialysis waste.
(Amended 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
MILLIGRAM PER LITER (mg/L) - The same as parts per million when the specific gravity of the liquid is 1.0, and is a weight-to-volume ratio; the milligram per Liter value multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water.
(Added 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
MUNICIPAL WASTEWATER SYSTEM - A treatment works as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1292), which is owned by the Town of Front Royal, including any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of domestic sewage or industrial waste and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant.
NEW SOURCE:
1. Any source of a discharge, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed Categorical Pretreatment Standards under Section 307(c) of the Act [33 U.S.C. Section 1317(c)] which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307(c), provided that:
a. No other source is located at that site;
b. The source completely replaces the process or production equipment of an existing source at that site; or
c. The new wastewater generating process of the source is substantially independent of an existing source at that site; and the construction of the source creates a new facility rather than modifying an existing source at that site.
2. For purposes of this definition, construction or operation has commenced if the owner or operator has:
a. Begun or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site construction program:
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-13
[1] Any placement, assembly or installment of facilities or equipment; or
[2] Significant site preparation work, including clearing, excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities, which is necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
b. Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which is intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss and contracts for feasibility, engineering and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this definition.
NORMAL USE - Any user discharging waste of a strength less than or equal to that of normal wastewater and at a flow rate of less than twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons per day.
(Added 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
NORMAL WASTEWATER - Wastewater discharged into the public sewer in which none of the following average concentrations and flows are exceeded:
1. BOD: Less than or equal to two hundred fifty (250) mg/L;
2. Suspended solids: Less than or equal to three hundred (300) mg/L;
3. Flow: Less than twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons per day;
4. No toxic or harmful substances are present.
(Added 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
NPDES PERMIT - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit.
(Added 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
PASS-THROUGH - A discharge which exits the treatment plant then enters waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with an indirect discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the Town's VPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation).
PERSON - Any individual, partnership, corporation, firm, company, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate or any other legal entity, and his or its representatives, agents or assigns, specifically to include all federal, state or local governmental entities.
PHARMACEUTICAL - Any drug or dietary supplement for use by humans or other animals; any electronic nicotine delivery system (e.g., electronic cigarette or vaping pen); or any liquid nicotine (e-liquid) packaged for retail sale for use in electronic nicotine delivery systems (e.g., pre-filled cartridges or vials.)
(Added 4-27-20-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-14
PLANT - The Town of front Royal Wastewater Treatment Facility.
(Added 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
POLLUTANT - Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, industrial wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and agricultural waste and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g. pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity or odor).
(Amended 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
PRETREATMENT OR TREATMENT - The reduction of the amount of the pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater, thereby rendering the pollutants less harmful to the municipal wastewater system prior to introducing pollutants into said system. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, by process changes or by other means, but not by diluting the concentration of pollutants, unless allowed by an applicable "pretreatment" standard.
PRETREATMENT STANDARD AND REQUIREMENTS - All applicable federal rules and regulations (including specifically those regulations found in 40 CFR, Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471) implementing Section 307 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act and the Clean Water Act of 1977, including prohibited standards, as amended, as well as nonconflicting state and local standards. In case of conflict or regulations, the most stringent thereof shall be applied.
(Amended 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARDS OR PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE - Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain types of industrial wastewater as specifically set forth in this Article.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or POTW - A treatment works, as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. section 1292), which is owned by the Town. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances, which convey wastewater to a treatment plant.
(Added 4-27-20-Effective Upon Passage)
RECEIVING STREAM OR WATER OF THE STATE - All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial or public or private, which are contained within, flow through or border upon the state or any portion thereof.
REVERSE DISTRIBUTOR - Any person that receives and accumulates prescription pharmaceuticals that are potentially creditable hazardous waste pharmaceuticals for the purpose
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-15
of facilitating or verifying manufacturer credit.
(Added 4-27-20-Effective Upon Passage)
SANITARY SEWER - A pipe or conduit which carries domestic sewage and/or industrial waste and to which stormwater, surface water and groundwater and other unpolluted waters are not intentionally admitted.
(Amended 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
SEWER LATERAL - A pipe which receives sewage from a building and carries it to the collector or interceptor sewer.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER - This term means:
1. All Categorical Users; and
2. Non-Categorical Users that:
a. Discharge twenty-five (25,000) gallons or more of process wastewater per day; or
b. Discharge process wastewater which makes up five (5) percent or more of the dry weather average hydraulic or organic capacity of the treatment works; or
c. Have in the Town's opinion, a reasonable potential to adversely affect the treatment works (causing pass-through, interference, sludge contamination or danger to the POTW).
(Ord. No. 2-05 Amended 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
SIGNIFICANT NON-COMPLIANCE - Industrial user violations meeting one or more of the following criteria:
(Amended by adding “Non-Compliance” 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
1. Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined herein as those in which sixty-six percent (66%) or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits.
(Amended 4-27-20-Effective Upon Passage)
2. Thirty-three percent (33%) or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria [one and four-tenths (1.4) for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and one and two-tenths (1.2) for all other pollutants except pH].
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-16
3. Any other discharge violation that the Town believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through (including endangering the health of Town personnel or the general public).
4. Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment or has resulted in the Town's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge.
5. Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction or attaining final compliance.
6. Failure to provide, within thirty (30) days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance with compliance schedules.
7. Failure to report noncompliance.
8. Any other violation or group of violations which the Town determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the pretreatment program.
(Added “8” 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
SLUG LOAD OR SLUG DISCHARGE - Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration, which could cause a violation of the pretreatment discharge standards of this ordinance. A Slug Discharge is any Discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a non-customary batch Discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause Interference or Pass Through, or in any other way violate the POTW’s regulations, Local Limits or Permit conditions.
(Amended 4-27-20-Effective Upon Passage)
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) CODE - A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President of the United States or the Federal Office of Management and Budget (OMB).
STANDARD METHODS - The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, as prepared, approved and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation.
(Added 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
STORMWATER - Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation or resulting therefrom, including snowmelt.
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-17
SUSPENDED SOLIDS - Solids measured in mg/L. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of or is suspended in water, wastewater or other liquid and which is removable by laboratory filtering.
(Amended 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
TOWN - The Town of Front Royal, Virginia, which may act through its Town Manager or his or her duly authorized agents.
(Amended 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
TO DISCHARGE - Includes to deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow to seep or otherwise release or dispose of, or to allow, permit or suffer any of these acts or omissions.
(Added 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
TOXIC POLLUTANT - Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of Section 307 of the Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1317).
TREATMENT PLANT EFFLUENT - Any discharge of pollutants from the municipal wastewater system designed to provide treatment of domestic sewage and industrial waste.
(Amended Title 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
UNPOLLUTED WASTEWATER - Water containing:
1. No free or emulsified grease or oil.
2. No acids or alkalis.
3. No phenols or other substances producing taste or odor in the receiving water.
4. No toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state or solution.
5. No noxious or otherwise obnoxious or odorous gases.
6. Not more than ten (10) mg/L each of suspended solids and BOD.
7. Color not exceeding fifty (50) units, as measured by the platinum-cobalt method or
determination as specified in Standard Methods.
(Added 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
USEPA (or EPA) - The United States Environmental Protection Agency, or a duly authorized official of said agency.
(Added 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
USER - Any person who contributes or causes or allows the contribution of sewage or industrial wastewater into the municipal wastewater system, including persons who contribute such wastes from mobile sources.
(Added 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-18
WASTEWATER - The liquid in water-carried industrial waste or domestic sewage, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed to the municipal wastewater system.
Abbreviations. The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
BOD - Biochemical Oxygen Demand
CFR - Code of Federal Regulations
COD - Chemical Oxygen Demand
EPA - United States Environmental Protection Agency
gpd - Gallons per day
L - Liter
mg - Milligrams
mg/L - Milligrams per liter
O & M - Operation and Maintenance
pCi - Common Unit of Radioactivity
pH - Measure of Acidity or Alkalinity of A Substance
POTW - Publicly Owned Treatment Works
RCRA - Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SIC - Standard Industrial Classification
SWDA - Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. Section 6901 et seq.)
TSS - Total Suspended Solids
USC - United States Code
VPDES- Virginia Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(Amended Entire Section 4-27-92-Effective Upon Passage)
(Removed (B) “LC50” & Added “pCi” 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
134-4 PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS
A. No user, except as set forth in subparagraph no. 14. below, industrial or domestic, shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will cause interference pass-through or violation of water quality standards. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the municipal wastewater system whether or not the use is subject to the Categorical Pretreatment Standards or to any other national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements. Furthermore, no use may contribute any of the following substances to the municipal wastewater system:
(Amended 8-12-13-Effective Upon Passage)
1. Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are or may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any way to the municipal wastewater system. Included in this prohibition are waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140° F.) [sixty degrees Celsius (60° C.)]. At no time shall two (2) successive readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the system or at any point in the system be more than five percent (5%) nor any single reading be over ten percent (10%) of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. Prohibited materials include but are not limited to
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-19
gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides.
(Amended (A) 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
2. Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause interference with the flow in a sewer, but in no case solids greater than one-half (1/2) inch [one and twenty-seven hundredths (1.27) centimeters] in any dimension.
3. Any water or waste which contains wax, grease, oil, plastic or other substances that will solidify or become discernibly viscous at temperatures between thirty-two degrees and one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (32° and 150° F.).
a. When it has been determined by the Director of Public Works, or his authorized agent, that any restaurant is discharging grease into the sewer system which results in interference to the sewer line, including backup or maintenance work not otherwise necessary, then a sewer surcharge shall be added to the utility bill for that restaurant. The sewer surcharge shall be equal to the amount of the maintenance costs incurred by the town in eliminating the grease deposits from the sewer system, but in any event shall not be less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250).
(Replaced “Town Engineer” with “Director of Public Works” 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
b. Prior to the initial assessment of the sewer surcharge, the owner or operator of such restaurant shall be notified, in writing, of the Director of Public Work's determination. The owner or operator of said restaurant shall then be granted thirty (30) days in which to permanently correct and abate the condition causing the grease to be discharged into the sewer system. Unless the discharge of grease is then permanently eliminated, the initial sewer surcharge shall be assessed ten (10) days thereafter. No restaurant shall be entitled to more than one (1) such notice and grace period in which to correct the condition. The change in management or ownership shall not operate to give an existing restaurant facility an additional grace period in which to correct the condition.
(Replaced “Town Engineer” with “Director of Public Works” 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
c. Thereafter, any further discharge of grease into the sewer system by the restaurant facility which, in the determination of the Director of Public Works, creates a condition requiring maintenance to eliminate the grease deposit shall result in the assessment of a sewer surcharge without further notice or grace. Sewer surcharge shall continue to be assessed until the grease discharge condition has been permanently corrected to the satisfaction of the Town.
(Replaced “Town Engineer” with “Director of Public Works” 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
4. Any wastewater having a pH less than six point zero (6.0) or more than nine point zero (9.0) or which otherwise causes corrosive structural damage to the system, Town personnel or equipment.
(Amended 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-20
5. Any wastewater containing pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc), in sufficient quantity (flow or concentration), either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to pass through or interfere with the municipal wastewater system or any wastewater treatment or sludge process or constitute a hazard to humans or animals.
(Amended 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
6. Any pollutant which will cause interference or pass through, including any toxic substances in amounts exceeding standards promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to Section 307(a) (33 U.S.C. Section 1317(a) and chemical elements or compounds, phenols or other taste or odor-producing substances or other substances which are not susceptible to treatment or which may interfere with the biological processes or efficiency of the wastewater treatment system, or that will pass through the system.
(Added 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
7. Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair.
8. Any substance which may cause the treatment plant effluent or any other residues, sludges or scums to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the system cause the Town to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal regulations or permits issued under Section 405 of the Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or other state requirements applicable to the sludge use and disposal practices being used by the Town.
9. Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as but not limited to dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the Town's NPDES permit. Color (in combination with turbidity) shall not cause the treatment plant effluent to reduce the depth of the compensation point for photosynthetic activity by more than ten percent (10%) from the seasonably established norm for aquatic life.
10. Any wastewater having a temperature greater than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150?°) [sixty-five degrees Celsius (65?° C.)], or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed one hundred four degrees Fahrenheit (104?° F.) [forty degrees Celsius (40?° C.)].
11. Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except as specifically approved by the Administrator in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
12. Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the system in a quantity that may cause worker health and safety problems.
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-21
13. Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the Town in accordance with Section 134-12.
(Amended Section # 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
14. Storm water, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, cooling water and unpolluted industrial wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the Administrator, except that governmentally owned, operated, and appropriately licensed and credentialed correctional facilities may utilize a local central rain collection and distribution system only for purposes of flushing toilets, operating HVAC cooling and heating systems, and/or operating laundry facilities, provided that the system is approved by the Administrator, or designee, as meeting or exceeding the Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (“LEED”) initiative or comparable or better environmental standards. Town procedures and ordinances relating to water and sanitary sewer facilities, and other applicable policies, regulations, and laws; and further provided the system is approved by the Administrator as meeting or exceeding the Pre-treatment protocols and standards set forth in the Virginia Department of Health’s “Virginia Rainwater Harvesting & Use Guidelines”.
(Amended 8-12-13-Effective Upon Passage)
15. Any industrial wastes containing floatable fats, waxes, grease or oils or which become floatable at the wastewater temperature at the introduction to the treatment plant during the winter season; but in no case industrial wastewater containing more than one hundred (100) mg/L of emulsified oil or grease.
16. The discharge of a petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that cause interference or pass through.
(Amended 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
17. Any sludges, screenings or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes.
18. Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the Administrator in a wastewater permit.
19. Any material identified as hazardous waste according to 40 CFR 261 except as may be specifically authorized by the Administrator, and in accordance with Section 134-18N.
(Amended 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
20. Any wastewater causing the treatment plant effluent to show acute or chronic toxicity in excess of that allowed by Virginia State Water Control Law, using a percentage of the discharge and aquatic test species chosen by the Administrator.
(Amended 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
21. Recognizable portions of the human or animal anatomy.
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-22
22. Any wastes containing detergents, surface-active agents or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the municipal wastewater system.
23. All discharges of storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, or other waters not intended to be treated in the treatment facility, except as authorized by the Town.
(Added 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
24. Bulk, expired, outdated or concentrated prescription or non-prescription pharmaceuticals.
(Added 4-27-20-Effective Upon Passage)
25. Hazardous waste pharmaceuticals or DEA controlled substances by a healthcare facility or reverse distributor.
(Added 4-27-20-Effective Upon Passage)
B. Wastes prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that these wastes could be discharged to the municipal wastewater systems. All floor drains located in process or materials storage areas must discharge to the industrial user's pretreatment facility before connecting with the system.
C. Wastewater survey. Upon request of the Administrator, all industrial users shall submit information as to the nature and characteristics of their wastewater. The Administrator shall prepare a form for this wastewater survey and may periodically require industrial users to update the wastewater survey, or update thereof, within thirty (30) days from receipt of the Administrator's request. Failure to complete the wastewater survey, or any update thereon, shall constitute a violation of this Article.
(Amended Entire Section 4-27-92-Effective Upon Passage)
134-5 SPECIFIC POLLUTANT LIMITATIONS
A. The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass-through and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater into the municipal treatment system containing an excess of the following instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limits:
1. Any arsenic greater than 0.13 mg/L
2. Any barium greater than 1.0 mg/L
3. Any beryllium greater than 3.5 mg/L
4. Any cadmium greater than 0.08 mg/L
5. Any Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD) greater than 1,500 mg/L
6. Any chlorides greater than 1,000 mg/L
7. Any chromium greater than 5.6 mg/L
8. Any copper greater than 0.93 mg/L
9. Any cyanide greater than 1.3 mg/L
10. Any iron greater than 2.0 mg/L
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-23
11. Any lead greater than 0.53 mg/L
12. Any manganese greater than 1.0 mg/L
13. Any mercury greater than 0.014 mg/L
14. Any molybdenum greater than 1.16 mg/L
15. Any nickel greater than 0.72 mg/L
16. Any oil and grease greater than 100.0 mg/L
17. Any phenols greater than 0.20 mg/L
18. Any radioactivity as radium - 225 and strontium - 90 greater than 3 pCi and 10 pCi per liter, respectively. In the known absence of strontium - 90 and alpha emitters, the part per million concentration shall not be greater than 1,000 pCi per liter.
19. Any selenium greater than 0.08 mg/L
20. Any silver greater than 0.52 mg/L
21. Any Total Toxic Organics (TTO's) greater than 2.13 mg/L
22. Any zinc greater than 5.4 mg/L
(Added “1-22” 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
B. Concentrations apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged into the municipal wastewater system. All concentration from metallic substances are for total metal. Compliance with all parameters may be determined from a single grab sample. The Administrator may impose mass limitations in addition to or in place of the concentration-based limitations above.
(Amended Entire Section 4-27-92-Effective Upon Passage)
C. The Town may develop best management practices (BMPs), by regulation or in individual wastewater discharge permits to implement local limits and the requirements of Sec. 134-4.
(Added 4-27-20-Effective Upon Passage)
134-6 VARIANCES AND AGREEMENTS
The Town shall have the right to enter into special agreements with users setting forth terms under which the user may discharge into the municipal wastewater system. In no case will a special agreement waive compliance with a pretreatment standard. However, the industrial user may request a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR Part 403.15. Industrial users may also request a fundamentally different factor variance from the Categorical Pretreatment Standards of the USEPA. Such a request must be either approved or not objected to by the EPA and will be permitted by the Town only if the user can prove that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by the USEPA when establishing its pretreatment standard. An industrial user requesting a fundamentally different factor variance must comply with procedural and substantive provisions set forth in 40 CFR Part 403.13.
(Amended Entire Section 4-27-92-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-24
134-7 DILUTION RESTRICTED
No industrial user shall ever increase the use of process water or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement. The Town, as defined in 40 CFR Part 403.12(a), may impose mass limitations on industrial users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
(Amended Entire Section/Title 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
134-8 FEDERAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS
A. Users subject to Categorical Pretreatment Standards are required to comply with applicable standards as set out in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471, and incorporated herein.
B. Industrial users shall provide wastewater treatment necessary to comply with this Article and shall comply with all Categorical Pretreatment Standards and the local limits and prohibitions set out in this Article. All facilities required to pretreat wastewater shall be provided, operated and maintained at the industrial user's sole expense. Detailed plans showing all pretreatment facilities and outlining operating procedures shall be submitted to the Town for review and approval before construction of any pretreatment facility. The Town's review of said plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility of making any necessary modifications to the pretreatment facilities in order to obtain compliance with the provisions of this Article.
(Amended Entire Section 4-27-92-Effective Upon Passage)
134-9 PRETREATMENT MEASURES
A. The Administrator is authorized and may require industrial users to restrict their discharge during peak flow net periods, to designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewer lines, to relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, to separate domestic sewage waste streams from industrial sewage waste streams and to impose such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the municipal wastewater system and to ensure the industrial user's compliance with the requirements of this Article.
B. Each person discharging into the municipal wastewater system an amount greater than one hundred thousand (100,000) gallons per day or an amount greater than five percent (5%) of the average daily flow in the system shall install and maintain on his property and at his sole expense a suitable storage and flow-control facility designed to ensure equalization of flow over a twenty-four hour period. Said facility shall have a capacity for at least fifty percent (50%) of the daily discharge volume by the user and shall be equipped with alarms and a rate of discharge controller. The regulation of flow from said facility shall be directed by the Administrator. The Town may issue a wastewater permit solely for flow equalization.
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-25
C. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Administrator, said interceptors are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease, flammable substances, sand or other harmful substances. All interception units shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Administrator and shall be so located as to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. The Administrator shall determine a schedule for the inspection, cleaning and repair of said interceptors, the costs of which shall be borne by the property owner at his sole expense.
D. The Town may require industrial users with the potential to discharge flammable substances to install and maintain at their own expense an approved combustible gas detection meter.
E. All facilities constructed after the date of this Article shall separate domestic sewage from industrial wastewater until the industrial wastewater has passed through, the required pretreatment system and the industrial user's monitoring facility. The Administrator may require industrial users with previously existing facilities to separate domestic sewage from industrial waste streams when it appears that the combination of domestic sewage and industrial waste streams causes or contributes to interference with the municipal wastewater system.
(Amended Entire Section 4-27-92-Effective Upon Passage)
134-10 SPILL PREVENTION PLANS
A. Industrial users shall develop spill prevention plans to provide protection from the accidental discharge of materials which may interfere with the municipal wastewater system. All spill prevention plans shall be submitted to the Town of Front Royal for approval and must address the following:
1. Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges;
2. Description of stored chemicals;
3. Procedures for immediately notifying the Town of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by Section 138-18 (E) and 138-18 (F) of this ordinance; and
4. Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance or storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plan site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measure for containing toxic organic pollutants including solvents, and/or measure and equipment for emergency response.
B. Industrial users shall construct facilities necessary to implement approved spill prevention plans and shall maintain the facilities at their sole expense. Existing industrial users shall have six (6) months from the effective date of this Article to submit a spill prevention plan to the Administrator for approval. In the event that the plan is rejected, the Administrator shall provide to the industrial user a written statement specifying the reasons for rejection. The industrial user shall then have thirty (30) days to submit an amended spill prevention plan complying with the
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-26
deficiencies noted by the Administrator. In the event that an industrial user fails to provide an approved spill prevention plan and/or fails to implement an approved spill prevention plan, the Administrator may require said industrial user to cease all discharge into the municipal wastewater system.
(Amended Entire Section 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
134-11 TENANT RESPONSIBILITY
Any person who occupies an industrial user's premises as a tenant under any rental or lease agreement shall be jointly and severally responsible for compliance with the provisions of this Article. The owner of the industrial user's premises shall remain jointly and severally responsible for compliance with the provisions of this Article, regardless of the actions of his tenant.
(Amended Entire Section 4-27-92-Effective Upon Passage)
134-12 HAULED WASTEWATER
A. Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated by the Administrator, and as such times as are established by the Administrator. Such waste shall not violate any portion of this Article or any other requirements established by the Town. The Administrator may require septic tank haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits.
B. The Administrator shall require haulers of industrial waste to obtain permits. The Administrator may require generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The Administrator also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of this Article.
C. Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated by the Administrator. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the Administrator. The Administrator may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The Administrator may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge.
D. Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste tracking form for every load. The form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes.
(Amended Entire Section 4-27-92 and 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
134-13 WASTEWATER PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION; APPROVAL/ DENIAL; REISSUANCE
(Amended Title of Section 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-27
A. WASTEWASTER PERMIT REQUIREMENT - It shall be unlawful for any person to connect or attempt to connect any pipe to the Town's sewer lines without a permit, and it shall be unlawful for any person to discharge wastewater, whether domestic sewage or industrial waste, into the Town's municipal wastewater system without first obtaining a permit.
B. WASTEWATER PERMIT APPLICATION - Wastewater permit applications shall be submitted to the Administrator on forms provided by the Town. Each permit application shall contain all requested information in sufficient specificity to determine compliance with pretreatment standards and all other provisions of this Article. Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. Each application shall be accompanied by the system development charge in accordance with schedules promulgated by the Town or by special agreement between the Town and the user.
(Added “system development charge”6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
C. APPLICATION SIGNATORIES AND CERTIFICATION
1. All industrial wastewater permit applications and any industrial user reports must contain the following certification statement and be signed by the owner of the premises or an authorized representative:
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision, that only qualified personnel have provided the information so submitted, that I have made inquiry of said qualified personnel as to the accuracy of the information submitted, and to the best of my knowledge and belief, all information contained herein is true, accurate, and complete."
2. It shall be a violation of this Article to knowingly submit inaccurate, incomplete or false information on any wastewater permit application. It shall further be a violation to unknowingly submit inaccurate, incomplete or false information on a wastewater permit application by reason that the applicant failed to inquire as to the accuracy of the submitted information.
D. PERMIT APPROVAL DENIAL - The Administrator will evaluate the submitted data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within sixty (60) days from the receipt of all required data, the Administrator will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater permit. Any application not approved within the sixty-day period shall be deemed denied. The Administrator may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit.
E. SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USERS - Any significant industrial user which is discharging industrial waste into the municipal wastewater system prior to the effective date of this Article shall, within ninety (90) days after said effective date, apply to the Town for a wastewater permit and shall not cause or allow industrial waste discharges into the municipal wastewater system after one hundred eighty (180) days from the effective date of this Article except as may be in compliance with said permit. Failure to apply for a permit or to comply to the terms of a permit within the time required shall be a violation of this Article and, in addition, may result, at the discretion of the Town, in the termination of municipal wastewater use by the significant industrial user.
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-28
F. No sooner than six (6) months nor later than ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of an existing wastewater permit, a significant user seeking reissuance of a wastewater permit shall submit a complete permit application in accordance with the provisions of Section 134-13B.
(Amended Entire Section 4-27-92-Effective Upon Passage)
134-14 WASTEWATER PERMIT APPEALS
Any person who is denied a wastewater permit or who objects to the terms of the wastewater permit may petition the Front Royal Town Manager to reconsider the denial of a permit or the terms of an issued permit by filing written notice of appeal with the Front Royal Town Manager not more than ten (10) days from the date the wastewater permit was denied or from the date an objectionable permit was granted. The written notice of appeal shall state the basis for the appeal and the permit provisions objected to, if any. The Town Manager shall examine all submitted documents and may request a hearing on the appeal. The Town Manager shall announce his decision within fifteen (15) days from the date the written notice of appeal is submitted. If the Town Manager fails to act within fifteen (15) days, the request for appeal shall be deemed denied. Any person whose appeal is denied by the Front Royal Town Manager, either in whole or in part, may appeal that decision to the Warren County Circuit Court, if written notice of appeal is filed with the Clerk of the Warren County Circuit Court within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision by the Front Royal Town Manager. Failure to adhere to the administrative appeal process or to file written notices of appeal as required herein shall be deemed a waiver of the right to appeal.
(Amended Entire Section 4-27-92-Effective Upon Passage)
134-15 PERMIT PROVISIONS
A. Industrial wastewater permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years from the effective date of the permit. Each permit will indicate a specific expiration date. Existing industrial wastewater permits shall be deemed void upon cessation of operations by the user or upon the issuance of a new wastewater permit. The terms and conditions of a permit are automatically continued past its expiration date and remain fully enforceable pending issuance of a new permit if:
1. The permittee has submitted a timely and sufficient application for renewal; or
2. The Town is unable, through no fault of the permittee, to issue a new permit before the expiration date of the previous permit; and
3. The permittee is not in significant noncompliance with the terms and conditions of the previous permit on its expiration date.
4. A wastewater permit for a domestic user shall be issued for an indefinite period without an expiration date.
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-29
B. All wastewater permits shall include any such conditions deemed necessary by the Administrator to prevent pass-through or interference, to protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant effluent, to protect worker health and safety, to facilitate sludge management and disposal, to protect the ambient air quality and to protect against damage to the municipal wastewater system and treatment plant. Industrial wastewater permits shall be nontransferable without prior notification to and approval by the Town of Front Royal. Industrial permits shall contain the effluent limits, including BMP’s, based on pretreatment standards applicable to the user and shall include self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and record-keeping requirements pertaining to the user. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency and sample type based on Federal, State, and local law. In addition, the permit will contain a statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable Federal, State, or local law. The permit must include requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the Town to be necessary.
(Amended 4-27-20-Effective Upon Passage)
C. Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to the following conditions:
1. Limits on the average or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation name equalization;
2. Requirements for installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works;
3. Requirements for development of and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges;
4. Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the system;
5. The unit charge or schedule or user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the system;
6. Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment;
7. A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable Federal and State pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-30
8. Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Town to ensure compliance with this ordinance and State and Federal laws, rules and regulations.
(Amended Entire Section 4-27-92 and 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
134-16 PERMIT MODIFICATIONS AND TRANSFER
A. A user may apply for modification of an existing wastewater permit, or the Administrator, following notice and hearing to the user, may cause a permit to be modified for the following reasons:
1. To incorporate new or revised Federal, State, or local government laws, standards or requirements.
2. To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance.
3. To address a change or condition in the municipal wastewater system which requires a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of a previously authorized discharge.
4. To address new information indicating that a previously permitted discharge poses a threat to the municipal wastewater system, Town personnel or receiving waters.
5. To address violation by the user of any of the terms and conditions of the existing wastewater permit.
6. To address misrepresentation, a failure to disclose or otherwise incomplete or incorrect data submitted by the user in the wastewater permit application.
7. To incorporate a revision of or a grant of variance from Categorical Pretreatment Standards made pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13.
8. To correct typographical errors in the existing permit.
9. To reflect transfer of facility ownership and/or operation.
B. WASTEWATER PERMIT TRANSFER
1. Industrial wastewater permits may be reassigned to a new owner or operator by the Town Administrator upon at least thirty (30) days written certification by the new owner or operator stating that there will be no immediate change to the facility's operations and processes, acknowledging full responsibility for complying with the terms of the existing permit and identifying the specific date the transfer in ownership of operation is to occur.
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-31
2. Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer.
(Amended Entire Section 4-27-92-Effective Upon Passage; Amended “2” 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
134-17 PERMIT REVOCATION; APPEAL
(Amended Title 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
A. The Administrator may revoke existing wastewater permits, following notice and hearing to the user. The Administrator shall send a revocation notice by first class mail to the user at his last known address as stated in the permit application. The notice shall state the date, time and place of the revocation hearing, which may be held anytime within five (5) days after the notice is mailed. A permit may be revoked by the Administrator for any of the following reasons:
1. Failure to notify the Town of significant changes to wastewater discharge.
2. Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application.
(Added 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
3. Failure to provide prior notification of changed conditions pursuant to this Article.
(Added 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
4. Falsifying self-monitoring reports.
5. Refusing the Town access to facility premises and records.
6. Failure to meet effluent limitations.
7. Failure to pay fines or fees relating to sewer usage or violations of the Article.
8. Failure to meet compliance schedules.
9. Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application.
(Amended 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
10. Failure to provide required notice of transfer in ownership or operation.
11. Violation of any pretreatment standards or requirements.
B. An administrative appeal of any permit revocation may be made to the Town Manager in accordance with the same terms and conditions set forth herein for appeals on wastewater permit application decisions. An appeal from the Town Manager's decision on revocation may be made to the Circuit Court of Warren County in accordance with the same terms and conditions set forth for appeals from the Town Manager's decisions on wastewater permit application appeals. No wastewater discharge shall be permitted by any user pending an appeal of the revocation of a wastewater permit.
(Amended Entire Section 4-27-92-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-32
134-18 SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
A. BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS - Within one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a Categorical Pretreatment Standard or one hundred eighty (180) days after the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing significant industrial users subject to such Categorical Pretreatment Standards and currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the municipal system shall be required to submit to the Town a report which contains the information listed in Subsection A(1) through (8) below. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, including existing significant industrial users which have changed their operation or processes so as to become new sources, shall be required to submit to the Town a report which contains the information listed in Subsection A(1) through (8). A new source shall also be required to report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source shall also give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants discharged. The information required in this section includes:
1. Identifying Information: The user shall submit the name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owners.
2. Permits: The user shall submit a list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility.
3. Description of Operations: The user shall submit a brief description of the nature, average rate of production and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such industrial user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the system from the regulated process.
4. Flow Measurement: The user shall submit information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the system from regulated process streams and other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
5. Measurement of Pollutants:
a. The industrial user shall identify the Categorical Pretreatment Standard applicable to each regulated process.
b. In addition, the industrial user shall submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (and/or mass, where required by the standard or Town) of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum and long-term average concentrations (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be performed in accordance with procedures set out in 40 CFR 136.
c. A minimum of four (4) grab samples must be used for pH temperature, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organics. All other pollutants will be measured
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-33
by composite samples obtained through flow- proportional sampling techniques. If flow-proportional composite sampling is infeasible, samples may be obtained through time-proportional sampling techniques or through four (4) grab samples if the user proves such a sample will be representative of the discharge. See Section 134-5A for specific Pollutant Limitations.
6. Special Certification: The user shall submit a statement, reviewed by an authorized representative of the industrial user and certified to by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O & M) and/or additional pretreatment is required in order to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.
7. Compliance Schedule: If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the user shall submit the shortest schedule by which the industrial user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. All compliance schedules must meet the following requirements:
a. The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation);
b. No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months;
c. The user shall submit a progress report to the Town no later than fourteen days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and
d. In no event shall nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the Town.
(Added “a – d” 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
8. Signature and Certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified.
B. COMPLIANCE DEADLINE REPORTS - Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable Categorical Pretreatment Standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the municipal wastewater system, any industrial user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the Town a report containing the information described in Section 134-18A (5) and (6). For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-34
measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other industrial users subject to Categorical Pretreatment Standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified.
C. PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS
1. Any significant categorical or non-categorical industrial user subject to a pretreatment standard shall, at a frequency determined by the Administrator but in no case less than quarterly submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by such pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. In cases where the Pretreatment Standard requires compliance with a Best Management Practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation required by the Town or the Pretreatment Standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified.
(Amended 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage; 4-27-20-Effective Upon Passage)
2. All wastewater samples must be representative of the industrial user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of an industrial user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the industrial user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge.
3. If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the Administrator, using the procedures described in Section 134-13 (C) of this ordinance, the results of this monitoring shall be included in this report.
(Added 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
4. In the event that an industrial user's monitoring results indicate a violation has occurred, the industrial user must immediately notify the Town (within 24 hours) and resample its discharge. The industrial user must report the results of the repeated sampling within thirty (30) days of discovering the first violation. The industrial user is not required to resample if the Town monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the Town samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling.
Amended 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
D. REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS - Each industrial user is required to notify the Administrator of any planned significant changes, as defined in Section 134-18 (D)(4) to the industrial user's operations or pretreatment systems which might alter the nature, quality or volume of its wastewater, including any changes which affect the potential for a slug discharge.
(Amended 4-27-20-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-35
1. The Administrator may require the industrial user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater permit application, if necessary.
2. The Administrator may issue a wastewater permit or may modify an existing wastewater permit in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions.
3. No industrial user shall implement the planned changed condition(s) until and unless the Administrator has responded to the industrial user's notice.
4. For purposes of this requirement, flow increases of ten percent (10%) or greater and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutant shall be deemed significant.
E. REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS - Each industrial user shall provide protection from accidental or intentional discharges of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this Article. Facilities to prevent the discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the Town for review and shall be approved by the Town before construction of the facility. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this Article.
1. No industrial user which commences contribution to the system after the effective date of this Article shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the Town.
2. In the case of an accidental or other discharge which may cause potential problems for the municipal wastewater system, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the Town of the incident. This notification shall include the location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user.
3. Within five (5) days following an accidental discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the Administrator, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the system, natural resources or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability which may be imposed by this Article.
4. Failure to notify the Town of potential problem discharges shall be deemed a separate violation of this Article.
5. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in Subsection E (2)
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-36
above. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure.
F. REPORTS FROM NONCATEGORICAL USER - All industrial users not subject to Categorical Pretreatment Standards and not required to obtain a wastewater permit shall provide appropriate reports to the Town as the Administrator may require.
G. SAMPLE COLLECTION
1. Except as indicated in Subsection G(2) below, wastewater samples collected for purposes of determining industrial user compliance with pretreatment standards and requirements must be obtained using flow-proportional composite collection techniques. In the event that flow-proportional sampling is not feasible, the Administrator may authorize the use of time-proportional sampling.
2. Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, toxicity, sulfides, and volatile organic chemicals must be obtained using grab collection techniques.
H. ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS - All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136 or, if 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA and the Town.
I. MONITORING CHARGES - The Administrator may recover the Town's expenses incurred in collecting and analyzing samples of the industrial user's discharge by adding the costs to the industrial user's sewer charges.
J. TIMING - Written reports will be deemed transmitted at the time of deposit, for mailing postage prepaid, into a mail facility of the United States Postal Service.
K. RECORDKEEPING - Industrial users shall retain and make available for inspection and copying all records and information required to be retained under 40 CFR 403.12(o) and 9VAC25-31-840(0) including all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this ordinance, any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements, and documentation associated with Best Management Practices established under Section 134-5.C. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning compliance with this Article or where the industrial user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the Administrator.
(Amended 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage; 4-27-20-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-37
L. INSPECTION AND SAMPLING - The Town, and/or its duly authorized agents, bearing credentials and identification, shall have the right to enter the facilities of any industrial user to ascertain whether the purpose of this Article is being met and all requirements are being complied with. Industrial users shall allow the Administrator, or his representatives, ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying and the performance of any additional duties.
(Amended 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
1. Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the industrial user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the Town, state and USEPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.
2. The Town, state and USEPA shall have the right to set up or require installation of, on the industrial user's property, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations.
3. The Town may require the industrial user to install monitoring equipment, as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the industrial user at the industrial user's expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated periodically to ensure their accuracy.
4. Unreasonable delays in allowing Town personnel access to the industrial user's premises shall be a violation of this Article.
5. The Town and/or its agents may randomly sample and analyze the effluent from industrial users and conduct surveillance activities in order to identify, independent from information supplied by industrial users, occasional and continuing noncompliance with pretreatment standards. The Town and/or control authority must evaluate a least once a year whether a significant industrial user needs a plan to control slug discharges. For the purpose of this subsection, a slug discharge is any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge. If the Town and/or approval authority decides that a slug control plan is needed, the plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following elements:
a. Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges;
b. Description of stored chemicals;
c. Procedures for immediately notifying the Town of slug discharges, including any discharge that would violate a prohibition under 40 CFR Part 403.5(b), with procedures for follow up written notification within five (5) days;
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-38
d. If necessary, procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structure or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency responses.
(Added “5a-d” 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
M. CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION - Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits and monitoring programs, and from the Town's inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Town, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable State law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR Part 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction.
(Added 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
N. NOTIFICATION OF THE DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTE
1. Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and State hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include:
a. the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261,
b. the EPA hazardous waste number, and
c. the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other).
2. If the user discharges more than one hundred (100) kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user:
a. An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes;
b. An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged during that calendar month, and
c. An estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months.
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-39
3. All notifications must take place no later than one hundred and eighty (180) days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this paragraph need to be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under Section 134-18(D) of this ordinance. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of Sections 134-18(A), 134-18(B) and 134-18(C) of this ordinance.
4. Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of paragraph A, above, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR Part 261.30(d) and Part 261.33(e). Discharge of more than fifteen (15) kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR Part 261.30(d) and Part 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification.
5. In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the use must notify the Town, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and State hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within ninety (90) days of the effective date of such regulations.
6. In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical.
7. This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this ordinance, a permit issued there under, or any applicable Federal or State law.
(Amended Entire Section 4-27-92-Effective Upon Passage; Added “N1-6”12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
134-19 ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
A. NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION - Whenever the Administrator finds that any domestic user or any industrial user has violated or is violating this Article, a wastewater permit or order issued hereunder or any other pretreatment requirement, the Administrator, or his agent, may serve upon said user a written notice of violation. Within five (5) days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted to the Administrator. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the Town to take emergency action without first issuing a notice of violation.
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-40
B. CONSENT AGREEMENTS - The Administrator is hereby empowered to enter into consent agreements, assurances of voluntary compliance or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any domestic or industrial user responsible for the noncompliance. Such agreements will include specific action taken by the industrial user to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the agreement. Consent agreement shall be judicially enforceable.
C. SHOW CAUSE HEARING
1. The Administrator may order any domestic or industrial user which causes or contributes to violation(s) of this Article, wastewater permits or agreements hereunder or any other pretreatment requirement to appear before the Administrator and show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action and a request that the user show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be mailed by first class mail to the last known address of the user as stated on the permit application. Such notice may be mailed to any authorized representative of an industrial user. Immediate enforcement action may be taken by the Administrator following the hearing, whether or not the user appears. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(Amended 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
2. An administrative appeal of any show cause hearing may be made to the Town Manager in accordance with the same terms and conditions set forth herein for appeals of wastewater permit application decisions. An appeal from the Town Manager's decision on a show cause hearing may be made to the Circuit Court of Warren County in accordance with the same terms and conditions set forth for appeals from the Town Manager's decisions on wastewater permit application appeals.
D. JUDICIAL REMEDIES
1. The Town may enforce violation of or deviation from the standards of this Article by suit for injunction or other appropriate legal action or suit.
2. The Town may seek to recover by legal action or suit from any industrial user monetary compensation for damages to its public sanitary sewage system, and the POTW's treatment system, caused by the industrial user's violation of or deviation from the standards of this Article.
3. A person who violates the provisions of this Article shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor and upon conviction is punishable by a maximum fine up to two thousand five hundred ($2,500) dollars per violation per day and confinement in jail for not more than twelve (12) months, either or both. In the event of a violation, the Town shall also have the right to terminate the sewer and water connections.
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-41
4. In addition to the proceedings under the authority of subsection (c) of this section the Town is entitled to pursue all other criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority of state statues or other ordinances of the Town against a person conducting a prohibited discharge or violating a pretreatment standard or requirement, including, without limitation, injunctive relief.
5. Any person who knowingly makes and false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other document files required to be maintained pursuant to this Article, or wastewater permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring devices or method required under this article shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a maximum fine up to two thousand five hundred ($2,500) dollars per violation per day and confinement in jail for not more than twelve (12) months, either or both.
6. The Town has the authority and procedures (which shall include notice to the affected industrial users and an opportunity to respond) to halt or prevent any discharge to the system which presents or may presents an endangerment to the environment or which threatens to interfere with the operation of the system. The Director of the Department of Environmental Quality or an authorized representative shall have authority to seek judicial relief and may also use administrative penalty authority when the Town has sought a monetary penalty which the Director believes to be insufficient.
(Added “D 1-6” 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
E. OTHER ACTIONS
1. The Town shall be authorized to implement such other program and enforcement mechanisms as are consistent with regulatory guidelines and are deemed appropriate.
2. The Town shall publish annually, in any daily newspaper published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of users which, during the previous twelve (12) months were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall mean:
a. Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six (66) percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits.
(Amended 4-27-20-Effective Upon Passage)
b. Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty three (33) percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other parameters except pH);
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-42
c. Any other discharge violation that the Town believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public;
d. Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the Town's exercise of it's emergency authority to halt or prevent such discharge;
e. Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
f. Failure to provide within forty-five (45) days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with the compliance schedules;
(Amended to (45) days 4-27-20-Effective Upon Passage)
g. Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
h. Any other violation which the Town determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.
3. Supplemental Enforcement Action
a. Performance Bonds - The Administrator may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this Article, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or other issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such user first files a satisfactory bond payable to the Town, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the Administrator to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance.
b. Liability insurance - The Administrator may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this Article, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or other issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by it s discharge.
c. Water supply severance - Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provisions of this Article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply.
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-43
4. Availability of Records - Effluent data provided to the DEQ or to the Town shall be available to the public without restriction. Industrial users shall comply with all public access requirements of 40 CFR Par t403.14, incorporated by reference.
Added “E 1-4” 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
F. REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE
The remedies provided for in this ordinance are not exclusive. The Town may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the Town’s enforcement response plan. However, the Town may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the Town is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user.
(Amended Entire Section 4-27-92-Effective Upon Passage; Added “F” 4-27-20-Effective Upon Passage)
134-20 EMERGENCY SUSPENSIONS OR TERMINATION
A. The Administrator may suspend the wastewater permit of an industrial user, for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days, whenever such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, interferes with the operation of the municipal wastewater system or which presents or may present an endangerment to the environment.
B. Any industrial user notified of a suspension of its wastewater permit shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of an industrial user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Administrator shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the system, its receiving stream or endangerment to any individuals. The Administrator shall allow the industrial user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Town that the period of endangerment has passed, unless proceedings for termination of the wastewater permit are initiated against the user.
C. An industrial user which is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence to the Administrator prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing.
D. In addition to the provisions in 134-17 of this Article, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination:
1. Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
2. Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge;
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-44
3. Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;
4. Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling, or
5. Violation of the pretreatment standards in section 134-4, 134-5, 134-6, 134-7, 134-8 or 134-9 of this Article.
(Amended Entire Section 4-27-92-Effective Upon Passage)
(Added “D1-5” & Title 12-20-04-Effective Upon Passage)
134-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR ALL USERS
A. Separate connections required; exceptions: Buildings shall be provided with separate sanitary sewer connections at the property line. The connection of more than one (1) building to the same sewer lateral will not be allowed except by special permission prior to installation and at the sole discretion of the Town.
(Ord. No. 22-05 Amended 9-26-05-Effective Upon Passage)
B. Tap to sewer main; determination of size and sewer lateral:
1. The Town shall make the connection to the sewer main in the street and run the sewer service line from the sewer main in the street as near as practicable to the street right- of-way abutting the property to be served, in accordance with the provisions of Section 134-22.3
.
(Amended (1) 9-26-05-Effective Upon Passage ; Added “connection”6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
2. The property owner or his representative shall determine the size of the sewer lateral which is needed for the service required.
(Amended (2) 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
C. Inspection of connection and service lines: After a permit to make connection with the Town's sewer system has been granted, each such connection and the pipes running therefrom to the house or building shall be inspected and approved by a designated official of the Town before the pipes are covered and before the service can be used.
D. Covering of uninspected connections and service lines: Any person covering a sewer connection or sewer service line that has not been inspected and approved as provided in this Article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The guilty party shall be required to uncover such connection or pipes so proper inspection can be made.
E. Plugging of ends of pipe not immediately connected: The ends of all sewer pipes not to be immediately connected with are to be securely stopped by a watertight plug.
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-45
F. Tampering with system: It shall be unlawful for any person to open or tamper with any manhole, pipe, fence, building or any property to the Town's sewer system or to deface, damage or destroy any property of the Town used in connection with the Town's sewer system.
G. Determination of size, materials, location and elevation: In all projects for the extension of sewers, the Town Council shall be the sole judge as to the size of such sewers, laterals, manholes, valves, etc., and as to the materials used in the construction of the same and shall determine the location and elevation of all such sewers and laterals.
H. Extensions to be property of Town: All extensions of sewers, pipes, valves, manholes, laterals, etc., provided they are installed in conformance with the appropriate regulations and Town specifications, and all appurtenances thereto shall become and remain the property of the town and shall become a part of its general sewer system and, as such, subject to all rules and regulations as may be, from time to time, adopted by the Town Council.
(Amended Entire Section 4-27-92-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended “H” 9-26-05-Effective Upon Passage)
134-22 SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGES
A. The system development charge for sewer service, independent of and in addition to installation costs, will be based on the size of the water meter for water entering the premises from which a sewer connection exits, according to the following:
(Amended 9-26-05-Effective Upon Passage)
1.Sewer connection served by three-fourths-inch water meter: seven thousand three hundred thirty dollars ($7,330.00) each.
(Added 9-26-05-Eff Upon Passage)
(Amended 1-24-11-Effective 2-1-11; 5-23-11-Effective 7-1-11; 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
2. Sewer connection served by one-inch water meter: twelve thousand two hundred seventeen dollars ($12,217.00) each.
(Added 9-26-05-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended 1-24-11-Effective 2-1-11; 5-23-11-Effective 7-1-11; 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
3. Sewer connection served by one and one-half-inch water meter: twenty-four thousand four hundred thirty-three ($24,433.00) each.
(Added 9-26-05-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended 1-24-11-Effective 2-1-11; 5-23-11-Effective 7-1-11; 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
4. Sewer connection served by two-inch water meter: thirty-nine thousand ninety-three dollars ($39,093.00) each.
(Added 9-26-05-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended 1-24-11-Effective 2-1-11; 5-23-11-Effective 7-1-11; 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-46
5. Sewer connection served by three-inch water meter: eighty-five thousand five hundred seventeen dollars ($85,517.00) each.
(Added 9-26-05-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended 1-24-11-Effective 2-1-11; 5-23-11-Effective 7-1-11; 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
6. Sewer connection served by four-inch water meter: one hundred forty-six thousand six hundred dollars ($146,600.00) each.
(Amended 6-27-88-Effective 7-1-88; 6-24-90-Effective-9-24-90; 6-24-91-Effective 7-1-91)
(Amended 11-8-04-Effective Upon Passage; 9-26-05-Effective Upon Passage;1-24-11 Effective 2-1-11)
(Amended 5-23-11-Effective 7-1-11; 6-10-13-Effective 7-1-13; 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
7. Sewer connection served by six-inch water meter: three hundred twenty-nice thousand eight hundred fifty dollars ($329,850.00) each.
(Amended 6-27-88-Effective 7-1-88; 6-24-90-Effective-9-24-90; 6-24-91-Effective 7-1-91)
(Amended 11-8-04-Effective Upon Passage; 9-26-05-Effective Upon Passage;1-24-11 Effective 2-1-11)
(Amended 5-23-11-Effective 7-1-11; 6-10-13-Effective 7-1-13; 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
8. Sewer connection served by eight-inch water meter: six hundred eighty-four thousand one hundred thirty-three dollars ($684,133.00) each.
(Amended 6-27-88-Effective 7-1-88; 6-24-90-Effective-9-24-90; 6-24-91-Effective 7-1-91)
(Amended 11-8-04-Effective Upon Passage; 9-26-05-Effective Upon Passage;1-24-11 Effective 2-1-11)
(Amended 5-23-11-Effective 7-1-11; 6-10-13-Effective 7-1-13; 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
9. Sewer connection served by ten-inch water meter: one million twenty-six thousand two hundred dollars ($1,026,200.00) each.
(Added 9-26-05-Effective Upon Passage) (Amended 1-24-11-Effective 2-1-11; 5-23-11-Effective 7-1-11; 6-10-13-Eff 7-1-13; 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
10. Sewer connection served by twelve-inch water meter: one million two hundred ninety-four thousand nine hundred sixty-seven dollars $1,294,967.00) each.
(Added 9-26-05-Effective Upon Passage) (Amended 1-24-11-Effective 2-1-11; 5-23-11-Effective 7-1-11; 6-10-13-Eff 7-1-13; 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
B. The above standard fee schedule charges shall apply to apartments, houses, condominiums, commercial buildings and hostels.
C. For purposes of this fee schedule, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
APARTMENT UNIT - A single-dwelling unit in a multiple-unit structure which is occupied on a rental basis.
CONDOMINIUM - A single-dwelling unit in a multiple-unit structure which is occupied on an ownership basis.
UNIT - Any single place of residence, any single place of business or any single hostelry room.
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-47
D. The standard fee schedule shall apply to the first unit of any structure. The standard fee schedule charges shall apply to each condominium unit.
E. The charges for apartments, condominium units and trailers will be two thousand three hundred four dollars ($2,304.00) for sewer service for each unit after the first unit.
(Amended 6-24-91-Effective 7-1-91; 11-8-04-Effective Upon Passage; 6-10-13-Effective 7-1-13)
F. In the event that any multiple-unit complex which initially qualifies for the reduced rates for additional apartment units shall convert such units from a rental basis to an ownership basis, then, at the time of such conversion, the standard fee schedule charges shall be assessed against each single unit that is so converted.
G. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 134-22.A., G. H., and I. the system development charges for sewer service provided to structures and facilities which were existing as of May 20, 1991, in the following annexed areas of the Town of Front Royal shall be frozen at rates in effect on the date of May 20, 1991, to wit:
(Amended and Removed Reference to “Commercial Closets” 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
1. The annexed area incorporated into the Town of Front Royal by order of the Annexation Court, effective December 31, 1976, as shown by the plat of record in the annexation file of record in the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Warren County.
2. The annexed area incorporated into the Town of Front Royal by order of the Annexation Court, effective December 31, 1978, as shown by the plat of record in the annexation file of record in the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Warren County.
(Added (1-2) 7-22-91-Effective Upon Passage)
H. All system development charges for sewer services furnished outside of the limits of the Town of Front Royal will be one hundred percent (100%) more than the in-town rates as provided in Section 134-22, Subsections A through H.
(Added 12-18-95-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended to add “system development charges” 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
I. No system development charges for sewer service shall be accepted by the Town of Front Royal prior to the issuance of a zoning permit and the approval of a building permit application for building development or conversion upon the lot or parcel of land to be served. This provision shall not apply when the lot or parcel of land to be served has an existing structure approved for occupancy.
(Amended Entire Section 4-27-92-Effective Upon Passage)
(Added 1-10-2000-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended to add “system development charges” 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-48
134-22.1 SANITARY SEWER SERVICE RATES
The monthly base rates for sanitary sewer service usage shall be as follows:
A. Base rate, up to three thousand (3,000) gallons per month: sixteen dollars and seventy-four cents ($16.74)
(Amended 6-10-91-Effective 7-1-91; 6-14-93-Effective 7-1-93; 6-14-99-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended 5-28-02-Effective Upon Passage; 6-28-10-Effective 7-1-10; Amended 2-24-11-Effective 2-1-11)
(Amended 5-23-11-Effective 7-1-11; 6-10-13-Effective 7-1-13; 6-9-14-Effective 7-1-14)
(Amended 6-8-15-Effective 7-1-15; 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
B. All sanitary sewer service usage exceeding three thousand (3,000) gallons per month: fourteen dollars and forty cents ($14.40) per month, for each one thousand (1,000) gallons thereafter.
(Amended 6-14-93-Effective 7-1-93; 6-14-99-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended 5-28-02-Effective Upon Passage; 6-28-10-Effective 7-1-10; Amended 2-24-11-Effective 2-1-11)
(Amended 5-23-11-Effective 7-1-11; 6-10-13-Effective 7-1-13; 6-9-14-Effective 7-1-14)
(Amended 6-8-15-Effective 7-1-15; 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
C. The rates for sanitary sewer service usage furnished outside of the limits of the Town of Front Royal:
1. One hundred percent (100%) more than the in-town rates as provided above, for areas not in the “U.S. Routes 522/340 Corridor Area, or “Route 522 Corridor Area”, or “Corridor Area”, hereinafter, “Corridor Area”, as described and defined in subparagraph (ii) below.
2. a. In the “Corridor Area”, commercial users (“Users”) of Town sanitary sewer service usage shall pay to the Town a rate for services equal to the charge to in-Town commercial/industrial sanitary sewer users, plus an amount in lieu of all of the taxes (less and except, however, the equivalent of the Town’s meals and lodging taxes, as hereinafter set forth) and license fees the User would pay to the Town if User's premises, and all commercial activity thereon, or ancillary thereto, was located and occurring within the boundaries of Town, or “PILOT fees” (“Payments In Lieu of [Town] Taxes fees”). The annual amount due shall include all such taxes (less and except, however, the equivalent of the Town’s meals [food and beverage] and lodging taxes), and license fees, whether ordinarily imposed directly on the User and paid to the Town, or indirectly on User’s customers, collected by User and paid to the Town, as if User was located within the Town. Such indirectly imposed taxes shall not include the Town meals (food and beverage) taxes and Town lodging taxes. By February 1st each calendar year, User shall file with the Town a statement (“Statement”) of User’s previous year’s taxes in the following categories: (1) property taxes paid the County of Warren, Virginia; (2) gross receipts subject to a state sales tax, and business and professional occupational license taxes (excluding meals and lodging taxes collected); (3) a list of all automobiles for which license taxes were paid to Warren County; (4) any bank franchise tax paid on deposits in Warren County; and (5) any car rental tax paid. This information contained in the Statement will be used to calculate an amount equivalent to what User’s annual taxes
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-49
or taxes collected and license fees would be if User were a Town resident or a Town business. This amount shall then be divided into twelfths and such resulting amount shall be added to User’s monthly bill for services.
b. If a commercial User in the Corridor Area is new to Warren County, the information required in the Statement above shall be estimated by the Town for purposes of determining the User’s rate for the first year of services.
c. The Corridor Area was originally described and defined in the “Amendment to an Agreement Between the County of Warren and the Town of Front Royal Regarding the Provision of Water and Sewer Service by the Town in the U.S. Route 522/340 North Corridor and the Assumption of Full Service Funding and Responsibility by the County of Fire/Rescue, Parks/Recreation Operations and Animal Control Services”, dated August 9, 1999, and as further ratified by “Final Order Validating and Affirming Voluntary Settlement Agreement Between the Town of Front Royal and the County of Warren”, said Order entered into by the Circuit Court of Warren County, Virginia, dated December 13, 1999, Case No.CL97000225. The Corridor Area originally is described and defined as being that area north of the corporate boundaries of the Town of Front Royal, in Warren County, on both sides of U.S. Routes 522/340 North, extending to Crooked Run on the West side of U.S. Routes 522/340 North to the tracks of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad Company on the East side of U.S. Routes 522/340 North, and between the Interstate-66 Interchange to the South and State Route 661 (Fairgrounds Road) to the North. The Corridor Area has since been amended and expanded, by Voluntary Settlement Agreement between the Town of Front Royal and the County of Warren, to additionally include Crooked Run West, which contains current Warren County Tax Map Parcel Numbers 12 M 2 9 (11.22ac), 12 M 2 10 (2.33ac), 12 M 2 11 (53.93 ac), 12 M 2 12 (20.00 ac), 12 M 2 13 (30.43 ac), and 12 M 2 14 (29.94 ac), in total containing 147.85 acres, more or less, all of which are part of the Corridor Area.
d. Users in the Corridor Area, in order to use Town public water and sanitary sewer utility services, shall enter into with the Town, and be subject to, an Out-of-Town Water and Sewage Service Agreement which contains provisions for “payments in lieu of taxes” fees, or “PILOT Fee Agreement”, which PILOT Fee Agreements shall be in substantially the following form:
TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL, VIRGINIA
OUT-OF-TOWN WATER AND SEWAGE SERVICE AGREEMENT
(Warren County Commercial/Industrial Freehold Users)
This Out-of-Town Water and Sewage Service Agreement (“Agreement”), is made this _____ day of ________________, 20____ , by and between the Town of Front Royal, Virginia (“Town”) and __________________ LLC (“User”), owner of commercial/industrial property commonly known as _____, located in the County of Warren, Virginia, being the same property conveyed to User by deed recorded in Deed Book _______, Page_______, as instrument # _______, of the land records of the Warren County Circuit Court, and identified as Warren County Tax Map Parcel No. 12L 5 (“property”).
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-50
WHEREAS, the Town is authorized, pursuant to §§15.2-2119 and 15.2-2143 of the Code of Virginia, to operate outside of its boundaries, with the concurrence of the affected county, sewer services and water supply systems, and to contract for the use of such systems and services, and
WHEREAS, the Town operates sewer services and water supply systems outside of its boundaries and desires to contract to supply water and sewage services (“Services”) to commercial and industrial users (“Users”) located outside of its boundaries, and
WHEREAS, the County of Warren, Virginia, by separate agreement with the Town, concurs with the supplying of water and sewage services to such Users by the Town, and
WHEREAS, the User desires to obtain water and sewer services from the Town to its property via connection to the Town’s service mains (“service location”), and to enter into an agreement containing the terms and conditions for the supplying of Services which satisfies the contract requirements of Section 134.31 of the Code of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia.
NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of Town Work Order No.__________, incorporated herein by this reference, creating a service location for User, and of providing Services to User and/or such other good and valuable consideration, receipt of which is hereby acknowledged, User agrees to the following, which shall be binding upon User and User’s successors in interest, lessees, and assigns:
1. SERVICE ACCOUNT AND DEPOSIT
Account
Upon execution of this Agreement, The Town’s Department of Finance will open a service billing account (“Account”) for User’s service location and shall bill User for usage of Services supplied to such service location as determined by metering at User’s master meter. If User has tenants using Services supplied via the same service location, User’s usage shall be reduced by the usage of such tenants provided that each of such tenants have separate Accounts with Town, with usage determined by separate metering via separate tenant sub meters.
Deposit Amount
User shall pay to Town a deposit (“deposit”) to secure payment for Services. For an existing commercial/industrial service location at the property, the deposit required for Town Services shall be an amount equal to the highest monthly bill for that service location during the preceding twelve months of Services, or Two Hundred and Fifty Dollars ($250.00), whichever is greater.
For a newly created commercial/industrial service location at the property, the Town’s Department of Finance shall establish the required deposit at an amount estimated to equal to the User’s anticipated average monthly bill for Services.
Payment of Deposit, Interest and Refunds
Payment of the deposit is due upon the earlier of the execution of the Town’s service work order or the execution of this Agreement and shall be held by Town in an interest-bearing account.
The deposit, plus any accrued interest, shall be refunded upon the closing of the Account in an amount equal to the deposit and accrued interest minus any amount deducted to satisfy User arrearages or other debts owing to the Town. Upon request of a refund, the Director of Finance shall first ensure that User does not have any debts owing to the Town. If the User is indebted to the Town, the Director of Finance will apply any refund toward satisfaction of these debts prior to the refund of any deposit balances to the User.
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-51
2. COMPLIANCE WITH LAW
User agrees to comply with all applicable ordinances of Town concerning Services, including, but not limited to, discharge standards, pretreatment of waste, system development charges, and agrees to accept all new rate schedules and fees that the Town Council of Town may from time to time establish and adopt.
3. OUT-OF–TOWN COMMERCIAL RATES AND FEES
User shall pay to the Town a rate for Services equal to the charge to in-Town commercial/industrial users, plus an amount in lieu of all of the taxes (less and except, however, the equivalent of the Town’s meals [food and lodging] and lodging taxes, ) and license fees the User would pay to the Town if User's Premises, and all commercial activity thereon, or ancillary thereto, was located and occurring within the boundaries of Town (“PILOT fees” or “Payments In Lieu of [Town] Taxes fees”). The annual amount due shall include all such taxes (less and except, however, the equivalent of the Town’s meals [food and lodging] and lodging taxes, and hereinafter set forth) and license fees, whether ordinarily imposed directly on the User and paid to the Town, or indirectly on User’s customers, collected by User and paid to the Town, as if User was within the Town. Such indirectly imposed taxes shall not include the Town meals (food and beverage) tax and Town lodging tax. By February 1st each calendar year, User shall file with the Town a statement (“Statement”) of User’s previous year’s taxes in the following categories as may apply to User: (1) property taxes paid the County of Warren, Virginia; (2) gross receipts subject to a state sales tax, and business and professional occupational license taxes; (3) a list of all automobiles for which license taxes were paid to Warren County; (4) any bank franchise tax paid on deposits in Warren County; and (5) any car rental tax paid. This information contained in the Statement will be used to calculate an amount equivalent to what User’s annual taxes and license fees would be if User were a Town resident. This amount shall then be divided into twelfths and such resulting amount shall be added to User’s monthly bill for services.
If the User is new to doing business in Warren County, the information required in the Statement above shall be estimated by the Town for purposes of determining the User’s rate for the first year of services.
4. VERIFICATION OF FEES
For three years, User shall keep sufficient records to enable the Town to verify the accuracy of Statements submitted by User and the correctness of rates and fees under this Agreement. All such records, books of account and other information required to be kept by any taxing authority (“Records”) shall be open to inspection and examination by the Department of Finance of Town in order to allow the Town to determine compliance with the terms of this Agreement. The Town shall provide User with the option of having such audit conducted in a local business office of User where Records are maintained. In the event the Records are maintained outside Warren County, copies of the Records shall be sent to the Department of Finance upon written demand. The decision of the Town’s Director of Finance shall be final in determining whether Statements comply with the terms of this Agreement.
5. PAYMENTS
Due Date – Interest, Fees and Charges
A. User shall pay for water and sanitary sewer services provided by Town.
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-52
B. All payments on Accounts shall be due at Town’s Department of Finance by the close of business within twenty (20) days of the date of billing. Accounts for which full payment is not received within twenty (20) days, are delinquent. The Director of Finance shall notify the User in writing of all such delinquencies. A late charge of two percent (2%) of the delinquent bill shall be charged to the delinquent Account.
C. If the Account remains delinquent for ten (10) days after the original notice, an additional service charge of Twenty Dollars $20.00 shall be charged to the Account and interest shall commence accruing at the rate of interest permitted on omitted taxes and assessments under the "Underpayment Rate" established pursuant to § 6621 (a) (2) of the Internal Revenue Code plus two percent.
D. If such User does not pay the full amount of charges, penalty, and interest for water provided or cease such disposal within ten (10) days after the delinquent fees and charges charged for water or sewage disposal services are due, the Town’s Director of Finance may issue a service termination notice and may cease supplying water and sewage disposal services to User’s premises thereto unless an officer of the Virginia Department of Health certifies that shutting off the water will endanger the health of the occupants of User’s premises or the health of others. At least ten (10) business days prior to ceasing the supply of water or sewage disposal services, the Director of Finance shall provide the owner with written notice of such cessation. User shall have a right to request a hearing before the Finance Director during said ten (10) business day period to object to cessation of utility service, during which hearing said User may present evidence to support User’s position as to why utility service ought not to be disconnected for cause.
E. A service charge will be required to reconnect services on an Account that has had Services terminated for non-payment. If the reconnection occurs during normal business hours, the reconnection fee shall be $20.00 for the first time; 1st; $30.00 for the second time; and $40.00 for the third time. At all other times other than normal business hours, the reconnection fee shall be one and one-half (1 ½) the reconnection fee during normal business hours.
F. If the fees and charges charged for water service or the use and services of the Town’s sewage disposal system by or in connection with User’s Premises are not paid when due, the User shall, until such fees and charges are paid with such penalty and interest to the date of payment, cease to dispose of sewage or industrial waste originating from or on such real estate by discharge thereof directly or indirectly into the Town’s sewage disposal system.
G. Such fees and charges, and any penalty and interest thereon, when unpaid as provided above, shall constitute a lien against the property, ranking on a parity with liens for unpaid taxes. A lien may be placed on the property by the Town when the owner of the Premises has been advised in writing that a lien may be placed upon the property if the owner of the Premises fails to pay any delinquent water and sewer charges when due as provided as above. Such written notice shall be provided at least 30 days in advance of recordation of any lien with a copy of the bill for delinquent water and sewer charges to allow the owner of the Premises a reasonable opportunity to pay the amount of the outstanding balance and avoid the recordation of a lien against the property. The lien may be in the amount of (i) up to the number of months of delinquent water or sewer charges when the water or sewer is, or both are, provided to the owner of the Premises;
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-53
(ii) any applicable penalties and interest on such delinquent charges; and (iii) reasonable attorney fees and other costs of collection not exceeding 20 percent of such delinquent charges. In no case shall a lien for less than $25 be placed against the property.
Place of Payment
Payments shall be made by: 1) mail to Department of Finance, 102 E. Main Street, P.O. Box 1560, Front Royal, Virginia 22630, 2) deposit at the deposit box in the rear of the Town Hall, 102 East Main Street, Front Royal, Virginia 3) delivery in person at the Town Hall, 102 East Main Street, Front Royal, Virginia or 4) delivery to a designated bank.
Allocation of Payments
User recognizes and accepts that during a delinquency in the payment for services, any subsequent payment received will be applied first against the most delinquent Account balance.
6. TERMINATION OF SERVICES FOR BREACH OR FAILURE TO PAY
Grounds for Termination of Service
Services may be terminated for User’s failure to comply with any of the terms of this Agreement including failure to pay for services as agreed herein.
Notice
The Director will notify the User at User’s billing address (_______________________) in writing of all delinquencies, failures to comply with the terms of this Agreement, imminent service termination, and the right to contest as set forth below. The foregoing notwithstanding, the Town reserves the right to terminate Services as provided by Section 134-43 of the Code of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia. Notice of imminent service termination may be posted on the door of the premise at the service location with the delinquent Account, unless User and Town have previously agreed in writing to a different arrangement as to such notice.
Disconnection of Service
If such User does not pay the full amount of charges, penalty, and interest for water provided or cease such disposal within Ten (10) days after the delinquent fees and charges charged for water or sewage disposal services are due, the Town’s Director of Finance may issue a service termination notice and may cease supplying water and sewage disposal services to User’s premises thereto unless an officer of the Virginia Department of Health Certifies that shutting off the water will endanger the health of the occupants of User’s premises or the health of others. At least ten (10) business days prior to ceasing the supply of water or sewage disposal services, the Director of Finance shall provide the owner with written notice of such cessation. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no services shall be terminated prior to the date set by the Town for a contest hearing as set forth in paragraph 5. D., above.
Conditions for Reconnection of Service
Once terminated, services shall not be restored to User until the outstanding balance (service fee(s), penalty, interest and reconnection fee(s)) for that service location is paid in full, unless the Director of Finance has approved other arrangements for payment in full.
7. RETURNED CHECK POLICY
If a check for payment on the Account is returned to the Town by its bank unpaid for any reason, the Director of Finance shall notify the User in the same manner as provided above. Unless payment in full, plus a $35.00 returned check service charge, is received by the Director by the close of business three days after the date of the notice, in addition to any rights allowed
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-54
under State law, Services to the User’s service location shall be terminated. If the User presents the Town with more than two (2) returned checks during any twelve (12) month period, payment by check, other than in the form of cashier’s check or certified check, will no longer be accepted.
8. USE, INSTALLATION, AND INSPECTIONS
The User further agrees to the following conditions: (1) The User shall extend service via mains and/or laterals from the Town’s existing mains, with no new main construction required by the Town; (2) Extension of mains and the easements necessary for their installation and maintenance may be required to be dedicated and conveyed to the Town, such facilities and real property interests shall be accepted into the Town's system when they meet such standards and requirements as the Town may determine; (3) The User shall secure any necessary easement(s) for extension of laterals, with the easement(s) to include a clause allowing the Town to inspect the lines as required to ensure proper maintenance; (4) All construction must meet the Town’s water and/or sewer construction standards; (5) The User bears the total cost of all extension; (6) The User shall pay the in-town water and/or sewer system development charges. If the User violates any of these conditions, the Town may terminate Services after written notice to the User. The User may contest the Town’s Notice of Default by contacting the Town Manager within five business days of the notice. The Town Manager will immediately schedule a hearing on the User’s claim that he is not in default. If the User’s challenge is not successful, Services will be terminated.
9. RIGHTS OF WAY / EASEMENTS
User agrees to execute and convey, upon request of Town, any and all rights of way and/or easements in favor of Town, in recordable form, necessary to perfect in Town the right to place, maintain and inspect any mains, laterals, lines, pipes, valves, meters and other infrastructure over, under and/or across the property necessary to supply and bill for water and sewage services to User and User’s tenants, if any. User agrees to pay the filing fee(s) for the recordation of any such rights of way and/or easements in the Circuit Court for Warren County. Any such filing fees will be billed to User.
10. UNENFORCEABLE PROVISIONS
In the event that, by act of the Virginia General Assembly, decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, or for any other reason beyond the control of Town, the provisions of this Agreement for payments in lieu of taxes as a component of the out-of-town rate for services is determined to be illegal, ultra vires or unenforceable, the parties to this Agreement further agree that the Town may immediately terminate Services to the User unless the parties to this Agreement agree on a legally permitted substitute fee in place of a payment in lieu of Town taxes as set forth in this Agreement. In the event that no such legal substitute is available, the Town may terminate this Agreement without cost or liability.
11. REPRESENTATIONS
By signing below, the User represents and certifies that User has read and fully understands this Agreement having had an opportunity to consult with legal counsel, that User is the owner of the premises to which this Agreement relates, that User agrees to comply fully with the terms of this Agreement, and that the individual executing this Agreement on behalf of User is an authorized signatory hereto.
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-55
USER
By: ____________________________ DATE: _____/_______/_______
Member
Note: A certified corporate resolution, or equivalent, authorizing the above signatory to enter into this Agreement must accompany this Agreement.
STATE OF _____________________
COUNTY OF _______________, TO-WIT:
I, _________________________________, a Notary Public in and for the State of ___________, do hereby certify that ______________________, whose name is signed to the foregoing Agreement, did this day personally appear and acknowledge the same before me in my State and County aforesaid.
Given under my hand this ____ day of _____________, 20___.
____________________ _____________________
My Commission Expires Notary Public
TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL, VIRGINIA
By: _________________________________ Approved as to form:
Town Manager
_________________________________
Town Attorney
(Added 6-14-93-Effective 7-1-93; Amended Entire Section 6-12-95-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended (C) by Adding Service Agreement 5-14-19-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended by Adding “system development charges” in place of “tap” throughout and change title of “10” from “commission of local government” to “unenforceable provisions” 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
134-22.2 RESIDENTIAL SUMMER SEWER SERVICE RATES
A. The following sanitary sewer service rates may apply at the option of the customer for the months of any three (3) consecutive months between April and September inclusive of each year. The following summer rates shall apply only to residential sewer service. Commercial and industrial users shall not be eligible to receive summer sewer service rates.
B. Computation of rate.
1. For each participating residential user, an average month's usage will be calculated based on total water usage for October, November, December, January, February, and March of each participating year, divided by six (6).
2. If the monthly water usage for any three (3) consecutive months between April and September, inclusive, in the same participating year exceeds the average month's usage, as calculated herein, then the sewer service charge for those three (3) months will be reduced to that year's average month's usage.
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-56
C. To be eligible for participation in the summer sewer service rate plan, a residential user must apply at the Front Royal Town Hall, not later than March 31 of each participating year. No applications will be accepted after March 31. Residential users need not re-apply each year to continue participation in the program. Such participation in the program shall be renewed for such applicant by the Town automatically so long as such residential user continues to own the residential property to which such application and renewal applies. New residential users with no water usage history for any of the months October through March may not participate in the program for that year. Residential users who used no water during any of the months of October through March may not participate in the program for that year.
(Added Entire Section (A-C) 1-10-94-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended Entire Section 3-26-01-Effective Upon Passage)
134-22.3 SANITARY SEWER CONNECTIONS; FURNISHING AND REPAIR
A. Four four-inch sewer connections served by one-inch water meters or smaller, the customer shall have the option to provide, furnish and install the sanitary sewer connection in accordance with the Town of Front Royal’s Standards and at the customer’s cost and only upon prior written approval by the Town. Otherwise, and for all sewer connections larger than one inch, upon appropriate payment of the connection charge as provided in Section 134-22, the Town shall provide, furnish and install the following services, material, labor and equipment. Incurred costs for said services, material, labor and equipment shall be borne and paid for by the property owner or customer in all cases.
(Amended 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
1. The actual connection into the existing sanitary sewer line and connection with the customer's lateral sewer line.
2. All connection fittings, valves and sleeves.
3. The stub to the customer's property line for the customer's connection.
4. Necessary repairs to any existing sidewalk, pavement, landscaping or lawn caused by the town's sanitary sewer line connection measures.
B. The customer shall be responsible for all costs of the materials and installation of the equipment described in this Section. Upon the request of a customer for service, the Town shall prepare an estimate of the cost of all materials and installation of the meters and connections and all appurtenances to be installed and shall collect the amount from the customer prior to installation. In the event the final charge exceeds or is less than the estimate and payment, an additional billing or refund, respectively, shall be made by the Town. Failure of the customer to pay the additional charge within thirty (30) days may result in disconnection of the service until paid in full, including any reconnection and administrative fee.
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-57
C. The Town shall be responsible for the cost of maintenance, repair and/or replacement to the above-stated sanitary sewer line connection, materials and equipment. The Town shall not be responsible for the cost of repair, maintenance and/or replacement of any sewer lines, material or equipment located on the customer's property.
D. The customer shall have the option to provide, furnish and install the sanitary sewer connection at his cost and only upon prior written approval by the Town.
E. Subsection A shall not apply in the case of subdividers or developers required to install like improvements under the Town's Subdivision Ordinance (Chapter 148, Subdivision and Land Development). In such cases the town shall have no repair responsibility under Subsection B until and unless said improvements have been dedicated to and accepted by the Town.
(Added Entire Section (A-C) 1-10-94)
(Amended Entire Section (A-E) 9-26-05-Effective Upon Passage)
134-22.4 SEWER SERVICE RATES-COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL LAUNDRIES
A. In-Town Laundries: The monthly rates for sewer service usage by licensed commercial or industrial laundries located within the corporate limits of the Town of Front Royal shall be as follows:
1. All sanitary sewer service usage for the first one hundred thousand (100,000) gallons: fifteen dollars and forty-four cents ($15.44) per one thousand (1,000) gallons.
(Amended 6-12-95-Effective Upon Passage; 6-14-99-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended 5-28-02-Effective Upon Passage; 2-24-11-Effective 2-1-11; 5-23-11-Effective 7-1-11)
(Amended 6-10-13-Effective 7-1-13; 6-9-14-Effective 7-1-14; 6-8-15-Effective 7-1-15)
(Amended 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
2. All sanitary sewer usage from one hundred thousand one (100,001) gallons to five hundred thousand (500,000) gallons: fourteen dollars and three cents ($14.03) per one thousand (1,000) gallons.
(Amended 6-12-95-Effective Upon Passage; 6-14-99-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended 5-28-02-Effective Upon Passage; 2-24-11-Effective 2-1-11; 5-23-11-Effective 7-1-11)
(Amended 6-10-13-Effective 7-1-13; 6-9-14-Effective 7-1-14; 6-8-15-Effective 7-1-15)
(Amended 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
3. All sanitary sewer service usage above five hundred thousand (500,000) gallons: thirteen dollars and thirty-three cents ($13.33) per thousand (1,000) gallons.
(Renumbered to (1-3) and amended 9-25-06-Effective 8-1-06; 2-24-11-Effective 2-1-11)
(Amended 5-23-11-Effective 7-11-11; 6-10-13-Effective 7-1-13; 6-9-14-Effective 7-1-14)
(Amended 6-8-15-Effective 7-1-15; 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
B. Out-of-Town Laundries: The monthly rates for sewer service usage by licensed commercial or industrial laundries located outside the corporate limits of the Town of Front Royal shall be as follows:
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-58
1. The rates for sanitary sewer service usage furnished outside the limits of the Town of Front Royal: one hundred percent (100%) more than the in-town rates as provided above.
(Added Entire Section 3-14-94-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended Entire B 9-25-06-Effective 8-1-06; Amended 2-24-11-Effective 2-1-11)
134-22.5 WATER NOT DISCHARGED TO SEWERS EXCLUDED FROM RATES
Whenever a property upon which a sewer use charge is herein imposed uses water for an institutional or commercial purpose such that the water so used is not discharged into the sewerage system of the Town, the quantity of water so used and not discharged into the Town's sewers shall be excluded in determining the sewer use charge of said property. Provided however, that the portion not discharged to the sewer, in the opinion of the Town Manager taking into consideration the administrative cost to the Town and expected reduction to the user's charges for sewer service, is a significant volume and provided that the quantity of water so used and not discharged into the Town's sewers is determined, by measuring the volume either discharged or not discharged into the Town's sanitary sewer system. The determination of volume shall be by a device or devices, meter or meters, approved by the Director of Public Works & Utilities, and installed and operated without cost to the Town or determined by other means or methods approved by said Director of Public Works & Utilities; all without cost to the Town and only upon recommendation of the Director of Finance and provided the water supply is metered and the user pays for the water at meter rates applicable to that user.
The sewer use charge based upon the consumption of Town water to be paid by the user of said utility services shall be computed at the rates provided for, less the quantity not discharged into the Town's sewers. This section shall not apply to rates set pursuant to Section 134-23 if specifically excepted by the Town Council as part of the rate schedule or contract approved by the Town Council.
(Added Entire Section 1-12-98-Effective Upon Passage)
(Added “institutional” and “Public Works” 11-27-00-Effective Upon Passage)
134-23 INDUSTRIAL WATER AND SEWER RATES AND CHARGES
Notwithstanding any contrary provision of the Front Royal Town Code Chapter 134, the water and sewer rates and fees for industrial users, including but not limited to system development charge, inspection and monitoring fees, shall either be in accordance with a rate schedule approved by the Town Council or shall be in accordance with a contract by and between the individual industrial user and the Town of Front Royal as approved by the Town Council following public hearing to be held at the next regularly scheduled Town Council meeting, for which one (1) advertisement in a locally distributed newspaper shall be required.
(Added Entire Section 4-27-92 and 4-26-93-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended Entire Section 4-26-93-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended by adding “system development charge”6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
134-24 RESIDENTIAL SEWER BACKUP PROTECTION PROGRAM
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-59
A. Each Fiscal Year, subject to annual appropriation, the Town Council may, within its sole discretion, identify and appropriate funds within the Water and Sewer Enterprise Fund of its annual Budget, in a total amount of its sole selection, to provide individual grants not to exceed $750.00, each, to individual residential sewer customers for the sole and express purpose of providing partial funding for the installation of protective plumbing devices in the private sewer line of each such residence by private contractors of the customer’s selection. The sole purpose of such devices shall be to provide full or partial protection from an accidental backflow of untreated sewage into the residence of such customer. When the funds so appropriated in the aforesaid annual Budget have been exhausted, this program shall be terminated absolutely unless and until further funding is expressly approved by vote of the said Council, whether within the same Fiscal Year or in a succeeding Fiscal Year.
B. The Town Manager shall be solely responsible for the administration of the aforesaid grant program, and he shall prepare and submit Regulations to the Council as to how the program shall be operated. Unless and until such Regulations have been expressly approved by vote of the Council, the program, itself, shall not exist. At a minimum, said Regulations shall provide that the program shall be operated purely on a first-come first-served basis without bias or favoritism of any kind, that written applications by each and every residential customer shall be required in each case on a form and with such additional information as the said Regulations shall require, and that the said Council shall be the sole approving authority for the award of each said grant by majority vote. Applications which do not comply with the approved Regulations shall be rejected by the Town Manager and shall not be considered by the Council.
C. The Town shall make no payment to any approved grant applicant under this program, regardless of the approval of the grant by Council, unless and until the work to install the device has been completed after the applicant has obtained all necessary permits and completed all required inspections of the work, to specifically include testing of the device where required, and the applicant has submitted final accounts to the Town Manager for the cost of the work which he has approved.
(Added Entire Section 4-27-92-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended Entire Section & Title 1-10-11-Effective Upon Passage)
134-25 (RESERVED)
(Added Entire Section 4-27-92-Effective Upon Passage; Repealed 2-23-98-Effective Upon Passage)
134-26 EXTENSIONS TO DEVELOPMENTS; RESPONSIBILITY TO INSTALL MAINS WITHIN SUBDIVISION
A. When a proposed development within the corporate limits is located a distance greater than two hundred fifty (250) feet from the sewer system and an extension to the system is required to serve the development, the town may participate in the cost of the extension.
B. The developer of the subdivision must install water and sewer mains within the subdivision.
(Added Entire Section 4-27-92-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-60
134-27 TESTING STANDARDS
All tests and determinations shall be made in accordance with the requirements set forth at 40 CFR 136.
(Added Entire Section 4-27-92-Effective Upon Passage)
134-28 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES; LIABILITIES
A. Any person who violates this Article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.) or imprisoned in jail for a period not exceeding twelve (12) months, either or both. Each day such a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
B. In addition to any other penalties provided:
1. Every use of the town's sewer or water system shall be civilly liable in damages to the town for any injuries to the town's sewer or water system or for any injuries to third persons for which the town is liable caused or resulting from any violation of the provisions of this Article.
2. In addition to any criminal penalties for violations of this Article, the Town of Front Royal shall be empowered to seek injunctive relief against any person to remove any condition or to prevent any act which results in or contributes to a violation of this Article or which may constitute a threat or hazard to town water and sewer facilities, the health and safety of town personnel and citizens or a threat or hazard to receiving bodies of water.
(Added Entire Section 4-27-92-Effective Upon Passage)
134-29 PUBLICATION OF SIGNIFICANT VIOLATORS
The town shall publish annually, in a daily or weekly newspaper of significant circulation in the area where the municipal wastewater system is located, a list of significant violators, as defined herein, for the previous twelve (12) months.
(Added Entire Section 4-27-92-Effective Upon Passage)
PROVISIONS APLICABLE PARTICULARY TO WATER
134-30 SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT CHARGE ESTABLISHED
A. System development charge for water service, independent of and in addition to installation costs, will be based on meter size and service line size. The larger size will dictate the fee in conjunction with the following schedule:
(Amended 1-28-02-Effective Upon Passage; 9-26-05-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended by adding “system development charge” 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-61
1. Three-fourths-inch water connection: two thousand six hundred sixty-three dollars ($2,663.00) each.
(Amended 6-27-88-Effective 7-1-88; 6-29-90-Effective Upon Passage; 6-24-91-Effective 7-1-91)
(Amended 11-8-04-Effective Upon Passage; 1-24-11-Effective 2-1-11; 5-23-11-Effective 7-1-11)
(Amended 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
2. One-inch water connection: four thousand four hundred thirty-eight dollars ($4,438.00) each.
(Amended 6-27-88-Effective 7-1-88; 6-29-90-Effective Upon Passage; 6-24-91-Effective 7-1-91)
(Amended 11-8-04-Effective Upon Passage; 1-24-11-Effective 2-1-11; 5-23-11-Effective 7-1-11)
(Amended 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
3. One and one-half-inch water connection: eight thousand eight hundred seventy-seven dollars ($8,877.00) each.
(Amended 6-27-88-Effective 7-1-88; 6-29-90-Effective Upon Passage; 6-24-91-Effective 7-1-91)
(Amended 11-8-04-Effective Upon Passage; 1-24-11-Effective 2-1-11; 5-23-11-Effective 7-1-11)
(Amended 6-10-13-Effective 7-1-13; 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
4. Two-inch water connection: fourteen thousand two hundred three dollars ($14,203.00) each.
(Amended 6-27-88-Effective 7-1-88; 6-29-90-Effective Upon Passage; 6-24-91-Effective 7-1-91)
(Amended 11-8-04-Effective Upon Passage; 1-24-11-Effective 2-1-11; 5-23-11-Effective 7-1-11)
(Amended 6-10-13-Effective 7-1-13; 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
5. Three-inch water connection: thirty-one thousand sixty-eight dollars ($31,068.00) each.
(Added 4-10-00-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended 11-8-04-Effective Upon Passage; 1-24-11-Effective 2-1-11; 5-23-11-Effective 7-1-11)
(Amended 6-10-13-Effective 7-1-13; 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
6. Four-inch water connection: fifty-three thousand two hundred sixty dollars ($53,260.00) each.
(Amended 6-27-88-Effective 7-1-88; 6-29-90-Effective Upon Passage; 6-24-91-Effective 7-1-91)
(Amended 11-8-04-Effective Upon Passage; 1-24-11-Effective 2-1-11; 5-23-11-Effective 7-1-11)
(Amended 6-10-13-Effective 7-1-13; 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
7. Six-inch water connection: one hundred nineteen thousand eight hundred thirty-five dollars ($119,835.00) each.
(Added 9-24-90-Effective 9-21-90)
(Amended 6-24-91-Effective 7-1-91; 4-10-00-Effective Upon Passage; 11-8-04-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended 1-24-11-Effective 2-1-11; 5-23-11-Effective 7-1-11; 6-10-13-Effective 7-1-13)
(Amended 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
8. Eight-inch water connection: two hundred forty-eight thousand five hundred forty-seven dollars ($248,547.00) each.
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-62
(Amended 6-27-88-Effective 7-1-88; 6-29-90-Effective Upon Passage; 6-24-91-Effective 7-1-91)
(Amended 11-8-04-Effective Upon Passage; 1-24-11-Effective 2-1-11; 5-23-11-Effective 7-1-11)
(Amended 6-10-13-Effective 7-1-13; 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
9. Ten-inch water connection: three hundred seventy-two thousand eight hundred twenty dollars ($372,820.00) each
(Added 3-11-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended 11-8-04-Effective Upon Passage; 1-24-11-Effective 2-1-11; 5-23-11-Effective 7-1-11)
(Amended 6-10-13-Effective 7-1-13; 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
10. Twelve-Inch water connection: four hundred seventy thousand four hundred sixty-three dollars ($470,463.00) each.
(Added 3-11-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended 11-8-04-Effective Upon Passage; 1-24-11-Effective 2-1-11; 5-23-11-Effective 7-1-11)
(Amended 6-10-13-Effective 7-1-13; 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
B. The system development charge for water service exclusively used for fire-suppression systems will be based on the line size, according to the following fee schedule:
(Amended by adding “system development charge” 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
1. Three-inch line or smaller: one thousand tree hundred three dollars ($1,303.00) plus thirty-nine dollars and sixty-seven cents ($39.67) per month.
(Amended 6-24-91-Effective 7-1-91; 3-11-96-Effective Upon Passage; 6-14-99-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended 4-10-00-Effective Upon Passage; 11-8-04-Effective Upon Passage; 1-24-11-Effective 2-1-11)
(Amended 5-23-11-Effective 7-1-11; 6-10-13-Effective 7-1-13; 6-9-14-Effective 7-1-14; 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
2. Four-inch line: two thousand six hundred seven dollars ($2,607.00) plus seventy-nine dollars and thirty-two cents ($79.32) per month.
(Amended 6-24-91-Effective 7-1-91; 3-11-96-Effective Upon Passage; 6-14-99-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended 4-10-00-Effective Upon Passage; 11-8-04-Effective Upon Passage; 1-24-11-Effective 2-1-11)
(Amended 5-23-11-Effective 7-1-11; 6-10-13-Effective 7-1-13; 6-9-14-Effective 7-1-14; 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
3. Six-inch line: five thousand two hundred twelve dollars ($5,212.00) plus one hundred sixty-one dollars and forty-nine cents ($161.49) per month.
(Amended 6-24-91-Effective 7-1-91; 3-11-96-Effective Upon Passage; 6-14-99-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended 4-10-00-Effective Upon Passage; 11-8-04-Effective Upon Passage; 1-24-11-Effective 2-1-11)
(Amended 5-23-11-Effective 7-1-11; 6-10-13-Effective 7-1-13; 6-9-14-Effective 7-1-14; 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
4. Eight-inch line: seven thousand eight hundred nineteen dollars ($7,819.00) plus two hundred forty dollars and eighty cents ($240.80) per month.
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-63
(Amended 6-24-91-Effective 7-1-91; 3-11-96-Effective Upon Passage; 6-14-99-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended 4-10-00-Effective Upon Passage; 11-8-04-Effective Upon Passage; 1-24-11-Effective 2-1-11)
(Amended 5-23-11-Effective 7-1-11; 6-10-13-Effective 7-1-13; 6-9-14-Effective 7-1-14; 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
5. Ten-inch line: ten thousand four hundred twenty-six dollars ($10,426.00) plus three hundred twenty dollars and fourteen cents ($320.14) per month.
(Added 3-11-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended 6-14-99-Effective Upon Passage; 4-10-00-Effective Upon Passage; 11-8-04-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended 1-24-11-Effective 2-1-11; 5-23-11-Effective 7-1-11; 6-10-13-Effective 7-1-13)
(Amended 6-9-14-Effective 7-1-14; 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
6. Twelve-inch line: thirteen thousand thirty-three dollars ($13,033.00) plus three hundred ninety-nine dollars and forty-eight cents ($399.48) per month.
(Added 3-11-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended 6-14-99-Effective Upon Passage; 4-10-00-Effective Upon Passage; 11-8-04-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended 1-24-11-Effective 2-1-11; 5-23-11-Effective 7-1-11; 6-10-13-Effective 7-1-13)
(Amended 6-9-14-Effective 7-1-14; 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
C. The above standard fee schedule charges shall apply to apartments, houses, condominiums, commercial buildings and hostels.
D. For the purpose of this fee schedule, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
APARTMENT UNIT - A single dwelling unit in a multiple-unit structure which is occupied on a rental basis.
CONDOMINIUM - A single dwelling unit in a multiple-unit structure which is occupied on an ownership basis.
UNIT - Any single place of residence, any single place of business or any single hostelry room.
E. The standard fee schedule shall apply to the first unit of any structure. These standard fee schedule charges shall apply to each condominium unit.
F. The charges for apartments, condominium units and trailers will be two thousand three hundred seventy-one dollars ($2,371.00) for water service for each unit after the first unit.
(Amended 6-24-91-Effective 7-1-91; 3-11-96-Effective Upon Passage; 11-8-04-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended 6-10-13-Effective 7-1-13)
G. (RESERVED)
H. There will be an additional monthly charge for each water meter exceeding one (1) inch in size according to the following fee schedule:
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-64
1. One-and-one-fourth inch meter: seventeen dollars and thirty-five cents ($17.35) per month.
(Ord. No. 17-91 Amended 6-24-91-Effective 7-1-91 ; Ord. No. 3-95 Amended 6-12-95-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 11-99 Amended 6-14-99-Effective Upon Passage ; Ord. No. 14-04 Amended 11-8-04-Eff Upon Pass)
(Ord. No. 3-11 Amended 1-24-11-Effective 2-1-11 ; Ord. No. 9-11 Amended 5-23-11-Effective 7-11-11)
(Amended 6-10-13-Effective 7-1-13 ; Amended 6-9-14-Effective 7-1-14)
2. One-and-one-half inch meter: twenty-three dollars and twenty-eight cents ($23.28) per month.
(Ord. No. 17-91 Amended 6-24-91-Effective 7-1-91 ; Ord. No. 3-95 Amended 6-12-95-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 11-99 Amended 6-14-99-Effective Upon Passage ; Ord. No. 14-04 Amended 11-8-04-Eff Upon Pass)
(Ord. No. 3-11 Amended 1-24-11-Effective 2-1-11 ; Ord. No. 9-11 Amended 5-23-11-Effective 7-11-11)
(Amended 6-10-13-Effective 7-1-13 ; Amended 6-9-14-Effective 7-1-14)
3. Two-inch meter: fifty-five dollars and thirty-one cents ($55.31) per month.
(Ord. No. 17-91 Amended 6-24-91-Effective 7-1-91 ; Ord. No. 3-95 Amended 6-12-95-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 11-99 Amended 6-14-99-Effective Upon Passage ; Ord. No. 14-04 Amended 11-8-04-Eff Upon Pass)
(Ord. No. 3-11 Amended 1-24-11-Effective 2-1-11 ; Ord. No. 9-11 Amended 5-23-11-Effective 7-11-11)
(Amended 6-10-13-Effective 7-1-13 ; Amended 6-9-14-Effective 7-1-14)
4. Three-inch meter: two hundred ninety dollars and seventeen cents ($290.17) per month.
(Ord. No. 17-91 Amended 6-24-91-Effective 7-1-91 ; Ord. No. 3-95 Amended 6-12-95-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 11-99 Amended 6-14-99-Effective Upon Passage ; Ord. No. 14-04 Amended 11-8-04-Eff Upon Pass)
(Ord. No. 3-11 Amended 1-24-11-Effective 2-1-11 ; Ord. No. 9-11 Amended 5-23-11-Effective 7-11-11)
(Amended 6-10-13-Effective 7-1-13 ; Amended 6-9-14-Effective 7-1-14)
5. Four-inch meter: three hundred seventy-seven dollars and twenty-two cents ($377.22) per month.
(Ord. No. 17-91 Amended 6-24-91-Effective 7-1-91 ; Ord. No. 3-95 Amended 6-12-95-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 11-99 Amended 6-14-99-Effective Upon Passage ; Ord. No. 14-04 Amended 11-8-04-Eff Upon Pass)
(Ord. No. 3-11 Amended 1-24-11-Effective 2-1-11 ; Ord. No. 9-11 Amended 5-23-11-Effective 7-11-11)
(Amended 6-10-13-Effective 7-1-13 ; Amended 6-9-14-Effective 7-1-14)
6. Six-inch meter: five hundred eighty dollars and thirty-three cents ($580.33) per month.
(Ord. No. 17-91 Amended 6-24-91-Effective 7-1-91 ; Ord. No. 3-95 Amended 6-12-95-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 11-99 Amended 6-14-99-Effective Upon Passage ; Ord. No. 14-04 Amended 11-8-04-Eff Upon Pass)
(Ord. No. 3-11 Amended 1-24-11-Effective 2-1-11 ; Ord. No. 9-11 Amended 5-23-11-Effective 7-11-11)
(Amended 6-10-13-Effective 7-1-13 ; Amended 6-9-14-Effective 7-1-14)
I. All system development charges for water service furnished outside the limits of the Town of Front Royal will be one hundred percent (100%) more than the in-town rates as provided above. This section shall not apply to property located in the Belmont Subdivision of Warren County served by the water system constructed by the lot owners and subsequently conveyed to the Town of Front Royal.
(Amended to add “system development charge” 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-65
J. No system development charge for water service shall be accepted by the Town of Front Royal prior to the issuance of a zoning permit and the approval of a building permit application for building development or conversion upon the lot or parcel of land to be served. This provision shall not apply when the lot or parcel of land to be served has an existing structure approved for occupancy.
(Added 5-28-90-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended to add “system development charge” 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
K. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 134-30A through I, the system development charges for water service provided to structures and facilities which were existing as of May 20, 1991, in the following annexed areas of the Town of Front Royal shall be frozen at the rates in effect on the date of May 20, 1991, as follows:
(Amended to add “system development charge” 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
1. The annexed are incorporated into the Town of Front Royal by order of the Annexation Court, effective December 31, 1976, as shown by the plat of record in the annexation file of record in the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Warren County.
2. The annexed area incorporated into the Town of Front Royal by order of the Annexation Court effective December 31, 1978, as shown by the plat of record in the annexation file of record in the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Warren County.
(Added 6-24-91-Effective 7-1-91; Amended 7-22-91-Eff Upon Passage)
134-31 APPLICATION FOR WATER SUPPLY; WATER SUPPLY SERVICE CONTRACT REQUIRED
All applications for the supply of water must be made at the office of the Town Manager in person or by duly authorized attorney or agent of the customer on an application form furnished by the town. The application, when accepted by the town, will constitute a contract between the town and the consumer. It shall be unlawful for any person to use water from the town without having a water service contract.
(Amended to add “of the customer” 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
134-31.1 WATER SERVICE RATES
The monthly rates for water service usage shall be as follows:
A. Base rate, up to three thousand (3,000) gallons per month: nine dollars and ninety-two cents ($9.92) per month.
(Ord. No. 6-86 Amended 6-9-86-Effective 7-1-86 ; Ord. No. 14-91 Amended 6-10-91-Effective 7-1-9)
(Ord. No. 10-93 Amended 6-14-93-Effective 7-1-93 ; Ord. No. 4-95 Amended 6-12-95-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 8-99 Amended 6-14-99-Effective Upon Passage ; Ord. No. 6-10 Amended 6-28-10-Effective 7-1-10)
(Ord. No. 3-11 Amended 2-24-11-Effective 2-1-11 ; Ord. No. 9-11 Amended 5-23-11-Effective 7-11-11)
(Amended 6-10-13-Effective 7-1-13 ; Amended 6-9-14-Effective 7-1-14)
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-66
B. All water service usage exceeding three thousand (3,000) gallons per month: eight dollars and fifty-one cents ($8.51) per month, for each one thousand (1,000) gallons thereafter.
(Ord. No. 6-86 Amended 6-9-86-Effective 7-1-86 ; Ord. No. 14-91 Amended 6-10-91-Effective 7-1-91)
(Ord. No. 10-93 Amended 6-14-93-Effective 7-1-93 ; Ord. No. 4-95 Amended 6-12-95-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 8-99 Amended 6-14-99-Effective Upon Passage ; Ord. No. 6-10 Amended 6-28-10-Effective 7-1-10)
(Ord. No. 3-11 Amended 2-24-11-Effective 2-1-11 ; Ord. No. 9-11 Amended 5-23-11-Effective 7-11-11)
(Amended 6-10-13-Effective 7-1-13 ; Amended 6-9-14-Effective 7-1-14)
C. The rates for water service usage furnished outside of the limits of the Town of Front Royal:
1. One hundred percent (100%) more than the in-town rates as provided above, for areas not in the “U.S. Routes 522/340 Corridor Area, or “Route 522 Corridor Area”, or “Corridor Area”, hereinafter, “Corridor Area”, as described and defined in subparagraph (ii) below.
2.a. In the “Corridor Area”, commercial users (“Users”) of Town water services shall pay to the Town a rate for services equal to the charge to in-Town commercial/industrial users, plus an amount in lieu of all of the taxes (less and except, however, the equivalent of the Town’s meals and lodging taxes, as hereinafter set forth) and license fees the User would pay to the Town if User's premises, and all commercial activity thereon, or ancillary thereto, was located and occurring within the boundaries of Town, or “PILOT fees” (“Payments In Lieu of [Town] Taxes fees”). The annual amount due shall include all such taxes (less and except, however, the equivalent of the Town’s meals [food and beverage] and lodging taxes), and license fees, whether ordinarily imposed directly on the User and paid to the Town, or indirectly on User’s customers, collected by User and paid to the Town, as if User was located within the Town. Such indirectly imposed taxes shall not include the Town meals (food and beverage) taxes and Town lodging taxes. By February 1st each calendar year, User shall file with the Town a statement (“Statement”) of User’s previous year’s taxes in the following categories: (1) property taxes paid the County of Warren, Virginia; (2) gross receipts subject to a state sales tax, and business and professional occupational license taxes (excluding meals and lodging taxes collected); (3) a list of all automobiles for which license taxes were paid to Warren County; (4) any bank franchise tax paid on deposits in Warren County; and (5) any car rental tax paid. This information contained in the Statement will be used to calculate an amount equivalent to what User’s annual taxes or taxes collected and license fees would be if User were a Town resident or a Town business. This amount shall then be divided into twelfths and such resulting amount shall be added to User’s monthly bill for services.
b. If a commercial User in the Corridor Area is new to Warren County, the information required in the Statement above shall be estimated by the Town for purposes of determining the User’s rate for the first year of services.
c. The Corridor Area was originally described and defined in the “Amendment to an Agreement Between the County of Warren and the Town of Front Royal Regarding the Provision of Water and Sewer Service by the Town in the U.S. Route 522/340 North Corridor and the Assumption of Full Service Funding and Responsibility by the County of Fire/Rescue, Parks/Recreation Operations and Animal Control Services”, dated August 9,
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-67
1999, and as further ratified by “Final Order Validating and Affirming Voluntary Settlement Agreement Between the Town of Front Royal and the County of Warren”, said Order entered into by the Circuit Court of Warren County, Virginia, dated December 13, 1999, Case No.CL97000225. The Corridor Area originally is described and defined as being that area north of the corporate boundaries of the Town of Front Royal, in Warren County, on both sides of U.S. Routes 522/340 North, extending to Crooked Run on the West side of U.S. Routes 522/340 North to the tracks of the Norfolk and Southern Railroad Company on the East side of U.S. Routes 522/340 North, and between the Interstate-66 Interchange to the South and State Route 661 (Fairgrounds Road) to the North. The Corridor Area has since been amended and expanded, by Voluntary Settlement Agreement between the Town of Front Royal and the County of Warren, to additionally include Crooked Run West, which contains current Warren County Tax Map Parcel Numbers 12 M 2 9 (11.22ac), 12 M 2 10 (2.33ac), 12 M 2 11 (53.93 ac), 12 M 2 12 (20.00 ac), 12 M 2 13 (30.43 ac), and 12 M 2 14 (29.94 ac), in total containing 147.85 acres, more or less, all of which are part of the Corridor Area.
d. Users in the Corridor Area, in order to use Town public water and sewer utility services, shall enter into with the Town, and be subject to, an Out-of-Town Water and Sewage Service Agreement which contains provisions for “payments in lieu of taxes” fees, or “PILOT Fee Agreement”, which PILOT Fee Agreements shall be in substantially the following form:
TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL, VIRGINIA
OUT-OF-TOWN WATER AND SEWAGE SERVICE AGREEMENT
(Warren County Commercial/Industrial Freehold Users)
This Out-of-Town Water and Sewage Service Agreement (“Agreement”), is made this _____ day of ________________, 2_____ , by and between the Town of Front Royal, Virginia (“Town”) and __________________ LLC (“User”), owner of commercial/industrial property commonly known as _____, located in the County of Warren, Virginia, being the same property conveyed to User by deed recorded in Deed Book _______, Page_______, as instrument # _______, of the land records of the Warren County Circuit Court, and identified as Warren County Tax Map Parcel No. 12L 5 (“property”).
WHEREAS, the Town is authorized, pursuant to §§15.2-2119 and 15.2-2143 of the Code of Virginia, to operate outside of its boundaries, with the concurrence of the affected county, sewer services and water supply systems, and to contract for the use of such systems and services, and
WHEREAS, the Town operates sewer services and water supply systems outside of its boundaries and desires to contract to supply water and sewage services (“Services”) to commercial and industrial users (“Users”) located outside of its boundaries, and
WHEREAS, the County of Warren, Virginia, by separate agreement with the Town, concurs with the supplying of water and sewage services to such Users by the Town, and
WHEREAS, the User desires to obtain water and sewer services from the Town to its property via connection to the Town’s service mains (“service location”), and to enter into an agreement containing the terms and conditions for the supplying of Services which satisfies the contract requirements of Section 134.31 of the Code of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia.
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-68
NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of Town Work Order No.__________, incorporated herein by this reference, creating a service location for User, and of providing Services to User and/or such other good and valuable consideration, receipt of which is hereby acknowledged, User agrees to the following, which shall be binding upon User and User’s successors in interest, lessees, and assigns:
1. SERVICE ACCOUNT AND DEPOSIT
Account
Upon execution of this Agreement, The Town’s Department of Finance will open a service billing account (“Account”) for User’s service location and shall bill User for usage of Services supplied to such service location as determined by metering at User’s master meter. If User has tenants using Services supplied via the same service location, User’s usage shall be reduced by the usage of such tenants provided that each of such tenants have separate Accounts with Town, with usage determined by separate metering via separate tenant sub meters.
Deposit Amount
User shall pay to Town a deposit (“deposit”) to secure payment for Services. For an existing commercial/industrial service location at the property, the deposit required for Town Services shall be an amount equal to the highest monthly bill for that service location during the preceding twelve months of Services, or Two Hundred and Fifty Dollars ($250.00), whichever is greater.
For a newly created commercial/industrial service location at the property, the Town’s Department of Finance shall establish the required deposit at an amount estimated to equal to the User’s anticipated average monthly bill for Services.
Payment of Deposit, Interest and Refunds
Payment of the deposit is due upon the earlier of the execution of the Town’s service work order or the execution of this Agreement, and shall be held by Town in an interest-bearing account.
The deposit, plus any accrued interest, shall be refunded upon the closing of the Account in an amount equal to the deposit and accrued interest minus any amount deducted to satisfy User arrearages or other debts owing to the Town. Upon request of a refund, the Director of Finance shall first ensure that User does not have any debts owing to the Town. If the User is indebted to the Town, the Director of Finance will apply any refund toward satisfaction of these debts prior to the refund of any deposit balances to the User.
2. COMPLIANCE WITH LAW
User agrees to comply with all applicable ordinances of Town concerning Services, including, but not limited to, discharge standards, pretreatment of waste, system development charges, and agrees to accept all new rate schedules and fees that the Town Council of Town may from time to time establish and adopt.
3. OUT-OF–TOWN COMMERCIAL RATES AND FEES
User shall pay to the Town a rate for Services equal to the charge to in-Town commercial/industrial users, plus an amount in lieu of all of the taxes (less and except, however, the equivalent of the Town’s meals [food and lodging] and lodging taxes, ) and license fees the User would pay to the Town if User's Premises, and all commercial activity thereon, or ancillary thereto, was located and occurring within the boundaries of Town (“PILOT fees” or “Payments
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-69
In Lieu of [Town] Taxes fees”). The annual amount due shall include all such taxes (less and except, however, the equivalent of the Town’s meals [food and lodging] and lodging taxes, and hereinafter set forth) and license fees, whether ordinarily imposed directly on the User and paid to the Town, or indirectly on User’s customers, collected by User and paid to the Town, as if User was within the Town. Such indirectly imposed taxes shall not include the Town meals (food and beverage) tax and Town lodging tax. By February 1st each calendar year, User shall file with the Town a statement (“Statement”) of User’s previous year’s taxes in the following categories as may apply to User: (1) property taxes paid the County of Warren, Virginia; (2) gross receipts subject to a state sales tax, and business and professional occupational license taxes; (3) a list of all automobiles for which license taxes were paid to Warren County; (4) any bank franchise tax paid on deposits in Warren County; and (5) any car rental tax paid. This information contained in the Statement will be used to calculate an amount equivalent to what User’s annual taxes and license fees would be if User were a Town resident. This amount shall then be divided into twelfths and such resulting amount shall be added to User’s monthly bill for services.
If the User is new to doing business in Warren County, the information required in the Statement above shall be estimated by the Town for purposes of determining the User’s rate for the first year of services.
4. VERIFICATION OF FEES
For three years, User shall keep sufficient records to enable the Town to verify the accuracy of Statements submitted by User and the correctness of rates and fees under this Agreement. All such records, books of account and other information required to be kept by any taxing authority (“Records”) shall be open to inspection and examination by the Department of Finance of Town in order to allow the Town to determine compliance with the terms of this Agreement. The Town shall provide User with the option of having such audit conducted in a local business office of User where Records are maintained. In the event the Records are maintained outside Warren County, copies of the Records shall be sent to the Department of Finance upon written demand. The decision of the Town’s Director of Finance shall be final in determining whether Statements comply with the terms of this Agreement.
5. PAYMENTS
Due Date – Interest, Fees and Charges
A. User shall pay for water and sanitary sewer services provided by Town.
B. All payments on Accounts shall be due at Town’s Department of Finance by the close of business within twenty (20) days of the date of billing. Accounts for which full payment is not received within twenty (20) days, are delinquent. The Director of Finance shall notify the User in writing of all such delinquencies. A late charge of two percent (2%) of the delinquent bill shall be charged to the delinquent Account.
C. If the Account remains delinquent for ten (10) days after the original notice, an additional service charge of Twenty Dollars $20.00 shall be charged to the Account and interest shall commence accruing at the rate of interest permitted on omitted taxes and assessments under the "Underpayment Rate" established pursuant to § 6621 (a) (2) of the Internal Revenue Code plus two percent.
D. If such owner does not pay the full amount of charges, penalty, and interest for water provided or cease such disposal within ten (10) days after the delinquent fees and
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-70
charges charged for water or sewage disposal services are due, the Town’s Director of Finance may issue a service termination notice and may cease supplying water and sewage disposal services to User’s premises thereto unless an officer of the Virginia Department of Health certifies that shutting off the water will endanger the health of the occupants of User’s premises or the health of others. At least ten (10) business days prior to ceasing the supply of water or sewage disposal services, the Director of Finance shall provide the owner with written notice of such cessation. User shall have a right to request a hearing before the Finance Director during said ten (10) business day period to object to cessation of utility service, during which hearing said User may present evidence to support User’s position as to why utility service ought not to be disconnected for cause. E. A service charge will be required to reconnect services on an Account that has had Services terminated for non-payment. If the reconnection occurs during normal business hours, the reconnection fee shall be $20.00 for the first time; 1st; $30.00 for the second time; and $40.00 for the third time. At all other times other than normal business hours, the reconnection fee shall be one and one-half (1 ½) the reconnection fee during normal business hours.
F. If the fees and charges charged for water service or the use and services of the Town’s sewage disposal system by or in connection with User’s Premises are not paid when due, the User shall, until such fees and charges are paid with such penalty and interest to the date of payment, cease to dispose of sewage or industrial waste originating from or on such real estate by discharge thereof directly or indirectly into the Town’s sewage disposal system.
G. Such fees and charges, and any penalty and interest thereon, when unpaid as provided above, shall constitute a lien against the property, ranking on a parity with liens for unpaid taxes. A lien may be placed on the property by the Town when the owner of the Premises has been advised in writing that a lien may be placed upon the property if the owner of the Premises fails to pay any delinquent water and sewer charges when due as provided as above. Such written notice shall be provided at least 30 days in advance of recordation of any lien with a copy of the bill for delinquent water and sewer charges to allow the owner of the Premises a reasonable opportunity to pay the amount of the outstanding balance and avoid the recordation of a lien against the property. The lien may be in the amount of (i) up to the number of months of delinquent water or sewer charges when the water or sewer is, or both are, provided to the owner of the Premises; (ii) any applicable penalties and interest on such delinquent charges; and (iii) reasonable attorney fees and other costs of collection not exceeding 20 percent of such delinquent charges. In no case shall a lien for less than $25 be placed against the property.
Place of Payment
Payments shall be made by: 1) mail to Department of Finance, 102 E. Main Street, P.O. Box 1560, Front Royal, Virginia 22630, 2) deposit at the deposit box in the rear of the Town Hall, 3) delivery in person at the Town Hall, or 4) delivery to a designated bank.
Allocation of Payments
User recognizes and accepts that during a delinquency in the payment for services, any subsequent payment received will be applied first against the most delinquent Account balance.
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-71
6. TERMINATION OF SERVICES FOR BREACH OR FAILURE TO PAY
Grounds for Termination of Service
Services may be terminated for User’s failure to comply with any of the terms of this Agreement including failure to pay for services as agreed herein.
Notice
The Director will notify the User at User’s billing address (_______________________)
in writing, of all delinquencies, failures to comply with the terms of this Agreement, imminent service termination, and the right to contest as set forth below. The foregoing notwithstanding, the Town reserves the right to terminate Services as provided by Section 134-43 of the Code of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia. Notice of imminent service termination may be posted on the door of the premise at the service location with the delinquent Account, unless User and Town have previously agreed in writing to a different arrangement as to such notice.
Disconnection of Service
If such User does not pay the full amount of charges, penalty, and interest for water provided or cease such disposal within Ten (100) days after the delinquent fees and charges charged for water or sewage disposal services are due, the Town’s Director of Finance may issue a service termination notice and may cease supplying water and sewage disposal services to User’s premises thereto unless an officer of the Virginia Department of Health certifies that shutting off the water will endanger the health of the occupants of User’s premises or the health of others. At least ten (10) business days prior to ceasing the supply of water or sewage disposal services, the Director of Finance shall provide the owner with written notice of such cessation. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no services shall be terminated prior to the date set by the Town for a contest hearing as set forth in paragraph 5. D., above.
Conditions for Reconnection of Service
Once terminated, services shall not be restored to User until the outstanding balance (service fee(s), penalty, interest and reconnection fee(s)) for that service location is paid in full, unless the Director of Finance has approved other arrangements for payment in full.
7. RETURNED CHECK POLICY
If a check for payment on the Account is returned to the Town by its bank unpaid for any reason, the Director of Finance shall notify the User in the same manner as provided above. Unless payment in full, plus a $35.00 returned check service charge, is received by the Director by the close of business three days after the date of the notice, in addition to any rights allowed under State law, Services to the User’s service location shall be terminated. If the User presents the Town with more than two (2) returned checks during any twelve (12) month period, payment by check, other than in the form of cashier’s check or certified check, will no longer be accepted.
8. USE, INSTALLATION, AND INSPECTIONS
The User further agrees to the following conditions: (1) The User shall extend service via mains and/or laterals from the Town’s existing mains, with no new main construction required by the Town; (2) Extension of mains and the easements necessary for their installation and maintenance may be required to be dedicated and conveyed to the Town, such facilities and real property interests shall be accepted into the Town's system when they meet such standards and requirements as the Town may determine; (3) The User shall secure any necessary easement(s) for extension of laterals, with the easement(s) to include a clause allowing the Town to inspect the lines as required to ensure proper maintenance; (4) All construction must meet
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-72
the Town’s water and/or sewer construction standards; (5) The User bears the total cost of all extension; (6) The User shall pay the in-town water and/or sewer system development charge. If the User violates any of these conditions, the Town may terminate Services after written notice to the User. The User may contest the Town’s Notice of Default by contacting the Town Manager within five business days of the notice. The Town Manager will immediately schedule a hearing on the User’s claim that he is not in default. If the User’s challenge is not successful, Services will be terminated.
9. RIGHTS OF WAY / EASEMENTS
User agrees to execute and convey, upon request of Town, any and all rights of way and/or easements in favor of Town, in recordable form, necessary to perfect in Town the right to place, maintain and inspect any mains, laterals, lines, pipes, valves, meters and other infrastructure over, under and/or across the property necessary to supply and bill for water and sewage services to User and User’s tenants, if any. User agrees to pay the filing fee(s) for the recordation of any such rights of way and/or easements in the Circuit Court for Warren County. Any such filing fees will be billed to User.
10. UNENFORCEABLE PROVISIONS
In the event that, by act of the Virginia General Assembly, decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, or for any other reason beyond the control of Town, the provisions of this Agreement for payments in lieu of taxes as a component of the out-of-town rate for services is determined to be illegal, ultra vires or unenforceable, the parties to this Agreement further agree that the Town may immediately terminate Services to the User unless the parties to this Agreement agree on a legally permitted substitute fee in place of a payment in lieu of Town taxes as set forth in this Agreement. In the event that no such legal substitute is available, the Town may terminate this Agreement without cost or liability.
11. REPRESENTATIONS
By signing below, the User represents and certifies that User has read and fully understands this Agreement having had an opportunity to consult with legal counsel, that User is the owner of the premises to which this Agreement relates, that User agrees to comply fully with the terms of this Agreement, and that the individual executing this Agreement on behalf of User is an authorized signatory hereto.
USER
By: ____________________________ DATE: _____/_______/_______
Member
Note: A certified corporate resolution, or equivalent, authorizing the above signatory to enter into this Agreement must accompany this Agreement.
STATE OF _____________________
COUNTY OF _______________, TO-WIT:
I, _________________________________, a Notary Public in and for the State of ___________, do hereby certify that ______________________, whose name is signed to the
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-73
foregoing Agreement, did this day personally appear and acknowledge the same before me in my State and County aforesaid.
Given under my hand this ____ day of _____________, 20___.
____________________ _____________________
My Commission Expires Notary Public
TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL, VIRGINIA
By: _________________________________ Approved as to form:
Town Manager
_________________________________
Town Attorney
(Ord. No. 10-93 Added (C) 6-14-93-Effective 7-1-93 ; Ord. No. 4-95 Amended (C) 6-12-95-Eff Upon Passage)
(Amended (C) by Adding Service Agreement 5-14-18-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended by adding “system development charge throughout and title for (10)6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
134-31.2 WATER SERVICE RATES-COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL LAUNDRIES
A. In-Town Laundries: The monthly rates for water service usage by licensed commercial or industrial laundries located within the corporate limits of the Town of Front Royal shall be as follows:
(Added “In-Town Laundries” 9-25-06-Effective 8-1-06)
1. The first one hundred thousand (100,000) gallons: nine dollars and fourteen cents ($9.14) per one thousand (1,000) gallons.
(Added 3-14-94-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended 6-12-95-Effective Upon Passage; 6-14-99-Effective Upon Passage; 6-12-06-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended 2-24-11-Effective 2-1-11; 5-23-11-Effective 7-11-11; 6-10-13-Effective 7-1-13)
(Amended 6-9-14-Effective 7-1-14)
2. One hundred thousand one (100,001) gallons to five hundred thousand (500,000) gallons: eight dollars and thirty cents ($8.30) per one thousand (1,000) gallons.
(Added 3-14-94-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended 6-12-95-Eff Upon Passage; 6-12-06-Effective Upon Passage; 2-24-11-Effective 2-1-11)
(Amended 5-23-11-Effective 7-11-11; 6-10-13-Effective 7-1-13; 6-9-14-Effective 7-1-14)
3. Above five hundred thousand one (500,001) gallons: seven dollars and eighty-nine cents ($7.89) per one thousand (1,000) gallons.
(Added 3-14-94-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended 6-12-95-Eff Upon Passage; 6-12-06-Effective Upon Passage; 2-24-11-Effective 2-1-11)
(Amended 5-23-11-Effective 7-11-11; 6-10-13-Effective 7-1-13; 6-9-14-Effective 7-1-14)
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-74
B. Out-of-Town Laundries: The monthly rates for water service usage by licensed commercial or industrial laundries located outside the corporate limits of the Town of Front Royal shall be as follows:
1. The rates for water usage furnished outside the limits of the Town of Front Royal: one hundred percent (100%) more than the in-town rates as provided above.
(Added (B) 3-14-94-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended (B) 9-25-06-Effective 8-1-06; 2-24-11-Effective 2-1-11)
134-32 FURNISHING OF WATER METERS AND APPURTENANCES; REPAIRS
A. Connections under 2" on development of existing in-fill lots:
(Amended by adding “connections” 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
1. Upon appropriate payment of the system development charge(s) as provided in Section 134-30, and in consideration whereof, the Town shall, subject to 134-32.A.3. and A.4. below, provide, furnish and install the following services, material, labor and equipment. Incurred costs for said services, material, labor and equipment shall be borne and paid for by the property owner.)
(Amended 9-26-05-Effective Upon Passage; 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
a. The connection into the existing waterline.
b. All fittings, valves and sleeves deemed necessary by the Town for said tap.
c. All appurtenances deemed necessary by the Town including the service line to the meter, water meter jar, angle valve, yoke bar, flanges, gaskets, back-flow prevention device, ring & lid assembly, and up to five feet of pig-tail at the property. The meter will be located at the Town right-of-way/easement/property line.
(Amended 9-26-05-Effective Upon Passage)
d. The Town will own and maintain all appurtenances up to the discharge side of the water meter/back-flow device.
2. The customer shall be responsible for all costs of the materials and installation of the equipment described in this Section. Upon the request of a customer for service, the Town shall prepare an estimate of the cost of all materials and installation of the meters and connections and all appurtenances to be installed, in addition to the system development charges described in Section 134-30, and shall collect the amount from the customer prior to installation. In the event the final charge exceeds or is less than the estimate and payment, an additional billing or refund, respectively, shall be made by the Town. Failure of the customer to pay the additional charge within thirty (30) days may result in disconnection of the service until paid in full, including any reconnection and administrative fee.
(Added 9-26-05-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended by adding “system development charges” 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-75
3. For one-inch water connections and smaller, the customer shall have the option to provide, furnish and install the water system connection in accordance with the Town of Front Royal Standards and Specifications at the customer’s cost and only upon prior written approval by the Town.
(Added 6-8-30-Effective 7-1-20)
4. Subsection A shall not apply in the case of subdividers or developers required to install like improvements under the Town’s Subdivision Ordinance (Chapter 148, Subdivision and Land Development). In such cases the Town shall have no repair responsibility under Subsection A until and unless said improvements have been dedicated to and accepted by the Town.
(Added 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
B. Taps 2" and greater and development of any parcels other than existing in-fill lots:
(Amended 9-26-05-Effective Upon Passage)
1. The customer will be responsible for the purchase, excavation and installation of the meter vault, water meter, valves, piping, back-flow device, and all other appurtenances deemed necessary by the Town and County.
2. The materials and configuration and installation of all appurtenances shall be in compliance with the Town of Front Royal Standards and Specifications.
3. After the installation and final inspection, the Town of Front Royal will assume full ownership and maintenance of the vault and Town required appurtenances.
C. All services will be protected with back-flow protection devices.
D. For water taps used exclusively for fire suppression systems:
1. The Town will tap the main line and extend the service as a stub to the edge of the right-of-way/easement/property line.
2. The customer will be responsible for the excavation and installation at the edge of the right-of-way/easement/property line for the required vault and appurtenances deemed necessary by the Town of Front Royal and by the customer and in compliance with all applicable codes and regulations.
3. Upon final inspection, the Town will assume responsibility and maintenance for the vault and all appurtenances deemed necessary by the Town of Front Royal.
4. The installation and appurtenances will be in compliance with the Town of Front Royal Standards and Specifications.
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-76
E. The Town will not be responsible for the cost of repair, maintenance and/or replacement of any lines, materials or equipment located on the customer's property from and beyond the end point of the Town owned meter vault.
F. The Town thereafter shall be responsible for the cost of repair and/or replacement to the above-stated waterline connection, materials and equipment. The Town shall not be responsible for the cost of repair, maintenance and/or replacement of any lines, material or equipment located on the customer's property from and beyond the end point of the town-installed tail specified at Subsection (E) herein.
G. Subsection A shall not apply in the case of subdividers or developers required to install like improvements under the Town's Subdivision Ordinance (Chapter 148, Subdivision and Land Development). In such cases the Town shall have no repair responsibility under Subsection B until and unless said improvements have been dedicated to and accepted by the Town.
(Amended Entire Section 1-10-94 and 1-28-02-Effective Upon Passage)
134-33 (RESERVED)
(Repealed 1-28-02-Effective Upon Passage)
134-34 COMPLIANCE AND APPROVAL REQUIRED
No water taps shall be made until all the requirements contained in the laws and ordinances as to plumbing have been complied with and approved by the Plumbing Inspector.
134-35 REMOVAL OR REPAIR OF METERS AND FIXTURES
No person except an officer or agent authorized by the town shall at any time remove or undertake to repair or in any way interfere with any water meter or fixtures connected therewith.
134-36 REMOVAL OF METERS FOR TESTING; PAYMENT OF BILL WHEN COMPLAINT IN PROCESS
A. The town shall not be required to remove and test meters or substitute new meters at the demand of consumers, unless there is good reason to believe such meters are inaccurate.
B. A complaint against a water bill shall not be taken as a proper excuse for nonpayment of same when due or exempt the complainant from the penalties prescribed for failing to pay his bill at the proper time.
134-37 CHARGE FOR REINSPECTION OF METER
A charge, as established by resolution, shall be added to the water bill of each consumer who, by his request, has the town test and inspect a water meter, when said water meter has been tested and inspected by the town at the request of the consumer within a previous twelve-month period.
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-77
Should, however, the water meter be found to be inaccurate or malfunctioning, the charge will not be assessed.
(Amended 1-26-04-Effective 3-1-04)
134-38 USE OF WATER BY SEVERAL CONSUMERS ON ONE METER
A. When more than one (1) supply is made through one (1) service pipe and under control, in the street, of one (1) stopcock, one (1) person must make application for all such supplies, and the bill will be made to such applicant for all the parties so supplied.
B. Permits for the use of water will not be granted to a block of stores, shops, tenements or rooms occupied by different parties or families using water through the same meter, unless the application shall be made by the landlord or agent of such premises, and all rents and bills for water are to be charged to and collected from him or his agent.
C. The use of water and/or sewer submetering equipment may be used in a commercial or residential occupied by more than one tenant or user if clearly stated in the rental agreement or lease for the leased premises or dwelling unit.
(Added 6-27-05-Effective Upon Passage)
D. Separate buildings shall be provided with separate water meters at the property line. The connection of more than one building to the same meter shall not be allowed except by special permission shall include: additional building(s), landscaping irrigation, decorative fountains/fish pools, swimming pools, and multiple living quarters. In granting such special permission, the Town Manager shall ensure that:
1. Such special permission is applied to single ownership of a lot and/or business;
2. All connections safeguard the health and safety of the public, and shall be made in accordance with the Town's water and sewer specifications manual;
3. The Town's ability to operate the utility system and collect revenues is not inhibited;
4. The new connection is terminated should the property or building supporting the extra connection be conveyed or leased;
5. The consumption rate of the combined use will not be detrimental to trunkline flow or pressure;
6. All sub-meter installations will be inspected by the Town of Front Royal Utilities Inspector;
7. All primary and sub-meter installations will be equipped with backflow protection devices and isolation valves;
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-78
8. Isolation valves are installed to effectively turn off all primary and secondary water supplies independently without interruption of the remaining services.
(Added as “C” 9-27-99-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended as “C and Added 1-8” 7-24-00-Effective Upon Passage)
E. Notwithstanding the provisions of subparagraphs D1 and D4 above, the Town Council may approve an application for the extension of a water service line with or without a submeter to an additional building from a principal building on the same parcel of land, provided that the terms and conditions described in paragraphs A, B, D2, D3, D5, D6, and D7 above are met.
(Ord. No. 7-02 Added as (D) 5-13-02-Eff Upon Pass ; Ord. No. 13-05 Amended (E) 6-27-05-Eff Upon Pass)
134-39 METERING WHEN MORE THAN ONE SERVICE PIPE SUPPLIES PREMISES
When more than one (1) service pipe is used to supply water to one (1) house or tenement, the landlord will be required, before the water shall be allowed to be used at such premises, to have the pipe so arranged that all the water on the premises shall pass through one (1) meter, or if he prefers to do so, additional meters will be furnished by the town, the cost of which, together with the cost of setting the same, meter boxes, repairs, etc., shall be paid by the landlord as provided in this Article.
134-40 REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT OF METERS OR BOXES BECAUSE OF NEGLIGENCE OF CONSUMER
All repairs or replacements of meters or meter boxes caused by carelessness, neglect or interference of consumers shall be made by the town at the expense of the person responsible for the water bill.
134-41 METER ACCESS
It shall be unlawful for any person to access a water pit or vault and operate any facilities contained within except for the following:
A. Town employees whose job responsibility it is to maintain the Town’s water system.
B. In the event of an emergency at a residence where continued water service will cause damage to the residential structure, bonded plumbers who are licensed in Virginia may access the meter to turn off water at a residence provided the plumber has contacted the Police Department.
C. Bonded plumbers or contractors who are licensed in Virginia who have contracted with the Town to perform work on the Town’s water system.
Violation of the Code Section shall be subject to a tampering fine established by the Town.
(Amended Entire Section 7-14-14-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-79
134-42 REPAIRING OF LEAKS
All leaks in or upon all premises supplied with water must be promptly repaired by the owners or occupant, and, on failure to make such repairs with reasonable dispatch, the town may turn off the water from the premises until necessary repairs are made and charge one dollar ($1.) for turning the same on again.
134-43 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE
A. The town reserves the right to discontinue its service without notice for any of the following reasons:
1. Repair.
2. Want of supply.
3. Nonpayment of water bills when due.
4. Any fraudulent representation in relation to consumption of service.
5. Violation of contract or any rules or regulations applying at any time to consumer's service.
6. Detriment to service in general, in immediate locality, caused by service to particular consumer.
7. Riots, strikes, insurrection or acts of God.
B. The Town shall not be liable for damages to any person for such cutting off of service.
134-44 WASTE, UNAUTHORIZED USE OF WATER
A. If the occupant of a lot or tenement, on which has been erected or placed a hydrant, cock or other fixture to supply water, shall permit the water to run from hydrant, cock or fixture without proper care to prevent waste or shall permit the water to be used, taken or received by any person other than such occupant or member or visitor of his family, except in cases of necessity, there shall in each case be imposed a fine on the occupant of not less than five dollars ($5.) nor more than twenty-five dollars ($25.). In the latter case, there shall be a like fine on the person so using, taking or receiving the water. In every such case, the town shall stop the water from such lot or tenement and not turn it on again until a satisfactory assurance is given that a like case will not happen again. If any hydrant, cock or other fixture is found leaking, and the owner or occupant of the premises shall refuse or fail to have the necessary repairs made, or if any hydrant, located in an exposed place is not protected so as to prevent its being used by the public generally, the town may cut off the supply of water, and there shall be imposed a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.) on any person who shall turn on the water before such repairs are made or the hydrant is protected as aforesaid.
B. All willful waste of water and waste through neglect of servants or agents or by any fixture being out of order or allowing water to be taken from premises by persons having no right to use it, except in cases of necessity, shall be sufficient cause of cutting off the supply to any premises and forfeiture of the amount of the bill paid in advance or sufficient cause for withholding the supply for such terms as the town may decide.
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-80
134-45 OPENING OF FIRE HYDRANTS
Fire hydrants shall not be opened without the consent of the Town Manager, except for use in extinguishing fire.
134-46 UNAUTHORIZED REMOVAL FROM HYDRANT, TROUGH, FOUNTAIN OR FIRE-SUPPRESSION SYSTEM
A. No person shall take or carry away water from any hydrant, watering trough, drinking or public fountain without written authority to do so from the town.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to take, divert or make use of water for any purpose other than fire suppression from a connection with the town water lines, or any line leading therefrom, installed for a fire-suppression system and assessed a system development charge on that basis.
(Amended to add “system development charge” 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
C. Use of water removed from a fire hydrant by the Fire Department for non-emergency or training purposes shall be pre-approved by the Town Manager. Non-emergency use shall be metered for possible payment. (Added (C) 7-14-14-Effective Upon Passage)
134-47 LOCATION OF EQUIPMENT FOR CUTTING OFF WATER
A wrench and key for cutting off water shall be in the custody of the Police Department at police headquarters, to which calls for emergency service shall be made.
134-48 OBSTRUCTING OR INJURING FIXTURES
No person shall place any building material, rubbish or other matter on a stopcock, meter box or valve of the street main or service pipe or obstruct any fixture connected with the waterworks or remove or injure the pipe, fireplug, hydrant or cock.
134-49 RESERVOIRS
No person shall, without proper authority, enter the enclosures around the town reservoirs or interfere in any manner with such enclosures or the water contained in the town reservoirs or throw sticks, stones, trash or any other matter or substance whatever into any of the reservoirs or basins or disturb or in any manner violate the water falling into or contained in any of the reservoirs or basins or bathe within one thousand (1,000) feet above the Shenandoah River pump intake.
134-50 APPOINTMENT OF SPECIAL POLICEMAN AT PUMPHOUSE
The Town Manager may appoint a special policeman to act at the pumphouse, whose duty it shall be to arrest any person who may be found violating this Article or other ordinance of the town within the vicinity of the pumphouse, reservoirs and reservoir enclosures.
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-81
134-51 COVERS FOR METER BOXES
A cast-iron cover of a style approved by the town shall be placed over the meter box.
134-52 PIPE STANDARDS
Only galvanized wrought-iron, copper or brass pipe approved by the town shall be used for water services from the water main to the curbstone stopcock. When pipe is required larger than two (2) inches in diameter, cast-iron pipes of standard weight as approved by the town shall be used. All wrought-iron pipe used in connection with the water system shall be of the best-quality guaranteed wrought-iron galvanized pipe, tested by hydrostatic pressure to three hundred (300) pounds per square inch. No service pipe from the curbstone stopcock shall be less than one-half-inch pipe.
134-53 CUTOFF VALVE REQUIRED
There shall be placed in the water service pipe entering premises inside or outside of the walls of the premises to be supplied with water a cutoff valve to control all water inside the house.
134-54 PIPE LAID OUTSIDE TOWN LIMITS
All water pipes laid outside the town limits for connection to the town's pipe lines or pipes through which the town is supply water shall be laid in accordance with specifications of the town and subject to inspection at all times by the Town Manager or any of his authorized agents.
134-55 RULES AND REGULATIONS OF WATER DEPARTMENT
The Town Water Department may make, from time to time, such rules and regulations for furnishing water to consumers as it may deem proper, to take effect when approved by the Town Council. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail, neglect or refuse to comply with such rules and regulations.
134-56 THROUGH 63 (RESERVED)
(Repealed Entire Article “Water & Sewer construction & Assessments”5-11-98-Effective Upon Passage)
BILL AND CHARGES
134-64 COLLECTING OFFICE FOR BILL PAYMENT
All bills for water supplied by the town and for sewer service shall be paid at the collecting office of the Town Manager.
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-82
134-65 CONTINUANCE OF RATES
Rates charged, as of the effective date of this chapter, by the town for water supplied by the town and for town sewer service shall continue in effect until changed by the Council.
134-66 EXEMPTIONS FROM CHARGES
A. Effective July 1, 1982, no charge shall be made for the first three thousand (3,000) gallons of water supplied each month to any building owned or occupied by a church or religious body and used wholly and exclusively for religious worship and education.
B. Effective July 1, 1982, no charge shall be made for the first three thousand (3,000) gallons of sewer service supplied each month to any building owned or occupied by a church or religious body and used wholly and exclusively for religious worship and education.
134-67 WATER METER RENTAL CHARGES
There shall be a charge for the rent of a water meter as provided by the Council. The charge for rent of a water meter charged as of the effective date of this chapter shall continue in effect until changed by the Council.
134-68 CHARGE WHEN METER OUT OF ORDER
If any water meter gets out of order or fails to register accurately, the consumer will be charged at the average daily rate as shown by the meter when in order.
134-69 CHARGE TO BE MADE FOR ALL WATER PASSING THROUGH METER
A charge will be made for all water passing through meters, whether used or wasted, even though the house or premises may not be occupied. When premises are unoccupied, owners may have water cut off by notice to the Town Managers office.
134-70 REGULATIONS FOR PAYMENT OF WATER AND SEWER SERVICE BILLS
Water and sewer service bills shall be paid in accordance with the regulations adopted by the Town Council. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail, neglect or refuse to comply with such regulations.
134-71 UTILITY ACCOUNTS DEPOSITS, PAYMENTS AND TERMINATION OF SERVICE
A. DEPOSIT:
1. a. Residential Service Location Amount: For an existing residential service location, the deposit required for Town utility services after September 9, 2019 shall be an amount
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-83
equal to the highest monthly bill for that location during the preceding twelve months or two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00), whichever is greater.
(Amended Deposit Amount 9-9-19-Effective Upon Passage)
b. Commercial Service Location: For an existing commercial service location, the deposit required for Town utility services shall be an amount equal to twice the average monthly bill for that location during the preceding twelve months or five hundred dollars ($500.00), whichever is greater.
(Amended Deposit Amount 9-9-19-Effective Upon Passage)
c. Newly Established Location: To calculate the amount of the deposit for newly established residential or commercial service locations, the Front Royal Department of Finance shall establish the deposit at an amount equal to the customer's anticipated monthly usage of water and electric service, as may be the case.
d. Reinstatement of Deposit: If, at any time, the customer's deposit is waived or returned, as set forth below, but the customer's service subsequently is terminated for nonpayment or the customer has made four late payments during any twelve month period, a deposit, in an amount as set forth above, shall be required.
(Added (e) 9-9-19-Effective Upon Passage; Removed (e) 1-13-20-Effective Upon Passage)
2. Service Location Deposit Waiver: Notwithstanding the foregoing, no service location deposit shall be required hen an acceptable credit history is furnished by the customer from a previous utility provider. Acceptable credit history is defined as a customer who can demonstrate that during the previous twelve months his bills were paid with no more than four (4) late payments on a monthly billing system or no more than two (2) late payments on a bimonthly system.
(Removed “residential” 1-13-20-Effective upon passage)
3. Payment of Deposit: Payment of the deposit is due upon execution of the service work order. In lieu of the foregoing, when the required deposit for a residential service location exceeds five hundred dollars ($500) or a commercial service location exceeds one thousand dollars ($1,000), the deposit may be paid in two equal installments with one half due when the work order is signed and pay the remaining half along with the payment for the first month's service.
(Amended 9-9-19-Effective Upon Passage)
4. Interest and Refunds: Deposits shall be held in an interest-bearing account.
a. Service location deposits plus interest shall be refunded either: (1) upon termination of the service account in an amount equal to the deposit and accrued interest minus any amount deducted to satisfy customer arrearages or other debts owing to the Town; or (2) upon the customer's request after a period of twelve months of service during which there were no more
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-84
than four delinquent payments. Upon request of a refund, the Director of Finance shall first ensure that customer does not have any debts owing to the Town. If the customer is indebted to the Town, the Director of Finance will apply any refund toward satisfaction of these debts prior to the refund of any money to the customer.
(Added (b) 9-9-19-Effective Upon Passage ; Removed “residential” and (b)-Effective Upon Passage)
B. PAYMENTS:
1. Due Date - Fines and Charges: All payments for water, sewer, electric, and garbage collection services shall be due within 20 days of the date of billing. Accounts, for which full payment is not received within 20 days, are delinquent. A late charge of 2% of the delinquent bill immediately shall be charged to the delinquent account. If the account remains delinquent for 10 days after the original notice, an additional service charge of $10.00 shall be charged. Finally, a service charge will be required to reconnect service that has been discontinued due to non-payment. If the reconnection occurs during normal business hours, the reconnection fee shall be $20.00-first reconnection fee; $30.00-second reconnection fee; $40.00-third reconnection fee; $50.00-reconnection fee for all other times.
(Amended by Adding Reconnection Fees 1-28-13-Effective Upon Passage)
2. Allocation of Payments: During a delinquency in the payment for any service (electric, water, sewerage, or garbage collection) any subsequent payment received for services will be applied first against the most delinquent account which is not subject to a defense of any applicable statute of limitations.
3. Budget Billing: Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Director of Finance, in his discretion, may enter into agreements with customers for alternative billing and payment schedules with persons on fixed or limited incomes.
4. The Town of Front Royal may take all lawful action to collect all debts owed to the municipality which have become overdue.
(Added (4) 9-9-19-Effective Upon Passage)
C. TERMINATION OF SERVICES:
1. Notice: The Director of Finance shall notify the customer in writing of all delinquencies, imminent service termination, and right to contest as set forth below. Notice also shall be posted on the door of the premise with the delinquent account.
(Amended by Removing “20-day” 9-9-19-Effective Upon Passage)
2. Protest: The customer may contest the bill by contacting the Director of Finance for the Town of Front Royal who will immediately schedule a hearing on the customer's claim that his account is not delinquent.
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-85
3. Disconnection of Service: If the matter is not successfully contested by the customer and arrearages remain 10 days after the date of the aforementioned notices, service shall be disconnected. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no services shall be disconnected prior to a requested hearing.
(Amended (3) 9-9-19-Effective Upon Passage)
4. Persons in Poor Health: Customer may seek an additional 30 days before water and electric services are disconnected if the Director of the Warren County Health Department certifies in writing to the Town of Front Royal Director of Finance that the customer has a serious medical condition or the customer resides with a family member with a serious medical condition. Upon providing certification the service termination may be delayed twice within a 12-month period, but may not be consecutive, certification shall be valid for period of 365 days.
(Amended 1-28-13-Effective Upon Passage)
5. Conditions for Reconnection of Service: Once disconnected, services shall not be restored to that customer until the outstanding balance (service fee(s), penalty, and reconnection fee(s)) for that service location is paid in full, unless the Director of Finance has approved other arrangements for payment in full.
D. RETURNED PAYMENT POLICY: If a payment is returned to the Town for any reason, the Director of Finance shall notify, in the same manner as provided above, the Customer. If payment, in full, plus a $35.00 service charge is not received by the close of business three days after the date on the notice, all utility services to the customer's service location shall be disconnected. If the customer presents the Town with more than two bad checks during any twelve-month payment, payment by check will no longer be accepted.
(Amended Service Charge 1-28-13-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended Entire Section 2-23-98-Effective Upon Passage)
E. System Development Charges shall be paid upon application.
(Added “E” 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
134-71.1 (RESERVED)
(Added Entire Section 2-10-86-Effective Upon Passage; Removed 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
134-71.2 (RESERVED)
(Repealed Entire Section “Water Availability Districts” 10-22-07-Effective Upon Passage)
CROSS-CONNECTION AND BACKFLOW CONTROL IN WATERWORKS
(Adopted 10-9-78)
134-72 DEFINITIONS
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-86
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AIR-GAP SEPARATION - The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying pure water to a tank, plumbing fixture or other device and the rim of the receptacle.
AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM - Any water system on or available to the premises other than the waterworks. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor's waterworks or water from a source, such as wells, lakes or streams, or process fluids or used water. They may be polluted or contaminated or objectionable or constitute a water source or system over which the water purveyor does not have control.
BACKFLOW - The flow of contaminants, pollutants, process fluids, used water, untreated waters, chemicals, gases or nonpotable waters into any part of a waterworks.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE - Any approved device, method or type of construction intended to prevent backflow into a waterworks.
CONSUMER - The owner or person in control of any premises supplied by or any manner connected to a waterworks .
CONSUMER'S WATER SYSTEM - Any water system located on the consumer's premises, supplied by or in any manner connected to a waterwork.
CONTAMINATION - Any introduction into pure water of microorganisms, wastes, wastewater, undesirable chemicals or gases.
CROSS-CONNECTION - Any connection or structural arrangement, direct or indirect, to the waterworks where backflow can occur.
DEGREE OF HAZARD - A term derived from an evaluation of the potential risk to health and the adverse effect upon the waterworks.
DOUBLE GATE - DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY - An approved assembly composed of two (2) single, independently acting check valves, including tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly and petcocks and test gauges for testing the watertightness of each check valve.
HEALTH HAZARD - Any condition, device or practice in a waterworks or its operation that creates or may create a danger to the health and well-being of the water consumer.
INTERCHANGEABLE CONNECTION - An arrangement or device that will allow alternate but not simultaneous use of two (2) sources of water.
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-87
POLLUTION - The presence of any foreign substance (chemical, physical, radiological or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute an unnecessary risk or impair the usefulness of the water.
POLLUTION HAZARD - A condition through which an aesthetically objectionable or degrading material may enter the waterworks or a consumer's water system.
PROCESS FLUIDS - Any fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted which would constitute a health, pollutional or system hazard if introduced into the waterworks. This includes, but is not limited to:
A. Polluted or contaminated waters.
B. Process waters.
C. Used waters originated from the waterworks which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality.
D. Cooling Waters.
E. Contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes, streams or irrigation systems.
F. Chemicals in solution or suspension.
G. Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other
processes or for fire-fighting purposes.
PURE WATER or POTABLE WATER - Water fit for human consumption and use which is sanitary and normally free of minerals, organic substances and toxic agents in excess of reasonable amounts for domestic usage in the area served and normally adequate in supply for the minimum health requirement of the persons served.
REDUCED-PRESSURE-PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE - A device containing a minimum of two (2) independently acting check valves, together with an automatically operated pressure-differential relief valve located between the two (2) check valves. During normal flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two (2) checks shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure between the check valves at less than the supply pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with properly located test cocks. These devices must be of the approved type.
SERVICE CONNECTION - The terminal end of a service line from the waterworks. If a meter is installed at the end of the service, then the "service connection" means the downstream end of the meter.
SYSTEM HAZARD - A condition posing an actual or threat of damage to the physical properties of the waterworks or a consumer's water system.
USED WATER - Any water supplied by a water purveyor from waterworks to a consumer water system after it has passed through the service connection.
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-88
WATER PURVEYOR - An individual, group of individuals, partnership, firm, association, institution, corporation, municipal corporation, county or authority which supplies water to any person within this state from or by means of any waterworks.
WATERWORKS - All structures and appliances used in connection with the collection, storage, purification and treatment of water for drinking or domestic use and the distribution thereof to the public or residential consumers as set forth in Title 62.1, Chapter 4, Section 62.1-45a, Code of Virginia 1950, as amended.
134-73 RESPONSIBILITY FOR INSPECTIONS
It shall be the duty of the Town of Front Royal to cause inspections to be made of properties served by the waterworks where cross-connection with the waterworks is deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be established by the Water Department Head in the Cross-Connection Control and Backflow Prevention Program and as approved by the Virginia Department of Health.
134-74 RIGHT TO ENTER PROPERTY
The representative of the Water Department shall have the right to enter, at any reasonable time, properties served by a connection to the waterworks of the Town of Front Royal for the purpose of inspection the piping system or systems for cross-connections. Upon request, the owner or occupants of the property served shall furnish to the inspection agency pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross-connection.
134-75 DENIAL OR DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE FOR DEFICIENCIES
The water purveyor may deny or discontinue water service to a consumer if the required backflow prevention device is not installed. If it is found that the device(s) has been removed or by-passed or if a cross-connection exists on the premises or if the pressure in the waterworks is lowered below ten (10) pounds per square inch gauge, the purveyor shall take positive action to ensure that the waterworks is adequately protected at all times. Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the deficiencies have been corrected or eliminated in accordance with Commonwealth of Virginia waterworks regulations and to the satisfaction of the purveyor.
134-76 ENFORCEMENT; LABELING OF SUPPLIES THAT ARE UNSAFE FOR DRINKING
The potable water made available on the properties served by the waterworks shall be protected from possible contamination or pollution by enforcement of this chapter and the Town of Front Royal Plumbing Code. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled as "water unsafe for drinking" in a conspicuous manner.
134-77 SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-89
This Article is a supplement to the applicable plumbing codes.
134-78 (RESERVED)
(Repealed “Violations and Penalties” 4-27-92-Effective Upon Passage)
RAINWATER AND SURFACE WATER
(Adopted 6-23-86 by Ord. 9-86)
134-79 DISCHARGE OF RAINWATER OR SURFACE WATER PROHIBITED
A. Except as provided in Section 134-4.A.14 of this ordinance, the discharge of rainwater or surface water into a sanitary sewer line through connections from the roofs of houses or other buildings, basement drains, foundation drains, yard drains or any other connection is hereby prohibited.
(Amended 8-12-13-Effective Upon Passage)
B. Except as provided in Section 134-4.A.14. of this ordinance, it shall be unlawful to make any connection to the town's sanitary sewer system which allows rainwater or surface water to flow into said system, and no occupancy permit shall be issued for any new structure or construction having such a connection to the sanitary sewer system. (Amended 8-12-13-Effective Upon Passage)
C. Whenever the Town Manager or Utility Inspector for the Town of Front Royal shall deem it necessary to remove, block, repair or otherwise reroute a drain or other connection to the Front Royal sanitary sewer system which allows a significant flow of rain or surface water into said system and thereby could endanger the public health, upon reasonable notice to the property owner of not less than thirty (30) days, and after said owner has failed to remove, block, repair or otherwise reroute said drain or connection in a manner approved by the town, the town may then, by its own agents or employees, remove, block, repair or otherwise reroute said drain or connection, and the cost of expenses thereof shall be chargeable to and paid by the owner of such property and shall be collected by the town as taxes and levies are collected.
D. Violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.).
134-80 UTILITY INSPECTOR
A. A Utility Inspector may be appointed by the Town Manager. It shall be the duty of the Utility Inspector to enforce all provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the town relating to the inflow of rain or surface water into the sanitary sewer system and to inspect and test drains and fixtures for inflow.
B. Whenever it is necessary for the purpose of enforcing the town ordinances or whenever the Utility Inspector has reasonable cause to believe that there exists, in any structure or upon any premises, a drain or connection which could jeopardize the public health by allowing rain or surface water to flow into the town's sanitary sewer system, the Utility Inspector or his
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-90
designated agent may enter such structure or premises, at all reasonable times, to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed by the provisions of this Article, provided that, if such structure or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such entry is refused, the Utility Inspector shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry.
CONSERVATION OF WATER
(Adopted 8-24-92 by Ord. 10-92)
134-81 CONSERVATION OF WATER
A. DEFINITIONS; EQUATIONS.
1. Definitions. For the purpose of this Article, the following definitions shall apply:
CFS - Cubic Feet per Second
(Amended (A) 7-10-00-Effective Upon Passage; 9-22-08-Effective Upon Passage)
B. VOLUNTARY WATER CONSERVATION: Whenever the fourteen-day average stream flow of the South Fork of the Shenandoah River, measured from Point 0163100 (South Fork of the Shenandoah River at Front Royal: latitude 384150; longitude 0781240), drops below 400 CFS, the Front Royal Town Manager shall declare voluntary water conservation measures to be in effect. The Town Manager, through appropriate means, shall inform the public to voluntarily conserve water. During periods of voluntary water conservation, all users of the Front Royal municipal water system are requested to cease the following:
1. The watering of shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass, plants, or any other vegetation from Town water supplies (except indoor plantings, greenhouse and commercial nursery stocks, and new plantings less than one year old) between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and 4:00 P.M.
2. The outdoor washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes, or other types of mobile equipment between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and 4:00 P.M, except from a bucket or other container not exceeding three (3) gallons or at a commercial vehicle wash facility.
3. The washing of private streets, driveways, parking lots, service station grounds, or other paved outdoor surfaces between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and 4:00 P.M.
4. The operation of any ornamental fountain, unless the water is recycled.
5. The filling of swimming and/or wading pools, except that filled pools may be topped off to maintain the appropriate levels for use.
6. Serving drinking water in restaurants, except upon request.
(Amended “B” 7-10-00-Effective Upon Passage; Added (1-6) 9-22-08-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-91
C. MANDATORY WATER CONSERVATION: Whenever the fourteen-day average stream flow of the South Fork of the Shenandoah River, measured from Point 01631000, drops below 340 CFS, the Front Royal Town Manager shall declare an emergency exists and declare mandatory water conservation measures to be in effect and shall implement enforcement thereof. The Town Manager shall notify the Department of Environmental Quality that mandatory conservation measures have been imposed. During periods of mandatory water conservation, all users of Front Royal municipal water system shall be prohibited from the following:
(Amended “C” 7-10-00-Effective Upon Passage; 9-22-08-Effective Upon Passage)
1. The watering of shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass, plants, or any other vegetation from Town water supplies, (except indoor plantings, greenhouse and commercial nursery stocks, and new plantings less than one year old) between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and 4:00 P.M.
2. The outdoor washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes, or other types of mobile equipment, except in a commercial vehicle wash facility.
(Amended 9-22-08-Effective Upon Passage)
3. The washing of private streets, driveways, parking lots, service station grounds, or other paved outdoor surfaces.
(Amended 9-22-08-Effective Upon Passage)
4. The operation of any ornamental fountains, unless the water is recycled. Municipal ornamental fountains shall be cleaned and closed within two (2) days of the Mandatory Water Conservation restriction declaration.
5. The filling of swimming and/or wading pools, except that filled pools may be topped off to maintain the appropriate levels for use.
D. EMERGENCY WATER CONSERVATION: Whenever the fourteen-day average stream flow of the South Fork of the Shenandoah River, measured from Point 01631000, drops below 240 CFS, the Front Royal Town Manager shall declare an emergency exists and declare emergency water conservation to be in effect and shall implement enforcement thereof. During periods of emergency water conservation, all users of the Front Royal municipal water system shall be prohibited from the following:
(Amended 9-22-08-Effective Upon Passage)
1. The watering of shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass, plants, or any other vegetation from Town water supplies (except indoor plantings, greenhouse and commercial nursery stocks) at any time through the use of a hose and/or sprinkler system. This time restriction prohibition shall not apply when individuals are watering plantings through the use of recycled household water.
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-92
(Amended 9-22-08-Effective Upon Passage)
2. The outdoor washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes, or other types of mobile equipment except in a commercial vehicle wash facility.
3. The washing of all streets, driveways, parking lots, service station grounds, office buildings, home of apartment exterior or other outdoor surfaces, including windows. Restaurants and other food preparation type businesses shall be allowed to wash their exterior garbage cans/dumpsters three (3) days per week, on Mondays, Thursdays and Saturdays the Town Manager may authorize exterior washings for specific purposes whenever the health or safety of the public may be affected.
4. The operation of all ornamental fountains.
5. The filling of swimming and/or wading pools.
(Amended 9-22-08-Effective Upon Passage)
6. All residential and recreational outdoor use shall be prohibited, unless and exception is otherwise granted in this Chapter.
7. All non-essential municipal water use shall be eliminated.
E. WATER RATIONING: Whenever the fourteen-day average stream flow of the South Fork of the Shenandoah River, measured from Point 01631000, drops below 200 CFS, the Front Royal Town Manager shall declare an emergency exists and declare water rationing to be in effect and shall implement enforcement thereof. During periods of water rationing, users of the Front Royal Municipal Water System shall be prohibited from the following:
(Amended 9-22-08-Effective Upon Passage)
1. The watering of shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass, plants, or any other vegetation, except indoor plantings, greenhouse and commercial nursery stocks. This prohibition shall not apply to waterings done through the use of recycled household water.
2. The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes, or other types of mobile equipment. During periods of water rationing, the operators of commercial car wash facilities shall be notified of the imposition of water rationing through service by a law enforcement officer and appropriate radio and television advertisements and notices published in the newspapers of local circulation. The operators shall likewise be notified of the cessation of water rationing.
3. The hauling of water beyond the Town's municipal limits except to customers with existing twelve-month hauling contracts.
4. The operation of outdoor water spigots in any municipal park, playground, or recreation facility.
Chapter 134 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 134
134-93
5. Commercial clothes washing facilities shall be required to reduce water usage by 50% of the average use of the previous twelve (12) months. Users with less than twelve months previous water use shall not exceed fifty-percent of their previous use for all water service shall not be restricted until they have established at least one (1) month's service in a period when water rationing is not in effect. During periods when water rationing, operators of commercial clothes washing facilities shall be notified of the imposition of water rationing through service by a law enforcement officer and appropriate radio and television advertisements and notices published in the newspapers of local circulation. The operators shall likewise be notified of the cessation of water rationing.
(Amended and Added (1-5) 7-10-00-Effective Upon Passage)
F. NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS: The public shall be notified of the imposition of mandatory water conservation, emergency water conservation, and watering rationing through appropriate radio and television announcements and notices published in newspapers of local circulation. The public shall likewise be notified of the cessation of mandatory conservation, emergency water conservation, and water rationing.
(Amended 7-10-00-Effective Upon Passage)
G. LIFTING OF RESTRICTIONS: Mandatory water conservation, emergency water conservation, and water rationing periods shall cease at such time as the fourteen-day average stream flow recovers and rises above the flow rate needed for the imposition of mandatory water conservation, emergency water conservation, or water rationing.
(Amended 7-10-00-Effective Upon Passage; 9-22-08-Effective Upon Passage)
H. VIOLATIONS: Violation of the mandatory water conservation, emergency water conservation, and water rationing prohibitions set forth in Subsection C, D, and E during periods of water conservation or rationing may be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000). Each day that a violation occurs may be punished as a separate offense.
(Added “H” 7-10-2000-Effective Upon Passage)
(Added (I) “Drought Restrictions” 10-28-02-Effective Upon Passage)
(Removed (I) “Drought Restrictions” 9-22-08-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 138 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 138
138-1
Chapter 138
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS
Sections:
138-1 PERMIT REQUIRED
138-2 DEFINITIONS
138-3 PERMIT APPLICATION
138-4 QUALIFYING FOR AN EXEMPTION
138-5 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS
138-6 TRANSFER
138-7 RENEWAL
138-8 RESTRICTIONS
138-9 PLACE OF SALE – PEDDLER AND ITINERANT MERCHANT
138-10DOOR-TO-DOOR SALES – COMMERCIAL SOLICITOR
138-11 EXHIBITION OF PERMIT AND BUSINESS LICENSE
138-12 RECORDS
138-13 REVOCATION OF PERMIT
138-14 APPEAL OF DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT
138-15 LICENSE TAX
138-16 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF CHAPTER
138-17 SEVERANCE CLAUSE
Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal 3-11-85 (Chapter 25 of the 1965 Code. Sections 138-1, 138-2 and 138-3 amended and sections 138-12.1 added at time of adoption of Code. Section 25-11, Subsection (e), of the 1965 Code, which immediately followed 138-12, was deleted at time of adoption of Code). Ord. No. 13-86 amended 138-3 “Solicitors Permit-Applicability” and 138-4 “Solicitors Permit-Permit Required” 7-28-86; Ord.8-91 amended 138-7 “Photographing” 3-11-91. The Entire Chapter was amended in its entirety 3-14-16. Other amendments noted where applicable.
138-1 PERMIT REQUIRED
To promote the safety of residents, it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of Peddler, Itinerant Merchant, or Commercial Solicitor as defined in this Chapter, within the limits of Front Royal, Virginia, without first obtaining a permit as provided herein. Issuance of a permit does not relieve an individual from obtaining a business license (Town Code Chapter 98) from the Town’s Finance Department prior to engaging in operation of business.
(Amended 12-11-17-Effective Upon Passage)
138-2 DEFINITIONS
ITINERANT MERCHANT - One who offers merchandise, goods, food or services for sale or barter from a stationary but temporary site within the Town.
PEDDLER - One who moves from place to place within the Town and offers merchandise, goods, food or services for sale or barter at no definite place of business.
Chapter 138 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 138
138-2
STREET; ROAD – A public thoroughfare, except an alley, driveway or parking area, which affords vehicular traffic circulation and principal means of access to abutting property.
(Added 12-11-17-Effective Upon Passage)
TOWN - Front Royal, Virginia.
TOWN MANAGER - The Town Manager of Front Royal, Virginia or their designated agent.
SOLICITOR (Commercial) - Any person, whether a principal, agent, or salesman, who engages in transient business by going from residence to residence for the purpose of taking orders or offering to take orders for the sale of goods, wares, or merchandise or taking orders for services to be performed in the future. A commercial solicitor shall not carry goods, wares, or merchandise except for display purposes only, and shall not sell items directly.
VEHICLE - Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn including any wheeled conveyance.
138-3 PERMIT APPLICATION
A. Applicants under this Chapter must file with the Town’s Planning and Zoning Department a sworn application to be furnished by the Town.
B. At the time of filing of the application for permit, a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be paid, to cover the cost of investigation and processing the application. There shall be no fee for those who are deemed exempt as defined in 138-4.
C. At the time of filing, the applicant shall provide a front facing passport size photograph which accurately depicts the applicant’s appearance at the time of application.
D. A background check will be performed on all applicants for Commercial Solicitor’s permits by local law enforcement.
E. All Peddler and Itinerant Merchant applicants shall obtain approval from the Town’s Department of Planning & Zoning prior to selling from private property. Approval shall be based upon submittal of a plat, site plan, or sketch plan identifying the location of the property on which the activity is to be conducted and showing the location of the structure from which the sale or exchange activity will occur, the area under the control of such person, parking spaces and provisions for well-defined vehicular entrances and exits.
(Amended Entire Section and Added C – E 12-11-17-Effective Upon Passage)
138-4 QUALIFYING FOR AN EXEMPTION
A. The following shall be exempt from the permit application fee but shall be required to submit a permit application and comply with this Chapter:
Chapter 138 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 138
138-3
1. Persons selling farm or domestic products or nursery products, ornamental or otherwise, or for the planting of nursery products, as an incident to the sale thereof, outside of the regular market houses and sheds of the Town, provided such products are grown or produced by the person offering them for sale; and peddlers at wholesale or to those who sell or offer for sale in person or by their employees, ice, wood, charcoal, meats, milk, butter, eggs, poultry, game, vegetables, fruits or other family supplies of a perishable nature or farm products grown or produced by them and not purchased by them for sale. A dairyman who uses upon the streets of the Town in one or more vehicles may sell and deliver from this vehicles, milk, butter, cream and eggs in Town without procuring a peddler’s license;
(Amended 12-11-17-Effective Upon Passage)
2. Persons selling newspapers;
3. Persons selling for wholesale concerns who only solicit orders from or sell to retail dealers in Front Royal for resale or other commercial purposes or to manufacturers for manufacturing or other commercial purposes;
4. Wholesalers soliciting orders or selling to others for retail, resale, or upon manufacturers for manufacturing and selling at wholesale at place of manufacture;
5. Children of or under the age of 16, except when they are acting as agents of adults covered by this article;
6. Delivery of food or merchandise ordered by phone, internet, or mail from a fixed place of business issued a business license for operation;
7. Merchants selling food and merchandise during a Special Event that has been issued permit by the Town; and
8. Tax exempt civic, charitable, government or educational organizations.
B. All persons qualifying for exemptions from this Section must present proof of such qualification upon completion of application.
(Amended Title and “B” 12-11-17-Effective Upon Passage)
138-5 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS
Upon receipt of completed application and required background check the Town Manager or his designee shall endorse on the application their approval, execute a permit addressed to the applicant for the carrying on of the business applied for and submit executed permit to the Town’s Finance Department for payment of business license tax as defined in Chapter 98 of the Town Code.
Permits shall be approved or denied ten (10) business days following the date of the filing of the application.
(Amended Entire Section 12-11-17-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 138 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 138
138-4
138-6 TRANSFER
No permit issued under the provisions of this Chapter shall be used by an person other than the one to whom it was issued.
138-7 RENEWAL
All permits issued under the provisions of this Chapter shall be valid for the calendar year they are issued, beginning from the date of issuance, and expiring on December 31 of each calendar year. Permits shall be renewed for subsequent calendar years, without the requirement for a new permit application, if the applicant files to renew their business license with the Department of Finance by March 1 of the calendar year, and submits written verification that there are no changes from the previous year’s application. A new permit application shall be required if there are changes from the previous year’s application, or if the filing of a renewal occurs after March 1 of the calendar year.
(Amended Entire Section 12-11-17-Effective Upon Passage)
138-8 RESTRICTIONS
No Peddler, Commercial Solicitor or Itinerant Merchant shall have any exclusive right to any location on public property, nor shall he or she:
A. Be permitted a stationary location on any public sidewalk or street;
B. Display any sign on a street, sidewalk, or other public place visible to vehicular traffic, except for signs that are actually imprinted on the exterior body of a licensed motor vehicle;
C. Make any sale or delivery to any person while such person is located in the street, as defined in 138-2;
(Amended 12-11-17-Effective Upon Passage)
D. Make any sale, offer or delivery to any driver or passenger in a motor vehicle while the motor vehicle is stopped at a red light or while in a moving traffic lane;
E. Conduct business from any street or center median strip of any street;
F. Restrict access to any legally parked vehicle;
G. Operate in any other way that would restrict the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic;
H. Conduct any business on any private or public property, street, or sidewalk between the hours of 10:00 pm and 6:00 am except if operating through a Special Event Permit issued by the Town
I. Leave vehicles and/or equipment overnight at the approved location. All vehicles and equipment must be removed from the site by the end of the business day, unless prior approval from the property owner has been received and submitted to the Town Manager or
Chapter 138 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 138
138-5
his designee for verification, excluding those permitted at the Flea Market as specified in Chapter 98-46; and
(Amended 12-11-17-Effective Upon Passage)
J. Leave any cart or table unattended on any public property, street, or sidewalk; and
K. Shall provide receptacles for the disposal of waste materials or other litter created in the immediate area of any stationary location from which sales, offers of sales or deliveries are taking place, and they shall request customers to place all waste and litter in the receptacles and they shall remove and dispose of the waste materials and litter.
138-9 PLACE OF SALE – PEDDLER AND ITINERANT MERCHANT
A. All Peddlers and Itinerant Merchants may only be located at a hospital, locations approved by Special Event Permit, or in the areas designated by the Town’s Zoning Map as C-1, Community Business District, C-2, Downtown Business District, or the Mixed-Use Campus District.
(Amended to include “hospital” and “Special Event Permit” 12-11-17-Effective Upon Passage)
B. It shall be unlawful for any Peddler or Itinerant Merchant to occupy or partially occupy while selling, or sell from, the private property of another without written permission of the private property owner.
138-10 DOOR-TO-DOOR SALES - COMMERCIAL SOLICITOR
Door-to-door sales shall only take place between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
Regardless of whether or not a permit and business license has been issued, no person shall enter in or upon any house, building or private property of any type without the prior express consent of the owner or occupant thereof, where there is placed or posted on the premises in a conspicuous position at or near the usual means of ingress a sign or other form of notice stating or indicating that the owner or occupant thereof forbids or otherwise does not desire persons in solicitation or selling to enter upon the premises.
(Amended 12-11-17-Effective Upon Passage)
138-11 EXHIBITION OF PERMIT AND BUSINESS LICENSE
Peddlers, Itinerant Merchants and Commercial Solicitors are required to conspicuously display their permit and business license at their vehicles or temporary stands or if they have none, to exhibit their permit and business license upon request.
(Amended by Adding “business license” 12-11-17-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 138 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 138
138-6
138-12 RECORDS
The Town’s Finance Department shall maintain a record for each permit and business license issued, and record the reports of violation thereon.
(Amended 12-11-17-Effective Upon Passage)
138-13 REVOCATION OF PERMIT
A. Permits issued under the provision of this Chapter may be revoked by the Town Manager after notice and hearing for any of the following causes:
1. Fraud, misrepresentation or intentional false statement of material or relevant facts contained in the application;
2. Conviction of any felony or crime of moral turpitude (including, by way of illustration and not limitation, crimes of sexual misconduct and distribution of controlled substances or paraphernalia) within the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of filing of the application;
3. Conviction of any crime involving fraud in the conduct of his or her business;
4. Permit holder creates a public safety hazard as identified by Fire Marshal, Chief of Police, or their designee or any authoritative body that has legal regulatory oversight over public safety; and,
(Amended 12-11-17-Effective Upon Passage)
5. Any violation of this Chapter
B. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a permit shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the revocation and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the permit holder at their last known address at least five (5) days prior to the date set for hearing. Failure to appear for a hearing does not preclude permit revocation.
138-14 APPEAL OF DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT
A. Any person aggrieved by the action of the Town Manager, or the designated agent, in the denial of an application for a permit or in the decision with reference to the revocation of a permit shall have the right of appeal. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Clerk of the Town Council within ten (10) days after the notice of action complained of has been mailed to such person's last known address, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds of appeal.
B. The Clerk of the Town Council shall notify the Town Manager of the filing of an appeal.
C. Upon filing an appeal, the party aggrieved shall be entitled to a hearing by the Town Council. The time and place of the hearing shall be scheduled by the Clerk of Council at any time after
Chapter 138 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 138
138-7
the filing of an appeal upon notice by the Clerk of Council mailed to the party to the action at the address required to be stated by the appellant at the time of the filing of the appeal. Such appeals may be continued by the Town Council.
D. The party shall have the right to present their case in person or by counsel licensed to practice law in the Commonwealth of Virginia.
E. The Town Council shall consider the case record as well as statements offered by an interested party and shall determine whether the Town Manager abused their discretion under the rules and standards set forth in this Chapter. The hearing need not be conducted according to technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. Any relevant evidence may be admitted if it is the sort of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence in civil actions.
138-15 LICENSE TAX
The License Tax for activities defined in this Chapter shall be provided in the following Chapters:
A. Peddlers and Itinerant Merchants – Chapter 98-61
B. Commercial Solicitors – Chapter 98-45
138-16 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF CHAPTER
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall be guilty of a Class 1 Misdemeanor with penalties specified in Town Code Chapter 1-15.
138-17 SEVERANCE CLAUSE
The provisions of this Chapter are hereby declared to be severable, and if any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this Chapter shall, for any reason, be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this Chapter, but they shall remain in effect, it being the legislative intent that this Chapter shall stand, notwithstanding the invalidity of any part.
(Amended Entire Chapter 3-14-16-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 142 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 142
142-1
Chapter 142
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Sections:
142-1 PLAY IN STREETS
142-2 BEGGING
142-3 FIRES
142-4 OBSTRUCTIONS
142-4.1 SNOW AND ICE ON SIDEWALKS
142-5 DEFECTIVE SPOUTING OR GUTTERING
142-6 USE OF PUBLIC SIDEWALK IN CONNECTION WITH BUSINESS
142-7 USE OF THE PUBLIC WAYS BY CERTIFICATED PROVIDERS OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES
142-8 THROUGH 16 (RESERVED)
142-17 PAVING OF AREAS BETWEEN PROPERTY LINE AND CURB & GUTTER
142-18 HEARING REQUIRED
142-19 USE OF CERTAIN PUBLIC SIDEWALKS FOR CYCLING, SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLER SKATING
142-20 TOWN BANNER POLES
Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal 3-11-85.(Chapter 26 of the 1965 Code including amendments 4-24-67, 6-9-75 and 11-9-70, 7-9-7. Sections 142-1, 142-2, 142-4, 142-6, 142-10, 142-12, and 142-17 amended at time of adoption of Code). Other amendments noted where applicable.
142-1 PLAY IN STREETS
It shall be unlawful for any person to play in the public streets of the Town, including but not limited to the playing of ball or marbles, where such play obstructs the passage along the same.
142-2 BEGGING
It shall be unlawful for any person to beg upon the streets or sidewalks of the Town.
142-3 FIRES
It shall be unlawful for any person to ignite or make a fire or conflagration of any kind or cause such fire or conflagration to be made or ignited in any of the public streets or sidewalks of the Town without the consent, in writing, of the Building Inspector, stating the time and place of such fires.
Chapter 142 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 142
142-2
142-4 OBSTRUCTIONS
A. It shall be unlawful to obstruct, and no obstruction shall be placed upon, any street or sidewalk of the Town; provided, however, that upon of any non-profit civic, religious or educational organization, application submitted at least thirty (30) days in advance, the Town Manager or his designee shall be authorized to issue a permit for the placement of temporary signs or banners within the street rights-of-way of the Town for the purpose of publicizing a temporary event. Any such sign or banner shall not be larger than twenty (20) square feet in area and not taller than seventy-two inches (72'') high at their highest point. Said permit shall be of a temporary nature, not to exceed seven (7) days, clearly stating the place and dates for which the permit is issued, and shall limit the number of signs or banners allowed under any permit to not more than one (1) for any given intersection or adjacent to the street frontage of any given parcel or lot. Such temporary signs or banners shall not be placed within any right-of-way prior to the date stated in the permit, and shall be removed not later than 11:59 p.m. on the last day shown on the permit.
(Ord. No. 7-05 Amended 6-13-05-Effective Upon Passage)
B. The provisions of subsection (A) above, shall not operate to alter, diminish or repeal the requirements for temporary sign permits for the types of signs described in Section 175-106(A)(7) of this Code nor to allow or make legal any of the prohibited signs described in Section 175-106(A)(5) of this Code.
(Ord. No. 7-05 Added 6-13-05-Effective Upon Passage)
C. Temporary signs or banners permitted under the terms of the section shall be of weather-resistant materials and of professional quality appearance and contain no changeable copy characters.
(Ord. No. 7-05 Added 6-13-05-Effective Upon Passage)
D. The provisions of this section shall not operate to vacate or supersede any policies heretofore adopted by the Council for the placement of banners over the right-of-way of the 100 block of North Royal Avenue.
(Ord. No. 7-05 Added 6-13-05-Effective Upon Passage)
142-4.1 SNOW AND ICE ON SIDEWALKS
A. All owners or occupants of property within the limits of the Town, which property is used for commercial or industrial purposes, shall remove or cause to be removed the snow and ice from the sidewalks adjacent to such property within twenty-four (24) hours after ice has formed or snow has ceased to fall. If the ice or snow forms or falls during the night or on a Sunday, it shall be removed by noon the following day. Sand or other abrasives may be applied to ice to establish traction if removal is not feasible.
Chapter 142 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 142
142-3
B. If at any time the Town Manager or his designee shall find that any such property owner has not removed snow or ice pursuant to this Section, the Town Manager or his designee shall give notice, in writing, to such owner or occupant to remove such snow and/or ice within a reasonable time not to exceed six (6) hours after the giving of such notice.
C. Upon failure of any person to whom notice has been given pursuant to this Section to comply with the terms of such notice, the Town Manager may cause such snow and/or ice to be removed, and the expense thereof shall be charged to such owner or occupant to be collected in the same manner as County taxes or in any other manner authorized by law.
(Ord. No. 3-01 Added Entire Section 5-14-01-Effective Upon Passage)
142-5 DEFECTIVE SPOUTING OR GUTTERING
It shall be unlawful for anyone to permit water from the spouting or gutter of the roof of any building owned by him to escape on any of the sidewalks of the Town by reason of defective spouting or guttering. Any person allowing such defective condition to continue after ten (10) days notice from the Town Manager shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article II, Penalties, of this Code.
142-6 USE OF PUBLIC SIDEWALK IN CONNECTION WITH BUSINESS
It shall be unlawful for any person within the Town to use the sidewalk in front of his place of business to exhibit that which he has for sale or for other uses connected with his business, without the prior consent of the Town Council.
142-7 USE OF THE PUBLIC WAYS BY CERTIFICATED PROVIDERS OF TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES
There is imposed upon all certificated providers of telecommunications service occupying the public rights-of-way of Front Royal, a fee in accordance with Virginia Code Section 56-468.1.
(Ord. No. 5-00 Added Entire Section 5-22-00-Effective 7-1-00)
142-8 THROUGH 16 (RESERVED)
(Ord. No. 6-98 Repealed Sections 5-11-98-Effective Upon Passage)
142-17 PAVING OF AREAS BETWEEN PROPERTY LINE AND CURB & GUTTER
At the time of construction of the curb and gutter, as provided in Section 142-16, the Town Council may also, upon written request of the landowner and prior payment of one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) per square foot, pave areas used by the landowner as driveways, crosswalks and other areas located between the property line and the curb and gutter.
Chapter 142 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 142
142-4
142-18 HEARING REQUIRED
The Council shall hold a public hearing in every case in which an individual, corporation, association or the Town itself opens a dedicated street or alley.
142-19 USE OF CERTAIN PUBLIC SIDEWALKS FOR CYCLING, SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLER SKATING
A. The use of skateboards, roller skates, and/or the riding of bicycles or mopeds on Town sidewalks and crosswalks in the Town of Front Royal is prohibited in the following areas:
1. Along Main Street between Royal and Commerce Avenues.
2. Along Chester Street between Main and 2nd Streets.
B. For purposes of this ordinance "sidewalk" includes the pedestrian court yard surrounding the Gazebo. It further is prohibited to use skateboards, roller skates, and/or bicycles or mopeds on any church, school, recreational facility, or any business property open to the public where such prohibition is posted.
C. In addition to the foregoing, it is unlawful to ride a moped along all other Town sidewalks, bike paths, and crosswalks.
D. Violations of this section by skateboarders, roller skaters, or bicycle riders shall be punishable by a civil penalty of not more than $50. Violations of this section by moped operators shall be punishable by a fine of up to $250.
(Ord. No. 2-00 Added Entire Section 1-10-00-Effective Upon Passage)
142-20 TOWN BANNER POLES
The Town has installed banner poles at various locations on arterial roads to inform citizens and visitors of civic events. Reservation of space to display a banner shall be regulated as follows:
1. Applications to display banners shall be submitted to the Town Manager and shall include the following information:
a. Name of Requesting Organization
b. Contact Name
c. Contact Phone Number
d. Requested Dates for Display
e. Banner Message and Description of Display
2. Applications shall be accepted beginning January 1 for placement that year.
3. Priority of display shall be granted to the Chamber of Commerce Wine & Craft Festival and to the Warren County Heritage Society Festival of Leaves subject to request being received within the first five (5) business days of January. Similar priority shall be
Chapter 142 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 142
142-5
granted to organization requests for events conducted at the same time period for a least five (5) consecutive years.
4. Display shall be for up to fourteen (14) calendar days. Extensions of up to fourteen (14) calendar days may be requested thirty (30) days prior to the approved date for display if no other display requests have been approved.
5. Banners size shall be a maximum of thirty (30) feet long by three (3) feet tall. Organizations requesting banner display shall be responsible to ensure banner can be connected to the existing hardware installed by the Town.
6. Banners shall be constructed of heavy-duty canvas, plastic tarpaulin material, or netting. Metal grommets shall be imbedded near each of the four (4) corners and along the top and bottom edges with two (2) feet intervals. The banner shall also have wind-relief flaps that are six (6) inch diameter half-circles and at least one (1) for every four (4) square foot of total area.
(Amended 7-27-15-Effective Upon Passage)
7. In the event that display date request conflict, the Town Manager or designee shall determine resolution of conflict. Display requests determined by the Town Manager or designee can be appealed to Town Council a minimum of forty-five (45) days prior to the requested date for display.
(Ord. No. 6-12 Added Entire Section 2-13-12-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 145 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 145
145-1
Chapter 145
STRUCTURES, DANGEROUS
Sections:
145-1 REMOVAL OR REPAIR BY OWNER
145-2 REMOVAL OR REPAIR BYTOWN UPON OWNER’S FAILURE TO DO SO
145-3 RESPONSIBILITY FOR COSTS
Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal 8-12-68. Chapter 145-4 was transferred from Chapter 9-2 10-22-18. Amendments noted where applicable.
145-1 REMOVAL OR REPAIR BY OWNER
The owners of property within the Town shall, at such time or times as the Town Council may prescribe, remove, repair or secure any building, wall or any other structure which might endanger the public health or safety of other residents of the town.
145-2 REMOVAL OR REPAIR BY TOWN UPON OWNER'S FAILURE TO DO SO
The Town Council, through its own agents or employees, may remove, repair or secure any building, wall or any other structure which might endanger the public health or safety of other residents of the Town when the owner of such property, after reasonable notice and a reasonable time to do so, has failed to remove, repair or secure such building, wall or other structure.
145-3 RESPONSIBILITY FOR COSTS
The costs or expenses thereof shall be chargeable to and paid by the owner of such property and may be collected as taxes and levies are collected. Every such charge which remains unpaid shall constitute a lien against such property.
145-4 REMOVAL, REPAIR, ETC., OF BUILDINGS AND OTHER STRUCTURES HARBORING ILLEGAL DRUG USE
A. As used in this Section:
Affidavit means the affidavit prepared by the Town in accordance with Subsection (2) hereof.
Controlled Substance means illegally obtained controlled substances or marijuana, as defined in 54.1-3401 of the Code of Virginia 1950, as amended.
Corrective Action means the taking of steps which are reasonably expected to be effective to abate drug blight on real property, such as removal, repair, or securing of any building, wall, or other structure.
Chapter 145 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 145
145-2
Drug Blight means a condition existing on real property which tends to endanger the public health or safety of residents of a locality and is caused by the regular presence on the property of persons under the influence of controlled substances or the regular use of the property for the purpose of illegally possessing, manufacturing, or distributing controlled substances.
Owner means the record owner of real property.
Property means real property.
B. The procedures for corrective action with respect to property shall be as follows:
1. Any law enforcement officer, as such terms are defined in Section 9.1-101 of the Code of Virginia 1950, as amended, may execute and file an affidavit with the Council, citing this Section of the Town Code, to the effect that (i) drug blight exists on a particular property within the Town, specifying the location of the property and the nature of the blight; (ii) that the Town has used diligence without effect to abate the drug blight; and (iii) the drug blight constitutes a present threat to the public's health, safety or welfare.
2. The Council shall then cause a Notice to be sent to the owner of the property by regular mail to the last address listed on the Town's tax assessment records, together with a copy of the foregoing affidavit, advising that (i) the owner has up to thirty (30) days from the date of the Notice to undertake corrective action to abate the drug blight described in the affidavit and (iii) the Town will, if requested to do so, assist the owner in determining and coordinating the appropriate corrective action to abate the drug blight described in such affidavit.
3. If no corrective action is undertaken during such thirty (30) - day period, the Town Manager shall send by regular mail an additional notice to the owner of the property, at the address stated in the preceding subdivision, stating the date on which the Town may commence corrective action to abate the drug blight on the property, which date shall be no earlier than fifteen (15) days after the date of mailing of the Notice. Such additional Notice shall also reasonably describe the corrective action contemplated to be taken by the Town. Upon receipt of such additional Notice, the owner shall have a right, upon reasonable notice to the Town, to seek equitable relief, and the Town shall initiate no corrective action while a proper petition for relief is pending before a court of competent jurisdiction.
C. If the Town undertakes corrective action with respect to the property after complying with the provisions of Subsection (2) hereof, the costs and expenses thereof shall be chargeable to and paid by the owner of such property and may be collected by the locality as taxes are collected.
D. Every charge authorized by this Section with which the owner of any such property has been assessed and which remains unpaid shall constitute a lien against such property with the same priority as liens for unpaid Town real estate taxes and enforceable in the same manner as
Chapter 145 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 145
145-3
provided in Articles 3 and 4 of Chapter 39 of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended.
E. If the owner of such property takes timely corrective action pursuant to this Section, the Council shall, by Resolution, deem the drug blight abated, shall close the proceeding without any charge or cost to the owner, and shall forward a copy of such Resolution to the owner, thereby certifying that the proceeding has been terminated satisfactorily. The closing of the proceeding shall not bar the Town from initiating a subsequent proceeding if the drug blight recurs.
F. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to abridge or waive any rights of remedies of an owner of property at law or in equity.
(Section was Originally Repealed/Added in Chapter 9-2 11-26-07-Effective 7-1-08)
(Added Entire Section to Chapter 145, Transferred from Chapter 9-2 10-22-18-Effective Upon Passage)
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-1
Chapter 148
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
Sections:
ARTICLE 1 – TITLE; PURPOSE; APPLICABILITY
148-100 TITLE
148-110 PURPOSE
148-120 AUTHORITY
148-130 ADMINISTRATION
148-140 SEVERABILITY AND VALIDITY
148-150 APPLICABILITY; WHEN EFFECTIVE
148-160 INTERPRETATION; WORD USAGE
148-170 EFFECT ON PRIOR APPROVALS
148-180 SUBDIVISION APPROVAL AND RECORDING REQUIRED
ARTICLE 2 – ADMINISTRATION AND GENERAL REGULATIONS
148-200 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED
148-210 ADMINISTRATIVE WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS
148-211 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
148-220 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
148-230 PRIVATE CONTRACTS
148-240 RECORD PLAT REVISIONS OR CHANGES
148-250 AMENDMENTS
148-260 FILING
148-270 STORMWATER DRAINAGE FEES
ARTICLE 3 – SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS AND REVIEW PROCEDURES FOR MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS
148-300 WHEN A MAJOR SUBDIVISION APPLICATION IS REQUIRED
148-301 PRE-APPLICATION PROCEDURE
148-305 SKETCH PLAN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS AND REVIEW PROCEDURES
148-310 PRELIMINARY PLAN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS AND REVIEW PROCEDURES
148-315 MAJOR SUBDIVISION SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS AND REVIEW PROCEDURES
148-320 FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT RECORDATION REQUIREMENTS
148-325 WAIVER OF PLAN AND PLAT SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
ARTICLE 4 – SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS AND REVIEW PROCEDURES FOR MINOR SUBDIVISIONS
148-400 WHEN A MINOR SUBDIVISION APPLICATION IS REQUIRED
148-401 PRE-APPLICATION PROCEDURE
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-2
148-405 SKETCH PLAN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS AND REVIEW PROCEDURES
148-415 MINOR SUBDIVISION SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS AND REVIEW PROCEDURES
148-420 FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT RECORDATION REQUIREMENTS
148-425 WAIVER OF PLAN AND PLAT SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
ARTICLE 5 – SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS AND REVIEW PROCEDURES FOR MAJOR SITE DEVELOPMENT PLANS
148-500 WHEN A MAJOR SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN IS REQUIRED
148-501 PRE-APPLICATION PROCEDURE
148-505 SKETCH PLAN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS AND REVIEW PROCEDURES
148-515 MAJOR SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS AND REVIEW PROCEDURES
148-525 WAIVER OF PLAN AND PLAT SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
ARTICLE 6 – SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS AND REVIEW PROCEDURES FOR MINOR SITE DEVELOPMENT PLANS
148-600 WHEN A MINOR SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN IS REQUIRED
148-601 PRE-APPLICATION PROCEDURE
148-605 SKETCH PLAN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS AND REVIEW PROCEDURES
148-615 MINOR SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS AND REVIEW PROCEDURES
148-625 WAIVER OF PLAN AND PLAT SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
ARTICLE 7 – SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS AND REVIEW PROCEDURES FOR BOUNDARY ADJUSTMENTS AND LOT CONSOLIDATIONS
148-700 WHEN A BOUNDARY ADJUSTMENT OR LOT CONSOLIDATION APPLICATION IS REQUIRED
148-701 PRE-APPLICATION PROCEDURE
148-715 BOUNDARY ADJUSTMENT AND LOT CONSOLIDATION SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS AND REVIEW PROCEDURES
148-720 FINAL PLAT RECORDATION REQUIREMENTS
148-725 WAIVER OF PLAN AND PLAT SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
ARTICLE 8 – DESIGN STANDARDS
148-800 GENERAL PROVISIONS
148-810 DEVELOPERS RESPONSIBILITY
148-820 STREET DESIGN
148-830 BLOCKS AND LOTS
148-840 UTILITIES AND SERVICES
148-850 STREET IMPROVEMENTS
148-860 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPROVEMENTS
148-870 PARKING AND LOADING AREAS
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-3
148-880 COMPLETION OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
148-890 DEVELOPMENT SURETY
ARTICLE 9 – DEFINITIONS
148-900 Definitions
ARTICLE 10 – PLAN AND PLAT DETAIL REQUIREMENTS
148-1005 SKETCH PLAN DETAIL REQUIREMENTS
148-1010 PRELIMINARY PLAN DETAIL REQUIREMENTS
148-1015 SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT PLAN DETAIL REQUIREMENTS
148-1020 SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN DETAIL REQUIREMENTS
148-1025 AS-BUILT DETAIL REQUIREMENTS
148-1030 OVERLOT GRADING PLAN DETAIL REQUIREMENTS
148-1035 FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT DETAIL REQUIREMENTS
148-1040 LOT CONSOLIDATION/BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENT PLAT DETAIL REQUIREMENTS
148-1045 GENERALIZED DEVELOPMENT PLAN DETAIL REQUIREMENTS
148-1050 PROPOSED HOUSE LOCATION SURVEY DETAIL REQUIREMENTS
ARTICLE 11 – SCHEDULE OF FEES
148-1100 FEES
Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal 4-10-78 (Subdivision of Land). Chapter amended in its entirety 6-24-91 (Subdivision and Land Development). Amended 148-25 (Performance Bonds) 8-10-98. Amended 148-46.A. (Development Tree Planting) 11-23-98. Amended 148-29.B.2.e. (Lots) 3-22-99. Amended 148-57 (Definition of Buildable Lot); 148-40 (Curbs and Gutters); 148-41 (Sidewalks) and 148-26.D. (Streets) 6-26-00. Amended 148-3 (Authority); 148-15.B.4.c. (Final Plat); 148-16.D.2. (Optional Open Space Subdivision) and 148-54 Amendments 9-25-00. Amended 148-26.D. (Streets) 9-10-01. Amended 148-14.D.4.i.; 148-14.D.4.r.6.; (Preliminary Plat); 148-20.D.2.g. (Site Plan) and 148-24.C. (Installation of Improvements) 1-26-04. Amended 148-25 (Developers Securities); 148-40 (Curbs and Gutters) and 148-20.D.2.h. (Site Plan) 2.14.05. Amended 148-14.D.5.b. (Preliminary Plat) and 148-37.F-H (Underground Wiring and Electric Service) 9-12-05. Amended 148-30.E. (Sanitary Sewer Disposal) and 148-32.D. (Water Supply) 7-24-06. Amended 18-15.C.3. (Final Plat) and 148-20.D.2 (Site Plan) 1-8-07. Amended 148-42 (Steep Slopes) 2-26-07. Amended 148-42 (Steep Slopes) 4-26-10. Amended 148-58 (Fees) 7-28-08. Amended 148-58 (Fees) 6-11-12. Amended 148-58.C. (Fees) 1-28-13 Chapter amended in its entirety 6-8-15.
ARTICLE 1 – TITLE, PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY
148-100 TITLE
This Chapter is known and may be cited as the "Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia" or "Subdivision and Land Development".
148-10 PURPOSE
A. The purpose of this Chapter is to establish certain subdivision and land development standards and procedures for Front Royal, Virginia, as required by the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-4
B. These Articles are intended to assure the orderly subdivision and development of land, the beneficial growth of the community, and to promote the public health, safety, convenience, comfort and general welfare. These standards and procedures govern the process of change that occurs when land is subdivided or becomes more urban in character as a result of residential, business or industrial development. The Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance is also intended to provide assurance to purchasers of lots that they are buying a commodity suitable for development and use; and provide for the construction of safe, adequate and more efficient and effective public facilities.
148-120 AUTHORITY
The Front Royal Town Council, following public hearing and in consideration of the recommendations of the Front Royal Planning Commission, enacts this legislation in accordance with the provisions of Title 15.2, Chapter 22, of the Code of Virginia, as amended and in accordance with its authority granted under the Front Royal Town Charter and the Code of Virginia to ensure the orderly subdivision and development of land.
148-130 ADMINISTRATION
The Director of Planning and Zoning, hereafter referred to in this Ordinance as the “Director”, shall administer this Ordinance. The Director may establish such administrative rules and procedures as deemed necessary, under the general direction and guidance of Council.
148-140 SEVERABILITY AND VALIDITY
Should any Article, section or part of this Chapter be declared by any court of lawful jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Chapter as a whole or any part thereof other than the part held invalid or unconstitutional.
148-150 APPLICABILITY; WHEN EFFECTIVE DATE
A. The provisions of this Chapter shall be applicable to all land located within the corporate limits of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia. No building or zoning permit shall be issued for any development unless the requirements of this Chapter are met.
B. This Chapter governs the following types of development:
1. All divisions of land into parcels or adjustments to the boundaries of parcels within the Town, both residential and nonresidential, proposed after the effective date.
2. Any modification or alteration to the design of an existing subdivision.
3. Any development or re-development in which vehicle parking spaces are to be used by more than one (1) establishment.
4. Any use, change of use, development or re-development in a residential, commercial,
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-5
industrial district, or mixed-use district.
5. Any nonresidential development or re-development in a residential district or a change of use from one category to another.
6. Any use, development or re-development requiring special use permit approval under Chapter 175, of the Town Code.
7. All public and/or semi-public buildings and other uses involving a structure required to be reviewed by the Planning Commission under §15.2-2232 of the Code of Virginia as amended.
8. Any revision or amendment to an existing, approved site plan, plan and profile or final subdivision plat.
C. This Chapter was duly considered, following required public hearings, was adopted by the Town Council, and became effective on June 8, 2015. A certified copy of the Chapter, as may be amended from time to time, shall be filed in the office of the Town Manager.
D. No lot of a subdivision may be sold or transferred before a plat has been approved and recorded, in accord with this ordinance or with the subdivision ordinance in force at the time the lot was subdivided. Nothing herein may be construed as preventing the recordation of an instrument by which land is transferred or title passed as between the parties to the instrument.
148-160 INTERPRETATION; WORD USAGE
A. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements stated herein.
B. For the purpose of this Chapter, certain words and terms used herein shall be interpreted or defined as follows, and in accord with the definitions contained in Article 9. Words used in the present tense include the future, words importing the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter, words used in the singular form include the plural and the plural the singular, unless the natural construction of the word indicates otherwise; the word "lot" includes the word "parcel"; the word "shall" is mandatory; the word "approve" shall be considered to be followed by the words "or disapprove"; any reference to this Chapter includes all ordinances amending or supplementing the same.
C. This Chapter shall be used and interpreted in conjunction with the provisions of Chapter 175, Zoning, and other applicable ordinances of the Town of Front Royal.
D. In the event a term is not defined in this Chapter, the Director shall refer to other Chapters of the Front Royal Code for guidance and to Virginia Code § 15.2-2201 as amended. If ambiguity remains, the Director shall then rely on the conventional, recognized meaning of the word or phrase (e.g. the current edition of Merriam-Webster’s Dictionary).
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-6
148-170 EFFECT ON PRIOR ARRIVALS
Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to require any change in or invalidation of plats or projects previously approved and of record prior to the effective date of this Chapter.
148-180 SUBDIVISION APPROVAL AND RECORDING REQUIRED
A. Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed, before any sale, exchange, transfer, or recordation is made of any subdivided part thereof and before any permit for the erection of a structure in such proposed subdivision shall be granted, the applicant shall apply for and secure approval from the Town of Front Royal of such proposed subdivision, in accord with all provisions of this Chapter. Plats for each and every separate parcel comprising the source tract, to include all primary and residual subdivided parcels, shall be required to be submitted for approval. Upon approval, plats shall be recorded among the Land Records of Warren County, Virginia.
B. Hereafter all plans for the subdivision of land within the corporate limits of the Town of Front Royal shall be reviewed and acted upon by the appropriate town, state or other officials in accord with procedures and other requirements as may be provided for in this Chapter. Any change in a recorded plat shall constitute a re-subdivision and shall make said plat subject to any and all of the requirements of this Chapter.
C. No plan or plat for the subdivision of land within the corporate limits of the Town of Front Royal shall be approved unless and until all Town real estate taxes, delinquent taxes, including interest and penalty, on the entire parcel to be subdivided have been paid in full. The Director shall notify the Director of Finance that the plan or plat is ready for signature approval after all review agency comments have been addressed. The Director of Finance shall then be the first person to sign the plans or plats under the notation that all Town real estate taxes have been paid in full.
D. The Town shall not approve a subdivision of land if, after adequate investigations conducted by all public agencies concerned, it has been determined that in the best interest of the public, the site is not suitable for platting and development purposes of the kind proposed. Provisions of this chapter shall be relied upon to determine suitability.
ARTICLE 2 – ADMINISTRATION AND GENERAL REGULATIONS
148-200 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED
A. The Warren County Clerk of Court shall not file or record a plat of a subdivision until such plat has been approved as required herein. The penalties provided herein shall apply to any failure to comply with the provisions of this Chapter.
B. No zoning clearance permit will be issued by any administrative officer of the Town of Front Royal, for the construction of any building or other improvement requiring a permit upon any land for which a subdivision plat or site development plan is required, unless and until the requirements of this Chapter have been complied with. Any person aggrieved by the decision of any administrative official whose decision is required pursuant to this Chapter may appeal said decision to the Town Council.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-7
148-210 ADMINISTRATIVE WAIVER OF TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS
A. Upon compliance with the provisions of Section 148-210.B, the Director may waive either one or more technical requirements of this Chapter, and approve the plat or plan administratively for the following types of subdivision or land development activities.
1. The division of a single lot or parcel into not more than eight (8) parcels or lots.
2. The combination or recombination of previously platted and recorded lots where the total number of lots is not increased, including the vacation or abandonment of a lot line.
3. Minor adjustments to an existing lot line that do not substantially change the size of any lots and which conform to all requirements of the applicable zoning regulations.
4. The change of use, development or re-development in a residential district for three (3) or fewer dwelling units in a single structure.
5. The change of use, development or re-development in a commercial or industrial district where the number of required parking spaces is ten (10) or less and the size of the structure and/or open air use does not exceed two thousand (2,000) square feet.
B. Proper finding shall be made that such subdivision or site development:
1. Does not violate the street frontage, lot area and width requirements of the applicable zoning district.
2. Does not violate the setback requirements of the applicable zoning district for the new property boundaries, where current improvements exist at the time of subdivision.
3. Does not involve the creation or dedication of any new public street or drainage easement.
4. Does not involve the extension of any sewer or water lines.
5. Does not obstruct any natural drainage or transportation facility, including planned transportation facilities.
6. Does not in any way violate the intent of this Chapter, the Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 175), the adopted Stormwater Management Control Plan, or the adopted Comprehensive Plan.
7. Does not concentrate stormwater runoff in an inadequate receiving channel or pipe.
C. The Director may waive or modify any of the plat or plan detail requirements upon request by the applicant and upon finding by the Director that the item is not required for the specific application, or that the modification serves the purpose of this ordinance to at least an equivalent degree.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-8
148-211 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
A. A special exception to the general regulations of this Chapter may be granted by Town Council, for either of the following circumstances:
1. When strict adherence to the general regulations would result in substantial injustice or hardship; provided that, the special exception would not diminish public health, safety or general welfare, including, but not limited to, consideration that adequate provisions are provided to ensure long-term maintenance of public and shared private facilities, and conformance with the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan.
2. When it is demonstrated that use of alternative regulations for a particular development would better achieve at least one of the goals listed below; provided that, the special exception would not diminish public health, safety or general welfare, including, but not limited to, consideration that adequate provisions are provided to ensure long-term maintenance of public and shared private facilities, and conformance with the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan.
a. Creation of affordable housing.
b. Design emphasis on the principles of traditional neighborhood design, including pedestrian-friendly roads, interconnection of new local streets with existing local streets, connectivity of pedestrian networks, and mixed-use neighborhoods.
c. Conservation or use of on-site natural features to protect water quality or open spaces.
B. Any request for an exception, shall be submitted to the Director, and shall include a signed and completed application form, any application fees, and any supporting documentation submitted by the applicant.
C. Prior to approval or denial of any request for an exception, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing, in accordance with Virginia Code § 15.2-2204, to review and provide recommendations to Town Council.
D. Prior to approval or denial of any exception to the design standards of this Chapter, Town Council shall hold a public hearing, in accordance with Virginia Code § 15.2-2204.
E. Town Council may impose such conditions or restrictions upon the premises benefited by an exception as may be necessary to comply with intent of this Chapter and to protect the public interest, safety and/or general welfare.
148-220 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Any person, firm or corporation violating, causing or permitting the violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, may be punishable by a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $1,000. If the violation is uncorrected at
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-9
the time of the conviction, the court shall order the violator to abate or remedy the violation in compliance with the zoning ordinance, within a time period established by the court. Failure to remove or abate a zoning violation within the specified time period shall constitute a separate misdemeanor offense punishable by a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $1,000, and any such failure during any succeeding 10-day period shall constitute a separate misdemeanor offence for each 10-day period punishable by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,500.
148-230 PRIVATE CONTRACTS
This Chapter has no bearing on any private easement, covenant, agreement or restriction, nor is the responsibility of enforcing such private easement, covenant, agreement or restriction implied herein to any public official, unless otherwise required by this Chapter.
148-240 RECORD PLAT REVISIONS OR CHANGES
No change, erasure, correction or revision shall be made on any record plat, or on any accompanying documents, after approval has been endorsed in writing on the plat unless authorization for such changes has been granted in writing by the approving body or its authorized agent.
148-250 AMENDMENTS
The Town Council may amend this Chapter in whole or in part, provided that any such amendment shall either originate with or be submitted to the Planning Commission for recommendation, and further provided that no such amendment shall be adopted without a public hearing or joint public hearing having been held in accordance with § 15.2-2204 (A), Code of Virginia. The Planning Commission shall have up to sixty (60) days after referral by the Council to make a recommendation.
148-260 FILING
When this Chapter is adopted or amended, a certified copy of the ordinance and any and all amendments thereto shall be filed in the office of the Town Manager and Warren County Clerk of Court.
148-270 STORMWATER DRAINAGE FEES (RESERVED)
ARTICLE 3 – SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS AND REVIEW PROCEDURES FOR MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS
148-300 WHEN A MAJOR SUBDIVISION APPLICATION IS REQUIRED
The requirements of this article apply to all major subdivisions, as defined under Article 9 of this chapter, within the boundaries of the Town of Front Royal.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-10
148-301 PRE-APPLICATION PROCEDURE
A pre-application consultation between the applicant and the Director is encouraged prior to the submission of any proposed subdivision. This is desirable to minimize development planning costs, to avoid misunderstanding or misinterpretation and to ensure compliance with the requirements of this Chapter. Representations made at pre-application meetings shall not be binding on the Town or the applicant.
148-305 SKETCH PLAN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS AND REVIEW PROCEDURES
A. Sketch Plan Submission Procedures.
1. A sketch plan of the proposed major subdivision may be submitted prior to the preparation of engineered development plans. In such cases, a sketch plan shall be considered a submission for informal discussion and shall not constitute official submission of a plan to the Town. A sketch plan should be submitted to the Director in numbers sufficient for distribution to and/or review by appropriate Town departments. The sketch plan should be prepared in accordance with the detail requirements of Section 148-1005.
2. Additional information may be provided at the option of the applicant.
B. Sketch Plan Review Procedures.
1. The sketch plan shall be reviewed administratively by the appropriate Town departments, taking into consideration the requirements of the Subdivision and Land Development, Zoning and Tree Ordinances, the arrangement, location and width of streets, the topography of the land, existing and proposed trees, sewage disposal, water supply, drainage and stormwater control, lot sizes and lot arrangement, further development of adjoining lands, the guidelines of the Town Comprehensive Plan and the requirements of other plans and ordinances as adopted by the Town. The advice of other officials or consultants may be sought in reviewing a sketch plan. Within one week of receipt by the Director, the sketch plan submission shall be reviewed for completeness. If found complete, it shall be immediately forwarded to the appropriate Town departments for review.
2. The reviewing departments shall have two (2) weeks for the review of the sketch plan and to provide written comments to the Director. The Director shall then contact the applicant and schedule a meeting to discuss any changes or modifications regarding any aspect of the plan that will be required for approval of future plan submissions. These discussions are informal and will not result in an official summary letter to the applicant, but are intended to serve as a guideline in the preparation of plans.
148-310 PRELIMINARY PLAN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS AND REVIEW PROCEDURES
A Preliminary Plan is required for all proposed major subdivisions.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-11
A. Preliminary Plan Application Procedures
1. An applicant shall submit a preliminary plan application form and checklist to the Director accompanied by plans in numbers determined sufficient for distribution to and review by the appropriate Town departments.
2. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee in the amount set in the schedule of fees.
3. In the event that a Special Use Permit approval is required for any element of the plan or any features therein, a Special Use Permit application shall be made in conjunction with the preliminary application. The Special Use Permit Application may be processed concurrently with the plan, but the SUP must be acted upon by the Planning Commission and approved by the Town Council following standard SUP procedures prior to any approval of the plan.
B. Preliminary Plan Detail Requirements
The preliminary plan shall indicate the proposed layout of the major subdivision including supplemental information and data required for the location of proposed lots, parcels, streets, storm drainage and public utilities. The preliminary plan or any portion thereof involving engineering, planning, landscape architecture or land surveying shall be prepared by qualified professionals licensed as same in the Commonwealth of Virginia. The preliminary plan shall be prepared in accordance with the detail requirements of Section 148-1010.
C. Supplemental Data to Accompany a Preliminary Plan
1. Environmental impact statement.
2. Existing and proposed proffers, if applicable.
D. Preliminary Plan Review Procedures
1. The Director shall determine whether the submitted preliminary plan application is complete, in accord with this Chapter. The Director must notify the applicant of any items that are required to make the application complete and eligible for official submission within ten (10) business days of submission. The date of official acceptance of the plan by the Town shall be noted on the application.
2. Review by the Planning Commission.
a. The commission shall take action on the preliminary plan within 60 days of submission of a complete application. However, if approval of a feature or features of the preliminary plan by a state agency or public authority is necessary, the commission shall have 30 additional days to take action, for a total of 90 days from the submission date of a complete application. When submission to a state agency or public authority is necessary, the commission or agent shall forward the preliminary plan to the
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-12
appropriate state agency or agencies for review within 10 business days of receipt of such preliminary plan. The state agency or agencies are then required by the Virginia Code to provide review comments within 45 days of receipt of the preliminary plan. Upon receipt of the approvals from all state agencies, the commission shall act upon the preliminary plan within 35 days.
b. The Director shall communicate the decision of the commission to the applicant, in writing. If the plan is disapproved, the reasons for disapproval shall be specifically enumerated and the modifications or corrections necessary to permit approval shall be identified.
c. If the commission or agent fails to approve or disapprove the preliminary plan within 90 days after it has been officially submitted for approval, the subdivider after 10 days' written notice to the commission, or agent, may petition the circuit court for the locality in which the land involved, or the major part thereof, is located to enter an order with respect thereto as it deems proper, which may include directing approval of the plat.
d. The Planning Commission shall deny approval of a preliminary plan if it is not in conformance with the Town Code, and all deficiencies on the plan must be addressed by the applicant prior to approval. The Commission may approve the plan if there are only minor deficiencies to correct by writing the deficiencies on the plan with a note that states “These deficiencies will be corrected on the major subdivision submission”.
e. Approval of a preliminary plan does not constitute acceptance of a plat for recording and does not constitute a guaranty of approval of the final subdivision plat.
f. When a preliminary plan has been approved or approved subject to any conditions, no subsequent changes or amendments in the Town Code shall be applied to adversely affect the right of the applicant to commence and to complete final plan approval. If such Chapter is amended after preliminary approval of such plan, the plan will be rendered nonconforming and will be subject to all requirements placed on such nonconformities.
g. Preliminary plan approval does not authorize the construction of improvements within the subdivision development plan.
h. Once a preliminary plan is approved, it shall be valid for a period of five (5) years, provided the subdivider (i) submits a final subdivision plat for all or a portion of the property within one year of such approval or such longer period as may be prescribed by the commission, and (ii) thereafter diligently pursues approval of the final subdivision plat. "Diligent pursuit of approval" means that the subdivider has incurred extensive obligations or substantial expenses relating to the submitted final subdivision plat or modifications thereto. However, no sooner than three years following such preliminary plan approval, and upon 90 days' written notice by certified mail to the subdivider, the commission or other agent may revoke such approval upon a specific finding of facts that the subdivider has not diligently pursued approval of the final subdivision plat.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-13
148-315 MAJOR SUBDIVISION SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS AND REVIEW PROCEDURES
A subdivision development plan and a final subdivision plat are required for all major subdivisions. The applicant shall have not more than thirty six (36), months after receiving official notification of approval of the preliminary plan, to file with the Town an application for major subdivision, in accord with this Chapter. Failure to do so shall make the preliminary plan approval null and void. However, a specific extension of time may be granted by the Town Council upon written request by the applicant. As a condition of any time extension, the Town Council may impose any new or revised standards or regulations adopted since the original preliminary plan approval.
A. Subdivision Development Plan and Final Subdivision Plat Submission Procedures
1. An applicant shall submit a major subdivision application form and checklists for a subdivision development plan and final subdivision plat to the Director along with sufficient number of the plan and plat for distribution to and review by the appropriate Town departments.
2. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee in the amount set in the schedule of fees.
3. In the event that a Special Use Permit approval is required for any element of the plan or any features therein, a special use permit application shall be made in conjunction with the preliminary application. The special use permit application may be processed concurrently with the plan, but the SUP must be acted upon by the Planning Commission and approved by the Town Council following standard SUP procedures prior to any approval of the plan.
B. Subdivision Development Plan and Final Subdivision Plat Detail Requirements
1. The subdivision development plan or any portion thereof involving engineering, planning, landscape architecture or land surveying shall be prepared by qualified professionals licensed as same in the Commonwealth of Virginia. The Subdivision Development Plan shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of Section 148-1015.
2. The final subdivision plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor or professional engineer licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia and shall conform to the Standards for Plats of the Virginia State Library Board (17VAC15-60-10, et seq). The final plat shall be prepared in accordance with the detail requirements of Section 148-1035.
C. Supplemental Data to Accompany Major Subdivision Submission
1. A landscape plan showing all trees proposed to be removed, all trees proposed to be protected, and all trees proposed to be added. The landscape plan shall be draw in accordance to the requirements of this Chapter and Chapter 156 (Tree Ordinance).
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-14
2. An erosion and sedimentation control plan in accord with the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook.
3. A complete list of any and all proffers or other conditions that may be attached to the property through a zoning map amendment, conditional zoning, or special exception approval, in their entirety.
4. A detailed estimate, prepared by a certified professional engineer, of the costs for construction and installation of the following on-site and off-site improvements:
a. Any street, curb, gutter, sidewalk, bicycle trail, drainage facility, sewer utility lines and infrastructure, water utility lines and infrastructure, required trees and shrubs, or other improvement dedicated for public use, located within the subdivision and maintained by the Town, the Commonwealth of Virginia, or any other public agency.
b. Any other site-related improvements required by this Ordinance or the Town Code for vehicular ingress and egress, including traffic signalization and control, public streets, structures necessary to ensure stability of critical slopes and for storm water management facilities.
c. Cost estimates must be based on per-unit quantities and costs for respective public or private-sector construction within the Northern Shenandoah Valley. The estimates must include a reasonable allowance for estimated administrative costs, inflation during the anticipated time of project completion (determined using the most recent yearly rate of change in the Consumer Price Index or Construction Cost Index), and potential damage to existing roads, utilities or other public facilities.
d. Each cost estimate must include an estimated time frame for phasing and completion of all improvements.
e. Cost estimates, including estimated time frames, will be reviewed and approved, approved with revisions, or disapproved by the Director of Environmental Services.
5. All offers of dedication and covenants governing the reservation and maintenance of undedicated open space, which shall bear the certificate of approval of the Town Attorney as to their legal sufficiency.
6. Such deed restrictions as may be imposed upon the property as a condition of sale, together with a statement of any restrictions previously imposed which may affect the title to the land being subdivided.
7. In the event that public water and/or sewer is not available to the site to be subdivided, a certificate of appropriate approval of the State Health Department for the water supply and/or sanitary sewage disposal system(s) for a proposed subdivision. If individual on-site sewage disposal systems are to be used, the applicant shall submit Health Department tentative approval of each lot in the subdivision as having a suitable site for a septic system at the state lot size. This shall be done on a lot-by-lot basis. This tentative approval does
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-15
not guarantee the issuance of a permit for a septic system when construction occurs. The State Health Department reserves the right to withdraw any tentative approval at the time a permit for a septic system is applied for.
D. Major Subdivision Review Procedures
1. The Director shall determine whether the submitted plats, plans and application is complete, in accord with this Chapter. The Director must notify the applicant of any items that are required to make the application complete and eligible for official submission within ten (10) business days of submission. The date of official acceptance of the plan by the Town shall be noted on the application.
2. Review by the Planning Commission.
a. The commission shall take action on the subdivision plat and plan within 60 days of submission. However, if approval of a feature or features of the proposed subdivision by a state agency or public authority is necessary, the commission or agent shall forward the plan and plat to the appropriate state agency or agencies for review within 10 business days of receipt of such plats and plans. Upon receipt of the approvals from all state agencies, the commission shall act upon the subdivision within 35 days.
b. The Director shall communicate the decision of the commission to the applicant, in writing. If the plan or plat is disapproved, the reasons for disapproval shall be specifically enumerated and the modifications or corrections necessary to permit approval shall be identified.
c. The commission or agent shall act on any subdivision plan and plat that it has previously disapproved within 45 days after the plan has been modified, corrected and resubmitted for approval.
d. The Planning Commission shall review the plan and plat and shall ensure that all requirements and standards of the Town Code have been met and that any appropriate changes from the preliminary plan have been made.
e. If the review is favorable, the Planning Commission shall authorize the Director to endorse the plan and plat on behalf of the Planning Commission and to forward it to the Town Council for consideration.
f. An appropriate number of paper prints of the plan and plat and the requisite performance bond shall be forwarded to the Town Council.
g. If the plan and plat is not approved by the Planning Commission, the reasons for such disapproval shall be transmitted, in writing, to the applicant and shall be sent to the Town Council for review.
3. Review by the Town Council.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-16
a. The recommendation of the Planning Commission shall be forwarded to the Town Council for action within sixty (60) days from the date of action by the Commission unless an extension is requested by the applicant. If the commission or other agent fails to approve or disapprove the plat within 60 days after it has been officially submitted for approval, or within 45 days after it has been officially resubmitted after a previous disapproval or within 35 days of receipt of any agency response pursuant to subsection B, the subdivider, after 10-days' written notice to the commission, or agent, may petition the circuit court for the Town of Front Royal in which the land involved, or the major part thereof, is located, to decide whether the plat should or should not be approved. The court shall give the petition priority on the civil docket, hear the matter expeditiously in accordance with the procedures prescribed in Article 2 (§ 8.01-644 et seq.) of Chapter 25 of Title 8.01 and make and enter an order with respect thereto as it deems proper, which may include directing approval of the plat.
b. A performance guaranty, cash or other bond to insure the satisfactory installation of improvements as required shall be submitted before the major subdivision application is placed on the Town Council agenda for consideration and approval.
c. The Town Council shall not approve any plans and plats until such plans and plats comply with the Town Code and until all required modifications are made. If disapproved, the Council shall return the plan and plat to the applicant with the deficiencies indicated thereon.
d. If approved by the Town Council, the plan and plat will be signed by the Director of Finance and the Town Council, with the date of action.
4. Revisions to subdivision design.
a. Any revisions to an approved subdivision development plan must be approved by the Town in accord with the procedures of this Chapter prior to making design changes in the field. The extent of the revisions will determine whether or not the revision can be approved administratively or requires re-review by the Planning Commission and re-approval by the Town Council.
E. As-built Survey Required
1. An as-built plan is required for all subdivision development plans. The as-built drawing shall be prepared in accordance with the detail requirements of Section 148-1025
148-320 FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT RECORDATION REQUIREMENTS
The purpose of good subdivision and site development design is to create a functional and attractive development, to minimize adverse impacts and to ensure that a project will be an asset to the general welfare of the community. To promote this purpose, all subdivision and site development plans shall conform to the standard herein, which are designed to result in a well-planned community without adding unnecessarily to the cost of development.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-17
A. Conditions and Procedures.
1. After approval by the Town Council and with all endorsements indicated on the final subdivision plat, the owner or agent shall record the approved plat in the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court within six (6) months following the date of approval and shall immediately provide a copy of the recorded plat to the Director. No subdivision plat may be legally recorded unless it bears the required Town endorsements.
2. Such plat shall be filed and recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court where deeds are admitted to record for the lands contained in the plat and indexed in the general index of deeds under the names of the owners of lands signing such plat and under the name of the subdivision.
3. Any plat not recorded within six (6) months after approval by the Town Council shall be considered void, and such approval shall be considered withdrawn. The Director shall mark the plat “VOID” and return it to the applicant.
4. The recordation of such plat shall operate to transfer in fee simple to the Town such portion of the premises platted and set apart for streets, alleys or other public use and to transfer to the Town any easement indicated on such plat to create a public right of passage over the same; but nothing contained in this section shall affect any right of a subdivider of land heretofore validly reserved.
B. Termination of Easements. Upon the recording of an approved plat in the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court, all rights-of-way, easements or other interest of the Town in the land included on the plat, except as shown thereon, shall be terminated and extinguished. However, an interest acquired by the Town by condemnation or by purchase for valuable consideration and evidenced by a separate instrument of record shall not be affected thereby.
C. Phased Recordation. Where a developer bonds and records a final subdivision plat that is a section of an approved phasing plan, unless otherwise approved by the commission, the developer shall have the right to record the remaining sections shown on the preliminary plan for a period of five (5) years from the recordation date of the first section. Final subdivision plats and plans shall comply with engineering and construction standards and all requirements of the Town Code in effect at the time each remaining section is recorded.
D. Re-subdivision. If a plat is to be revised or amended after recordation, it is a re-subdivision; amendments prior to recordation are revisions to an approved plat.
148-325 WAIVER OF PLAN AND PLAT SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
In accord with Section 148-210.G. of this Chapter, the Director may make a written determination to waive any submission requirement set forth in this Chapter, if such requirement is not relevant to the review and evaluation as to whether the proposed development meets the requirements of this Chapter.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-18
ARTICLE 4 – SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS AND REVIEW PROCEDURES FOR MINOR SUBDIVISIONS
148-400 WHEN A MINOR SUBDIVISION APPLICATION IS REQUIRED
The requirements of this article apply to all minor subdivisions, as defined under Article 9 of this chapter, within the boundaries of the Town of Front Royal.
148-401 PRE-APPLICATION PROCEDURE
A pre-application consultation between the applicant and the Director is encouraged prior to the submission of any proposed subdivision. This is desirable to minimize development planning costs, to avoid misunderstanding or misinterpretation and to ensure compliance with the requirements of this Chapter. Representations made at pre-application meetings shall not be binding on the Town or the applicant.
148-405 SKETCH PLAN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS AND REVIEW PROCEDURES
A. Sketch Plan Submission Procedures.
1. A sketch plan of the proposed minor subdivision may be submitted prior to the preparation of engineered plans. In such cases, a sketch plan shall be considered a submission for informal discussion and shall not constitute official submission of a plan to the Town. A sketch plan shall be submitted to the Director in numbers sufficient for distribution to and/or review by appropriate Town departments. The sketch plan shall be prepared in accordance with the detail requirements of Section 148-1005.
2. Additional information may be provided at the option of the applicant.
B. Sketch Plan Review Procedures.
1. The sketch plan shall be reviewed administratively by the appropriate Town departments, taking into consideration the requirements of the Subdivision and Zoning Ordinances, the arrangement, location and width of streets, the topography of the land, sewage disposal, water supply, drainage and stormwater control, lot sizes and lot arrangement, further development of adjoining lands, the guidelines of the Town Comprehensive Plan and the requirements of other plans and ordinances as adopted by the Town. The advice of other officials or consultants may be sought in reviewing a sketch plan. Within one week of receipt by the Director, the sketch plan submission shall be reviewed for completeness. If found complete, it shall be immediately forwarded to the appropriate Town departments for review.
2. The reviewing departments shall have two (2) weeks for the review of the sketch plan and to provide written comments to the Director. The Director shall then contact the applicant and schedule a meeting to discuss any changes or modifications regarding any aspect of
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-19
the plan that will be required for approval of future plan submissions. These discussions are informal and will not result in an official summary letter to the applicant, but are intended to serve as a guideline in the preparation of plans.
148-415 MINOR SUBDIVISION SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS AND REVIEW PROCEDURES
A final subdivision plat is required for all minor subdivisions.
A. Minor Subdivision Submission Procedures.
1. An applicant shall submit a minor subdivision application form and checklist for a final subdivision plat to the Director along with sufficient number of the plat for distribution to and review by the appropriate Town departments.
2. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee in the amount set in the schedule of fees.
B. Final Subdivision Plat Detail Requirements. The final subdivision plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor or professional engineer licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia and shall conform to the Standards for Plats of the Virginia State Library Board (17VAC15-60-10, et seq). The Final Plat shall be prepared in accordance with the detail requirements of Section 148-1035.
C. Supplemental Data to Accompany Minor Subdivision Submission.
1. An overlot grading plan or generalized development plan as determined by the Director. The overlot grading plan and/or generalized development plan shall be prepared in accord with the requirements contained herein.
2. In the event that public water and/or sewer is not available to the site to be subdivided, a certificate of appropriate approval of the State Health Department for the water supply and/or sanitary sewage disposal system(s) for a proposed subdivision. If individual on-site sewage disposal systems are to be used, the applicant shall submit Health Department tentative approval of each lot in the subdivision as having a suitable site for a septic system at the state lot size. This shall be done on a lot-by-lot basis. This tentative approval does not guarantee the issuance of a permit for a septic system when construction occurs. The State Health Department reserves the right to withdraw any tentative approval at the time a permit for a septic system is applied for.
D. Minor Subdivision Review Procedures.
1. The Director shall determine whether the submitted plat, plan and application is complete, in accord with this Chapter. The Director must notify the applicant of any items that are required to make the application complete and eligible for official submission within ten (10) business days of submission. The date of official acceptance of the application by the Town shall be noted on the application.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-20
2. After official acceptance of the application, the Director shall submit the plat and plan to the appropriate Town departments for review. The Director shall take action on the application within 60 days of submission. However, if approval of a feature or features of the proposed subdivision by a state agency or public authority is necessary, the commission or agent shall forward the plat and plan to the appropriate state agency or agencies for review within 10 business days of receipt of such plat or plan. Upon receipt of the approvals from all state agencies, the Director shall act upon the submission within 35 days.
3. The Director shall not approve any plan or plat until such plan or plat comply with the Town Code and until all required modifications are made. The Director shall notify the applicant if the plan or plat is disapproved, in writing, and the reasons for disapproval shall be specifically enumerated and the modifications or corrections necessary for approval shall be identified.
4. The Director shall act on any subdivision plan and plat that was previously disapproved within 45 days after the plan has been modified, corrected and resubmitted for approval.
5. If the review is favorable, the plat will be signed by the Director, the Director of Finance and the Town Manager, with the date of action.
E. As-built Survey Required.
1. An as-built plan is required for all minor subdivision overlot grading plans. The as-built drawing shall be prepared in accordance with the detail requirements of Section 148-1025.
148-420 FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT RECORDATION REQUIREMENTS
A. Conditions and Procedures.
1. After approval by the Director and with all endorsements indicated on the final subdivision plat, the owner or agent shall record the approved plat in the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court within six (6) months following the date of approval and shall immediately provide a copy of the recorded plat to the Director. No subdivision plat may be legally recorded unless it bears the required Town endorsements.
2. Such plat shall be filed and recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court where deeds are admitted to record for the lands contained in the plat and indexed in the general index of deeds under the names of the owners of lands signing such plat and under the name of the subdivision.
3. Any plat not recorded within six (6) months after approval by the Director shall be considered void, and such approval shall be considered withdrawn. The Director shall mark the plat “VOID” and return it to the applicant.
4. The recordation of such plat shall operate to transfer in fee simple to the Town such portion of the premises platted and set apart for streets, alleys or other public use and to
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-21
transfer to the Town any easement indicated on such plat to create a public right of passage over the same; but nothing contained in this section shall affect any right of a subdivider of land heretofore validly reserved.
B. Termination of Easements.
1. Upon the recording of an approved plat in the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court, all rights-of-way, easements or other interest of the Town in the land included on the plat, except as shown thereon, shall be terminated and extinguished. However, an interest acquired by the Town by condemnation or by purchase for valuable consideration and evidenced by a separate instrument of record shall not be affected thereby.
C. (Intentionally left blank)
D. Re-subdivision.
1. If a plat is to be revised or amended after recordation, it is a re-subdivision; amendments prior to recordation are revisions to an approved plat.
148-425 WAIVER OF PLAN AND PLAT SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
In accord with Section 148-210.G. of this Chapter, the Director may make a written determination to waive any submission requirement set forth in this Chapter, if such requirement is not relevant to the review and evaluation as to whether the proposed development meets the requirements of this Chapter.
ARTICLE 5 – SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS AND REVIEW PROCEDURES FOR MAJOR SITE DEVELOPMENT PLANS
148-500 WHEN A MAJOR SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN IS REQUIRED
The requirements of this article apply to development, as defined by Article 9 of this Chapter, within the Town of Front Royal. Certain types of development may submit a minor site development plan in lieu of a major site development plan, as specified under the definition for a minor site development plan in Article 9 of this Chapter.
148-501 PRE-APPLICATION PROCEDURE
A pre-application consultation between the applicant and the Director is encouraged prior to the submission of any proposed major site development plan. This is desirable to minimize development planning costs, to avoid misunderstanding or misinterpretation and to ensure compliance with the requirements of this Chapter. Representations made at pre-application meetings shall not be binding on the Town or the applicant.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-22
148-505 SKETCH PLAN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS AND REVIEW PROCEDURES
A. Sketch Plan Submission Procedures.
1. A sketch plan of the proposed major site development may be submitted prior to the preparation of engineered site development plans. In such cases, a sketch plan shall be considered a submission for informal discussion and shall not constitute official submission of a plan to the Town. A sketch plan shall be submitted to the Director in numbers sufficient for distribution to and/or review by appropriate Town departments. The sketch plan shall be prepared in accordance with the detail requirements of Section 148-1005.
2. Additional information may be provided at the option of the applicant.
B. Sketch Plan Review Procedures.
1. The sketch plan shall be reviewed administratively by the appropriate Town departments, taking into consideration the requirements of the Subdivision & Land Development and Zoning Ordinances, the arrangement, location and width of streets, the topography of the land, sewage disposal, water supply, drainage and stormwater control, lot sizes and lot arrangement, further development of adjoining lands, the guidelines of the Town Comprehensive Plan and the requirements of other plans and ordinances as adopted by the Town. The advice of other officials or consultants may be sought in reviewing a sketch plan. Within one week of receipt by the Director, the sketch plan submission shall be reviewed for completeness. If found complete, it shall be immediately forwarded to the appropriate Town departments for review.
2. The reviewing departments shall have two (2) weeks for the review of the sketch plan and to provide written comments to the Director. The Director shall then contact the applicant and schedule a meeting to discuss any changes or modifications regarding any aspect of the plan that will be required for approval of future plan submissions. These discussions are informal and will not result in an official summary letter to the applicant, but are intended to serve as a guideline in the preparation of plans.
148-515 MAJOR SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS AND REVIEW PROCEDURES
A. Major Site Development Plan Submission Procedures
1. An applicant shall submit a major site development plan application form and checklist to the Director accompanied by plans in numbers determined sufficient for distribution to and review by the appropriate Town departments and any necessary State or Federal agencies.
2. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee in the amount set in
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-23
the schedule of fees.
3. In the event that Special Use Permit approval is required for any element of the plan or any features therein, a Special Use Permit application shall be made in conjunction with the site development plan submission. The Special Use Permit Application may be processed concurrently with the plan, but the SUP must be acted upon by the Planning Commission and approved by the Town Council following standard SUP procedures prior to any approval of the plan.
B. Major Site Development Plan Detail Requirements
1. The major site development plan or any portion thereof involving engineering, planning, landscape architecture or land surveying shall be prepared by qualified professionals licensed as same in the Commonwealth of Virginia. The site development plan shall be prepared in accordance with the detail requirements of Section 148-1020.
C. Supplemental Data to Accompany Major Site Development Plan Submission
1. A landscape plan showing the location, number, species and size of plant materials, in accord with this Chapter. The plan shall show existing trees that are to be preserved on the site and the methods employed for ensuring preservation during the construction process.
2. An erosion and sedimentation control plan in accord with the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook.
3. A complete list of any and all proffers or other conditions that may be attached to the property through a zoning map amendment, conditional zoning, or special exception approval, in their entirety.
4. A detailed estimate, prepared by a certified professional engineer, of the costs for construction and installation of the following on-site and off-site improvements:
a. Any street, curb, gutter, sidewalk, bicycle trail, drainage or sewerage system, waterline as part of a public system or other improvement dedicated for public use, located within the subdivision and maintained by the Town, the Commonwealth, or any other public agency.
b. Any other site-related improvements required by this Ordinance or the Town Code for vehicular ingress and egress, including traffic signalization and control, public streets, structures necessary to ensure stability of critical slopes and for storm water management facilities.
c. Cost estimates must be based on per-unit quantities and costs for respective public or private-sector construction within the Northern Shenandoah Valley. The estimates must include a reasonable allowance for estimated administrative costs, inflation during the anticipated time of project completion (determined using the most recent
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-24
yearly rate of change in the Consumer Price Index or Construction Cost Index), and potential damage to existing roads, utilities or other public facilities.
d. Each cost estimate must include an estimated time frame for phasing and completion of all improvements.
e. Cost estimates, including estimated time frames, will be reviewed and approved, approved with revisions, or disapproved by the Director of Environmental Services.
5. All offers of dedication and covenants governing the reservation and maintenance of undedicated open space, which shall bear the certificate of approval of the Town Attorney as to their legal sufficiency.
6. If applicable, a record plat showing any proposed easements and/or rights-of-way to be dedicated for utility or street construction.
D. Major Site Development Plan Review Procedures
1. The Director shall determine whether the submitted plan and application is complete, in accord with this Chapter. The Director must notify the applicant of any items that are required to make the application complete and eligible for official submission within ten (10) business days of submission. The date of official acceptance of the plan by the Town shall be noted on the application.
2. Review by the Planning Commission.
a. The commission shall take action on the major site development plan within 60 days of submission. However, if approval of a feature or features of the plan by a state agency or public authority is necessary, the commission or agent shall forward the plat and plan to the appropriate state agency or agencies for review within 10 business days of receipt of such plan. Upon receipt of the approvals from all state agencies, the commission shall act upon the site development plan within 35 days.
b. The Director shall communicate the decision of the commission to the applicant, in writing. If the plan is disapproved, the reasons for disapproval shall be specifically enumerated and the modifications or corrections necessary to permit approval shall be identified.
c. The commission or agent shall act on any major site development plan that it has previously disapproved within 45 days after the plan has been modified, corrected and resubmitted for approval.
d. The Planning Commission shall review the plan and shall ensure that all requirements and standards of the Town Code have been met and that any appropriate changes from the preliminary plan have been made.
e. An approved major site development plan shall be valid for a period of not less than
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-25
five years from the date of approval thereof or for such longer period as the local planning commission or other agent may, at the time of approval, determine to be reasonable, taking into consideration the size and phasing of the proposed development. A site plan shall be deemed final once it has been reviewed and approved by the locality if the only requirement remaining to be satisfied in order to obtain a building permit is the posting of any bonds and escrows. Upon application of the subdivider or developer filed prior to expiration of a recorded plat or final site plan, the local planning commission or other agent may grant one or more extensions of such approval for additional periods as the commission or other agent may, at the time the extension is granted, determine to be reasonable, taking into consideration the size and phasing of the proposed development, the laws, ordinances and regulations in effect at the time of the request for an extension.
f. Where a site development plan has been approved, or approved subject to any conditions, prior to the effective date of an ordinance, no subsequent changes or amendments to the Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision Ordinance or other governing ordinance or plan shall be applied to adversely affect the right of the applicant to commence and to complete any item for which the site development plan approval was granted.
3. Revisions to site development plan design.
a. Any revisions to an approved site development plan must be approved by the Town in accord with the procedures of this Chapter prior to making design changes in the field. The extent of the revisions will determine whether or not the revision can be approved administratively or requires re-review by the Planning Commission.
E. As-built Plan Required
1. An as-built plan is required for all major site development plans. The as-built drawing shall be prepared in accordance with the detail requirements of Section 148-1025.
148-525 WAIVER OF PLAN AND PLAT SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
In accord with Section 148-210.G. of this Chapter, the Director may make a written determination to waive any submission requirement set forth in this Chapter, if such requirement is not relevant to the review and evaluation as to whether the proposed development meets the requirements of this Chapter.
ARTICLE 6 – SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS AND REVIEW PROCEDURES FOR MINOR SITE DEVELOPMENT PLANS
148-600 WHEN MINOR SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN IS REQUIRED
The requirements of this article apply to the specific types of development specified under the definition of a minor site development plan, found under Article 9 of this Chapter.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-26
148-601 PRE-APPLICATION PROCEDURE
A pre-application consultation between the applicant and the Director is encouraged prior to the submission of any proposed site development plan. This is desirable to minimize development planning costs, to avoid misunderstanding or misinterpretation and to ensure compliance with the requirements of this Chapter. Representations made at pre-application meetings shall not be binding on the Town or the applicant.
148-605 SKETCH PLAN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS AND REVIEW PROCEDURES
A. Sketch Plan Submission Procedures.
1. A sketch plan of the proposed minor site development may be submitted prior to the preparation of engineered site development plans. In such cases, a sketch plan shall be considered a submission for informal discussion and shall not constitute official submission of a plan to the Town. A sketch plan shall be submitted to the Director in numbers sufficient for distribution to and/or review by appropriate Town departments. The sketch plan shall be prepared in accordance with the detail requirements of Section 148-1005.
2. Additional information may be provided at the option of the applicant.
B. Sketch Plan Review Procedures.
1. The sketch plan shall be reviewed administratively by the appropriate Town departments, taking into consideration the requirements of the Subdivision and Zoning Ordinances, the arrangement, location and width of streets, the topography of the land, sewage disposal, water supply, drainage and stormwater control, lot sizes and lot arrangement, further development of adjoining lands, the guidelines of the Town Comprehensive Plan and the requirements of other plans and ordinances as adopted by the Town. The advice of other officials or consultants may be sought in reviewing a sketch plan. Within one week of receipt by the Director, the sketch plan submission shall be reviewed for completeness. If found complete, it shall be immediately forwarded to the appropriate Town departments for review.
2. The reviewing departments shall have two (2) weeks for the review of the sketch plan and to provide written comments to the Director. The Director shall then contact the applicant and schedule a meeting to discuss any changes or modifications regarding any aspect of the plan that will be required for approval of future plan submissions. These discussions are informal and will not result in an official summary letter to the applicant, but are intended to serve as a guideline in the preparation of plans.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-27
148-615 MINOR SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS AND REVIEW PROCEDURES
A. Minor Site Development Plan Submission Procedures
1. An applicant shall submit a minor site development plan application form and checklist to the Director accompanied by plans in numbers determined sufficient for distribution to and review by the appropriate Town departments and any necessary State or Federal agencies.
2. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee in the amount set in the schedule of fees.
B. Minor Site Development Plan Detail Requirements
The Minor Site development plan or any portion thereof involving engineering, planning, landscape architecture or land surveying shall be prepared by qualified professionals licensed as same in the Commonwealth of Virginia. The site development plan shall be prepared in accordance with the detail requirements of Section 148-1020.
C. Supplemental Data to Accompany Minor Site Development Plan Submission
An Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan in accord with the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, if applicable.
D. Minor Site Development Plan Review Procedures.
1. The Director shall determine whether the submitted plan and application is complete, in accord with this Chapter. The Director must notify the applicant of any items that are required to make the application complete and eligible for official submission within ten (10) business days of submission. The date of official acceptance of the plan by the Town shall be noted on the application.
2. After official acceptance of the application, the Director shall submit the plat and plan to the appropriate town departments for review. The Director shall take action on the application within 60 days of submission. However, if approval of a feature or features of the proposed subdivision by a state agency or public authority is necessary, the commission or agent shall forward the plat and plan to the appropriate state agency or agencies for review within 10 business days of receipt of such plat or plan. Upon receipt of the approvals from all state agencies, the Director shall act upon the submission within 35 days.
3. Except where a phased project has been approved by the Town, a minor site development plan shall be void if a building permit for all aspects of the approved plan is not obtained within one (1) year of final approval.
4. The Director shall not approve any plan until such plan complies with the Town Code and
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-28
until all required modifications are made. The Director shall notify the applicant if the plan is disapproved, in writing, and the reasons for disapproval shall be specifically enumerated and the modifications or corrections necessary for approval shall be identified.
5. The Director shall act on any plan that was previously disapproved within 45 days after the plan has been modified, corrected and resubmitted for approval.
6. If the review is favorable, the plan will be signed by the Director, the Director of Finance and the Town Manager, with the date of action.
E. As-built Plan Required
An as-built plan is required for all minor site development plans, except where waived in accordance with this Chapter. The as-built drawing shall be prepared in accordance with the detail requirements of Section 148-1025.
148-625 WAIVER OF PLAN AND PLAT SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
In accord with Section 148-210.G. of this Chapter, the Director may make a written determination to waive any submission requirement set forth in this Chapter, if such requirement is not relevant to the review and evaluation as to whether the proposed development meets the requirements of this Chapter.
ARTICLE 7 – SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS AND REVIEW PROCEDURES FOR BOUNDARY ADJUSTMENTS AND LOT CONSOLIDATIONS
148-700 WHEN A BOUNDARY ADJUSTMENT OR LOT CONSOLIDATION APPLICATION IS REQUIRED
The requirements of this article apply to any boundary adjustment or lot consolidation, as defined by Article 9 of this Chapter, within the Town of Front Royal. A plat of survey that does not involve any changes to the existing lot or parcel is not subject to the requirements of this article.
148-701 PRE-APPLICATION PROCEDURE
A pre-application consultation between the applicant and the Director is encouraged prior to the submission of any proposed boundary adjustment or lot consolidation. This is desirable to avoid misunderstanding or misinterpretation and to ensure compliance with the requirements of this Chapter. Representations made at pre-application meetings shall not be binding on the Town or the applicant.
148-715 BOUNDARY ADJUSTMENT AND LOT CONSOLIDATION SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS AND REVIEW PROCEDURES
A boundary adjustment/ lot consolidation plat is required for all boundary adjustments or lot consolidations.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-29
A. Boundary Adjustment and Lot Consolidation Submission Procedures.
1. An applicant shall submit a boundary adjustment/ lot consolidation application form and checklist to the Director along with sufficient number of copies of the plat for distribution to and review by the appropriate Town departments.
2. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee in the amount set in the schedule of fees.
B. Boundary Adjustment and Lot Consolidation Plat Detail Requirements. The boundary adjustment/ lot consolidation plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor or professional engineer licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia and shall conform to the Standards for Plats of the Virginia State Library Board (17VAC15-60-10, et seq). The Final Plat shall be prepared in accordance with the detail requirements of Section 148-1040.
C. (Intentionally left blank)
D. Boundary Adjustment and Lot Consolidation Review Procedures.
1. The Director shall determine whether the submitted plat application is complete, in accord with this Chapter. The Director must notify the applicant of any items that are required to make the application complete and eligible for official submission within ten (10) business days of submission. The date of official acceptance of the application by the Town shall be noted on the application.
2. After official acceptance of the application, the Director shall submit the plat to the appropriate Town departments for review. The Director shall take action on the application within 60 days of submission. However, if approval of a feature or features of the proposed boundary adjustment or lot consolidation by a state agency or public authority is necessary, the director shall forward the plat to the appropriate state agency or agencies for review within 10 business days of receipt of such plat. Upon receipt of the approvals from all state agencies, the Director shall act upon the submission within 35 days.
3. The Director shall not approve the plat until such plat complies with the Town Code and until all required modifications are made. The Director shall notify the applicant if the plat is disapproved, in writing, and the reasons for disapproval shall be specifically enumerated and the modifications or corrections necessary for approval shall be identified.
4. The Director shall act on any boundary adjustment or lot consolidation plat that was previously disapproved within 45 days after the plat has been modified, corrected and resubmitted for approval.
5. If the review is favorable, the plat will be signed by the Director, the Director of Finance and the Town Manager, with the date of action.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-30
148-720 FINAL PLAT RECORDATION REQUIREMENTS
A. Conditions and Procedures
1. After approval by the Director and with all endorsements indicated on the final plat, the owner or agent shall record the approved plat in the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court within six (6) months following the date of approval and shall immediately provide a copy of the recorded plat to the Director. No plat may be legally recorded unless it bears the required Town endorsements.
2. Such plat shall be filed and recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court where deeds are admitted to record for the lands contained in the plat and indexed in the general index of deeds under the names of the owners of lands signing such plat.
3. Any plat not recorded within six (6) months after approval by the Director shall be considered void, and such approval shall be considered withdrawn. The Director shall mark the plat “VOID” and return it to the applicant.
148-725 WAIVER OF PLAN AND PLAT SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
In accord with Section 148-210.G. of this Chapter, the Director may make a written determination to waive any submission requirement set forth in this Chapter, if such requirement is not relevant to the review and evaluation as to whether the proposed development meets the requirements of this Chapter.
ARTICLE 8 – DESIGN STANDARDS
148-800 GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. The design standards and regulations of this Article shall be required as minimum requirements for all subdivisions and developments within the Town.
B. Except where this Article specifically requires or allows for the approval of alternative design standards, the design standards of the Virginia Department of Transportation, Virginia Department of Conservation and Recreation, Virginia Department of Environmental Protection shall be required for all subdivisions and development.
C. The requirements of this Article incorporate by reference the additional minimum standards of the document Construction Standards and Specifications Manual (2005), or as may be amended in the future after review by the Planning Commission and approval by Town Council.
148-810 DEVELOPER’S RESPONSIBILITY
Nothing herein shall be construed to create an obligation on the Town to design, engineer, or construct any of the improvements required by this article. Costs associated with new
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-31
subdivisions or developments shall be responsibility of the developer or subdivider unless otherwise approved by Town Council.
148-820 STREET DESIGN
A. General Standards
1. All streets shall be dedicated to the Town of Front Royal for public use, and shall be designed, engineered and constructed to the public street design standards found within the Construction Standards and Specifications Manual.
2. Proposed subdivisions and developments shall coordinate the location, width and other street improvements associated with proposed streets with existing and planned streets that are contiguous to, or within, the property boundaries. For the purposes of this subsection, planned streets shall include streets, rights-of-way, and street improvements designated as a future road improvement by the Town of Front Royal Comprehensive Plan. Town Council, upon recommendation by the Planning Commission, may waive this requirement where the continuation of the planned, existing or platted street will create adverse traffic impacts.
a. The proposed street system shall extend existing or planned streets at the same width or larger, but at not less than the required minimum width as specified in this chapter. Where possible, a new intersection into an existing street shall align with an existing street intersection on the opposite side of such street.
b. Streets that are designated for continuation to adjoining properties shall be designed and constructed to the property line with a temporary cul-de-sac turnaround, or other temporary turn-around approved by the Town.
3. Whenever a property proposed for subdivision or development abuts or contains an existing public street that does not meet the minimum right-of-way width requirements of this article, additional right-of-way shall be provided on each side of the existing public street abutting the proposed subdivision or development so the minimum right-of-way width requirement is ultimately achieved.
4. On-site road improvements shall be required for new subdivisions or developments based on the requirements of this chapter.
5. In accordance with Virginia Code §15.2-2242.A.4, the Town may accept certain off-site road improvements that are reasonable and necessary, the need for which is substantially generated and reasonably required by the construction or improvement of the subdivision or development. Off-site road improvements may include, but are not limited to, acceleration and deceleration lanes, a center turning lane, a parallel service drive, reverse frontage lots, and/or the dedication of additional right-of-way.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-32
6. In accordance with Virginia Code §15.2-2242.A.4, the Town may develop reasonable provisions for the advancement of payments for, or construction of, reasonable and necessary road improvements located outside the property limits of the land owned or controlled by the subdivider or development, the need for which is substantially generated and reasonably required by the construction or improvement.
7. Private lanes or streets shall not be authorized for any new or existing subdivision or development without approval by the Town in accordance with Section 148-820.N.
B. Partial and Half Streets. Partial and half street sections of the required full street section may be authorized for subdivisions or developments with multiple phases, provided that the partial or half sections are sufficient to handle anticipated traffic volumes for the stage of development. Where possible, the dedication and grading of the full section shall be provided during the engineering and construction processes for the partial or half street sections.
C. Street Hierarchy and Right-of-Way Widths.
1. Streets shall be classified in the following street hierarchy system based on the characteristics and magnitude of the service to be provided.
a. Local Streets. Local Streets, also referred to as Subdivision Streets, shall include streets that function to serve as direct access to adjacent land for relatively short distances. Streets shall be classified as a Local Streets when the projected traffic volume is less than 2,000 average daily trips (ADT), except when appropriate to designate as Collector or Arterial Streets based on the Virginia Department of Transportation (VDOT) Road Design Manual, and associated Appendixes.
b. Collector Streets. Collector Streets shall include streets that function to serve as a distributor to arterial streets for relatively medium distances. Streets shall be classified as Collector Streets in accordance with the Virginia Department of Transportation (VDOT) Road Design Manual, and associated Appendixes.
c. Arterial Streets. Arterial streets shall include streets that function to serve as a main travel route between designations for relatively long distances. Streets shall be classified as Arterial Streets in accordance with the Virginia Department of Transportation (VDOT) Road Design Manual, and associated Appendixes.
2. The minimum width of a proposed street right-of-way, measured from lot line to lot line on either side of such right-of-way, shall be as shown in the table below for Alleys and Local Streets. Arterial Streets shall comply with the minimum right-of-way requirements found within the Virginia Department of Transportation Road Design Manual, and associated appendixes.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-33
3. Additional right-of-way and pavement widths may be required by the Town Council for major subdivisions, the Director for minor subdivisions, or the Planning Commission for developments other than subdivisions, for the purpose of promoting the public safety and convenience or to provide parking in commercial and industrial areas and in areas of high-density residential development.
D. Construction of Public Streets and Alleys. The following specifications shall apply for public streets within the corporate limits of Front Royal, unless otherwise approved by special exception.
1. The roadway shall be graded to the full width of the right-of-way.
2. Where deemed necessary, the Town may require boring tests, and if warranted, require the replacement of unsuitable subgrade materials and compaction certification of the subgrade and base materials for new streets.
3. When grading slopes steeper than 50% or where erosive soils are present, the Town may require on-site inspection of grading activities to be inspected by a geotechnical engineer provided by the developer.
4. The subdivider or developer shall be required to warrant and repair any deficiencies in the constructed roadway for one (1) year following the date of acceptance by the Town Council.
5. The roadway shall meet the geometric design requirements of VDOT, unless otherwise specified within this Chapter.
6. The minimum design standards of the following table shall be required for all Local Streets, Collector Streets and Alleys. Arterial Streets design standards shall comply with the Virginia Department of Transportation Road Design Manual, and associated Appendixes.
1 The minimum right-of-way may be reduced when against the curb. Minimum right-of-way width1
Alleys
20’
Local Streets
Up to 1,000 ADT
50’
1001 to 2,000 ADT
55’
Collector Streets
65’
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-34
Pavement Width (SM-9.5A)2 Base Course Width (BM 25.0)3 Sub Base Width (21-B)4 Surface Course Pavement Depth (SM-9.5A) Base Course Depth (BM 25.0) Sub Base Depth (21-B)5
Alleys
12’
N/A
N/A
11/2”
N/A
6”
Local Streets:
Up to 2,000 ADT
36’
36’
39’
11/2”
3”
6”
Collector Streets6:
40’
40’
43’
11/2”
3”
6”
E. Restriction of Access.
1. The following streets are hereby classified as limited-access by the Town:
a. West Strasburg Road from its intersection with North Shenandoah Avenue westward to the Town boundary.
b. John Marshall Highway from its intersection with South Commerce Avenue eastward to the Town boundary.
c. Leach Run Parkway from its intersection with Happy Creek Road southward to John Marshall Highway (upon completion).
d. Reserved.
e. Reserved.
2. Streets that are classified as limited-access streets shall only be accessed from connections with public streets or approved private streets.
3. Whenever a proposed subdivision contains or is adjacent to a limited-access highway, provisions shall be made for either a service drive or for reverse frontage lots. A service drive shall be approximately parallel to such right-of-way at a distance suitable for an appropriate use of the land between such highway and the proposed subdivision. Such distances shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for ingress and egress to the main thoroughfare. The right-of-way of any highway or street projected across any railroad or limited access highway shall be of adequate width to provide for the cuts or fills required for any future separation of grades.
2 Pavement is from face-of-curb to face-of-curb, which includes the gutter pan.
3 Base Course is from face-of-curb to face-of-curb, which includes the gutter pan.
4 Sub Base extends beyond the widths of pavement, base course and curb and gutter.
5 Stone, gravel, or other satisfactory material approved by the Town.
6 These minimum standards for Collector Streets shall be increased where required by the standards for Collector Streets found within the Virginia Department of Transportation Road Design Manual, but shall not be less.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-35
F. Approach Angle and Alignment. All streets shall approach each other at an angle of not less than eighty degrees (80o) unless the Town shall approve a lesser angle of approach for reasons of terrain, contour or the matching of existing patterns. Street jogs with a center-line offset of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall not be permitted. Town Council may authorize a waiver to this requirement if no other reasonable alternative exists and it is demonstrated that the deviation will not result significant traffic problems.
G. Street Grades. Center-line grades for all streets shall not exceed ten percent (10%). The grade of cul-de-sac turnarounds shall not exceed four percent (4%).
H. Cul-de-sac and Dead-end Streets.
1. Dead-end streets shall be prohibited, except for the circumstances listed below.
a. Dead-end streets shall be permitted as stubs to permit future extensions to adjoining land or future phases of a subdivision or development.
b. Dead end streets shall be permitted where, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, interconnectivity is not desired or feasible for the proposed type of subdivision or development.
2. In such instances when dead-end streets are allowed, they shall be designed as cul-de-sac streets.
3. Cul-de-sac streets shall not exceed eight hundred (800) feet in length and shall not furnish access to more than twenty-five (25) individual lots.
4. Any dead-end street intended for access to an adjoining property or created as the result of stage development shall be provided with a temporary all-weather turnaround within the subdivision. Such dead-end streets shall not exceed eight hundred (800) feet in length from the center line of the nearest road intersection.
5. Except for permanently designed cul-de-sac streets, the turnaround right-of-way of dead-end streets shall be placed adjacent to the tract on the subdivision stage boundary with sufficient additional width provided along the boundary line to permit extension of the street at full width.
6. All dead-end and cul-de-sac streets shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround whose minimum radius shall be forty (40) feet.
7. Drainage of cul-de-sac streets shall preferably be designed towards the open end. If drainage is designed toward the closed end, adequate provisions shall be made for runoff to be carried away. Drainage easements shall be required where necessary.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-36
I. Street Signs and Names. All procedures and standards for street signs and names shall be consistent with the E-911 Addressing System which shall supersede the standards below in the case of any conflict between them.
1. At each street intersection within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision, one (1) street identification sign of a design approved by the Town shall be installed by and at the expense of the subdivider/developer. Such signs shall comply with VDOT’s street sign requirements and the Federal Highway Administration’s Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
2. Street names shall be subject to the approval of the Town Council. Names of existing streets shall not be changed except by approval of the Council.
3. A proposed street which is in alignment with an existing named street shall bear the name of the existing street.
4. The name of a proposed street shall not duplicate that of an existing street in the Town or in the postal district. The use of the following suffixes: street, road, avenue, boulevard, drive, way, place, court, lane, etc., shall constitute a duplication if used after a name which is repeated after the suffix. Names which may be confused with existing street names shall be avoided.
5. Should development on a street occur prior to acceptance of the street for maintenance by the Town, temporary signs indicating “Not Maintained by the Town” with the proposed street name shall be installed by the developer.
J. Alleys
1. Alleys may be permitted where vehicular access to lots is restricted from public streets.
2. Dead-end alleys shall be avoided. In the event that this proves impractical, dead-end alleys shall terminate with an all-weather circular turnaround having a minimum radius of forty (40) feet.
3. Alley intersections and sharp changes in alley alignment shall be avoided.
4. Notwithstanding the requirements of Section 148-870.A.20, rear load parking access from alleys is permitted as a means of meeting required parking standards.
K. Driveways. Private driveways on corner lots shall be located at least forty (40) feet from the curbline intersection.
L. Railroad Crossings. The creation of new at-grade railroad crossings shall be prohibited, unless it involves the closure of one or more existing at-grade railroad crossings and improves overall safety. Existing at-grade railroad crossings shall not be used as the primary means of access to a subdivision or development. Where existing at-grade railroad crossings are utilized as
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-37
secondary access or are included within the streets of a subdivision, the applicant shall be responsible for providing flashing lights and short-arm gates, unless the railroad track is no longer active.
M. Subdivision and Development Entrances.
1. All means of access and entrances to a subdivision or development shall conform to all applicable standards of the Town and the Virginia Department of Transportation.
2. Where feasible, each subdivision shall provide two (2) connections to an existing public street where the traffic generated from the subdivision or development is between five hundred one (501) and two thousand (2,000) ADT's. Three (3) road connections shall be provided where the traffic generated exceeds two thousand (2,000) ADT's. In situations where only one (1) street connection is physically possible, due to topography, site distance or road frontage, the single entrance street shall be a four-lane restricted access divided road with a length of not less than two hundred fifty (250) feet for roads generating two thousand one (2,001) or more ADTs, and for every additional five hundred (500) ADTs generated, the four lane divided street standard shall be extended an additional one hundred (100) feet. Streets with two thousand (2,000) or fewer ADTs shall not be subject to this requirement.
N. Private Streets, Common Driveways, and Common Parking Courts.
1. Private Streets
a. Subdivisions on existing private non-dedicated private streets are permitted only as follows:
[1] Each lot parcel shall be a minimum of two (2) acres in area, regardless of zoning district classification.
[2] Each lot and residual parcel shall abut with a minimum frontage of one hundred seventy five (175) feet on the existing private non-dedicated street, regardless of zoning district classification.
[3] The existing private non-dedicated street shall have been platted and recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Warren County on or before December 31, 1978.
[4] The existing non-dedicated street shall have a platted width of at least fifty (50) feet at the date of subdivision approval. For subdivisions along Locust Dale Road, the width can be approved as thirty (30) feet for that section at or near John Marshall Highway.
[5] As of the date of subdivision approval, the platted non-dedicated street shall be in existence and shall conform to minimum design standards of a graded road surface
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-38
of at least twenty (20) feet wide, suitable for motor vehicle traffic, topped with gravel, crushed stone or other all-weather material, and provided with such culverts and ditching as are necessary to carry water runoff and to prevent erosion of the road surface. Conformity with said minimum design standards shall be subject to the inspection and approval by the Town.
[6] In order to facilitate future dedication of street right-of-way, the applicant shall dedicate to the Town of Front Royal such additional footage along the street frontage of each lot and residual parcel necessary to increase the street width to that required for the type of street in accordance with this Chapter, for that portion of the street abutting the subdivided lots and residual parcels. The applicant shall further dedicate to the Town of Front Royal any and all property interest he may possess in the existing non-dedicated street as a whole.
[7] All the aforesaid dedications shall be contingent and shall not take effect until such time as the entire street or a contiguous portion connected to a public street is improved to the then-current state standards for public streets, is subsequently dedicated to the Town of Front Royal by all parties in interest and is accepted by the Town of Front Royal as a public street. Until such time, the Town of Front Royal shall be under no obligation to maintain or improve any portion of the aforesaid street, and the Town shall not be liable for any acts or omissions associated with the street and its use.
[8] The private street does not exceed a total of 25 dwelling units or lots.
b. Subdivisions on new non-dedicated private streets may be permitted upon the approval of a special exception by Town Council. In addition to the general submission requirements for special exceptions, as prescribed under this Chapter, requests for private streets through the special exception process shall include a concept plan prepared by a Virginia registered architect, landscape architect, land surveyor or engineer with seal and signature affixed to the plan. The plan shall be approximately to scale and clearly show the following:
[1] Location map showing existing zoning and ownership of property and adjacent land;
[2] Identification of principal site features, including topography, steep slopes, wetlands, wooded areas, archeological areas, floodplains, and other features of significant public interest.
[3] Relationship of the proposal with surrounding utilities and public facilities to serve the tract at the ultimate proposed densities;
[4] A general layout of the road system within the project, including all proposed private and public streets and land uses.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-39
[5] Detailed information on the proposed private street standards with an explanation of the reason for any modifications to the public street standards of this Chapter.
[6] A description of the provisions for continued maintenance of any proposed private street.
[7] A description of the private deed restrictions that will be provided as notice to future property owners regarding the limitations of service available on any proposed private streets.
2. Subdivisions abutting approved non-dedicated common driveways may be permitted as follows:
a. Each lot shall be a minimum of two (2) acres in area.
b. Each approved common driveway shall serve no more than six (6) single-family residential lots.
c. Common driveways permitted under this section shall have a minimum pavement width of twenty (20) feet and a minimum public easement width of forty (40) feet and shall not serve a through function. All common driveways shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the construction standards of the Town of Front Royal and shall be sufficient to accommodate emergency vehicle travel.
d. No common driveway shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet of any abutting property which is not directly served by the common driveway.
e. Each common driveway shall connect with a publicly dedicated street or highway. No common driveway shall be more than six hundred (600) feet in length.
f. Each common driveway shall be clearly identified as such. A single sign, not to exceed two (2) square feet in area, shall be posted at the entrance, displaying only the words "Private Drive" and the addresses of the residences utilizing the common driveway. Addresses shall be assigned to the dedicated public street to which the common driveway connects.
g. In addition to all other requirements for a final subdivision plat, any subdivision containing a common driveway shall include a statement on the final subdivision plat acknowledging a perpetual private maintenance responsibility and guaranteeing public utility and emergency vehicle access.
3. Subdivisions with townhouse or duplex lots abutting common parking courts shall be permitted as follows:
a. Each approved common parking court shall serve no more than a total of thirty-six (36) dwelling unit lots, one (1) dwelling unit per lot. A minimum of two and a half (2 1/2) parking spaces are required for each Townhouse unit.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-40
b. No common parking court shall serve a through function, and all common parking shall be designed in accordance with the provisions of Section 148-870.D.
c. Common parking areas shall be adequately landscaped to ensure the residential character of the development, as provided in Section 148-870.
d. No common parking court shall be located within twenty five (25) feet of any abutting lot which is not directly served by the common parking court.
e. Each common parking court driveway shall be clearly identified as a private roadway. A single sign, not to exceed two (2) square feet in area, shall be posted at the entrance, displaying only the words "Private Drive" and the addresses of the residences utilizing the parking court. Addresses shall be assigned to the dedicated public street to which the common driveway connects.
f. In addition to all other requirements for a final subdivision plat, any subdivision containing a common parking court shall include a statement on the final subdivision plat acknowledging a perpetual private maintenance responsibility and guaranteeing public utility and emergency vehicle access.
g. Townhouses and/or duplexes that utilize common parking courts shall include a minimum of 4 acres.
148-830 BLOCKS AND LOTS
A. Block Length. Blocks should not normally exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet, unless unusual circumstances justify greater length. Within blocks of over eight hundred (800) feet in length, the Town may require dedication of a ten-foot right-of-way at or near the middle of the block for a public pedestrian walkway connecting adjacent streets or other public and private areas.
B. Block Depth. Blocks should be wide enough to allow two (2) tiers of lots of appropriate depth, except where an interior street parallels an arterial street or highway or where topographical conditions or the parcel size make a double tier impractical. In these cases, the Town Council may approve a single tier of lots.
C. Lot Shape.
1. Lots shall not contain peculiarly shaped elongations, unusable for normal building purposes, solely to provide necessary square footage.
2. The depth of residential lots shall not be less than one (1) nor more than four (4) times the width, unless the Town approves other configurations because of unusual topographical conditions.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-41
D. Lot Location.
1. The municipal boundary of the Town shall not cut through lots but rather shall act as lot lines for property adjacent to either side of the municipal boundary.
2. Each lot shall abut a street dedicated to and accepted by the Town of Front Royal, and each lot shall have a minimum frontage of fifty (50) feet on said street, or other minimum as specified in Chapter 175, Zoning, of the Municipal Town Code.
E. Remnants. All remnants shall be added to adjacent land within a subdivision.
F. Residual Parcels. For the purpose of this ordinance a residual parcel shall be treated as a typical lot.
148-840 UTILITIES AND SERVICES
A. Sanitary Sewer.
1. The applicant shall provide the type of sanitary sewer disposal facility determined by the Town and the Health Department to be consistent with existing physical, geographical and geological conditions. Connection to the Town sanitary sewer system shall be required, if available. Where Town sanitary sewers are not available, the following types of sanitary sewage disposal facilities shall be employed in order of desirability:
a. Community sanitary sewage system with a temporary sewage treatment plant.
b. On-lot disposal with septic tank and drain field.
2. Sanitary sewers, whether public, community or on-site, shall be designed and constructed in strict accordance with standards of the Department of Health, Department of Environmental Quality, and/or the Town’s construction standards, as applicable.
3. The sewer system and all service lines and appurtenances shall be installed in accordance with the plans and profiles prepared for the subdivision or development by a professional engineer or licensed land surveyor and shall be approved by the Town Engineer.
4. Sanitary sewers shall not be used to carry stormwater.
5. Where the Town determines that the public sanitary sewage collection system is accessible to the subdivision, the connections from the system to the property line of each lot in the subdivision shall be made at the time that the general site improvements are installed. Sewer connection shall be installed by the applicant at his own expense in accordance with the design and specifications of the Town of Front Royal and shall be inspected by the Town in each instance.
6. Sanitary sewer lines installed in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the Town shall be required improvements in each subdivision or development to serve each
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-42
subdivision lot, except where the Town sewer lines are not available to the subdivision site and septic tanks are to be employed. The applicant at the time the sanitary sewer lines are constructed shall, at his own expense, install connections from the sanitary sewage lines to the property line of each lot in the subdivision not then served by the existing public sanitary sewage system.
7. The subdivider or developer shall be required to warrant and repair any deficiencies in the constructed sanitary sewer system for one (1) year following the date of acceptance by the Town Council.
B. On-site Sewage Disposal.
1. Subdivisions and developments that propose an on-site sewage disposal system shall provide the results of a soil evaluation from an Authorized On-site Soil Evaluator (AOSE) at the time of preliminary plan submittal.
2. No plat shall be approved for a subdivision or development where septic tanks are to be used, unless a tentative approval from the Health Department is received stating that all lots have a suitable site for a septic tank system.
C. Water Supply.
1. Complete water main line systems installed in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the Town shall be required improvements in each subdivision or development to serve each subdivision, except where Town water lines are not available to the site and individual wells are to be used. Where determined feasible by the Town, water lines serving any cul-de-sac or other dead-end street exceeding three hundred (300) feet in length shall be connected back in a loop to the water distribution system. A blowoff valve assembly shall be installed at the end of all temporary dead-end streets, where no permanent fire hydrant is installed or where no loop back into the water distribution system is provided, for the purpose of periodic flushing of the water mains. Such systems shall furnish an adequate supply of water to each lot and shall have adequate main sizes and fire hydrants located and installed in accordance with specifications of the Town of Front Royal. A copy of the preliminary approval of such system by the appropriate public agency or utility company shall be submitted with the final plat.
2. The water system and all service lines and appurtenances, except the water meter, shall be installed in accordance with the plans prepared for the subdivision or development by a professional engineer or licensed land surveyor and shall be approved by the Town Engineer.
3. In instances where Town water is not available to the subdivision site, the Town may require the applicant to provide his own community water system in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the Town and the State Department of Health. Agreements may be required as to the ownership and maintenance of private community water systems.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-43
A copy of the approval of such system by the appropriate public agency or utility company shall be submitted with the final plat.
4. Where the Town water system is accessible to the subdivision site, the connections from the system to the property line of each lot in the subdivision not served by Town water shall be made at the time the general site improvements are installed. The water connections shall be installed by the applicant at his own expense in accordance with the design and specifications of the Town of Front Royal and shall be inspected by the Town in each instance.
5. Where individual wells or other on-site water supply systems are to be utilized, each lot so served shall be of such size and shape to allow safe location of the water source, in accordance with Health Department requirements.
6. The subdivider or developer shall be required to warrant and repair any deficiencies in the constructed water service system for one (1) year following the date of acceptance by the Town Council.
D. Stormwater Management.
1. Storm drainage facilities: adequacy, size and capacity.
a. Stormwater management facilities designed and installed for subdivisions and developments shall have the hydraulic characteristics necessary to accommodate the expected flow of stormwater from a given watershed or portion thereof for a specified duration and intensity of rainfall, as stated in Subsection 2 shown below. Determination of flooding and channel erosion impacts to receiving streams due to land development projects shall be measured at each point of discharge from the development project and such determination shall include any runoff from the balance of the watershed which also contributes to that point of discharge.
b. Stormwater management facilities shall be designed to:
[1] Account for both on-site and off-site stormwater;
[2] Honor natural drainage divides;
[3] Convey stormwater to a stream, water channel, natural drainageway or existing facility;
[4] Discharge stormwater into an existing facility of sufficient capacity to receive the same; and
[5] Not increase stormwater flow so as to create the potential for an increased hazard to downstream landowners.
c. In determining the size and capacity of an adequate stormwater drainage system design, the applicant shall take into account the characteristics and location of the subdivision or development in the watershed or affected portions thereof. The design shall not adversely affect adjacent or neighboring properties.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-44
2. The method used for determining the specified design storms and determining pre-development and post-development runoff rates shall comply with the current standards and guidelines of the Department of Conservation and Recreation (DCR).
3. Off-site stormwater management. The following minimum criteria shall apply to protect waterways and property downstream from erosion due to increases in the volume, velocity and peak flow rate of stormwater runoff resulting from new subdivision and development activities.
a. Concentrated stormwater runoff leaving a subdivision or development site must be discharged directly into a well-defined natural or man-made receiving channel or pipe. If there is no well-defined receiving channel or pipe, one must be constructed to convey stormwater to the nearest adequate channel. Increased volumes of unconcentrated sheet flows which will cause erosive action or sedimentation on adjacent properties shall be diverted to a stable outlet or detention facility. Adequacy of channel design shall be verified by the Town.
b. Each stormwater management/Best Management Practices (BMP’s) plan shall require that peak rate and velocity of runoff be controlled and that land and receiving waterways which are downstream from the land development be protected from stormwater runoff damage, as provided herein:
[1] To protect downstream properties and receiving waterways from flooding, the ten (10) year post-development peak rate of runoff from the land development shall not exceed the ten (10) year predevelopment peak rate of runoff.
[2] To protect downstream properties and receiving waterways from channel erosion, the two (2) year post-development peak rate and velocity of runoff from the land development shall not exceed the two (2) year pre-development peak rate and velocity of runoff.
[3] If the land development is in a watershed for which a hydrologic and/or hydraulic study has been conducted or a stormwater model developed, the Town Engineer may modify the requirements of paragraphs 1) and 2) so that runoff from the land development is controlled in accordance with the findings in the study or model, or to prevent adverse watershed stormflow timing, channel degradation, and/or localized flooding problems.
[4] In addition to the requirements of paragraphs 1) and 2), the Town Engineer may require that the plan include additional measures to address damaging conditions to downstream properties and receiving waterways caused by the land development.
[5] Pre-development and post-development runoff rates determined using methods consistent with the requirements identified in the current Department of Conservation and Recreation (DCR) Stormwater regulations and guidelines.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-45
c. In the event that any existing off-site receiving channel is to be employed for subdivision or development runoff but said channel does not conform to the requirements of this chapter, the applicant shall:
[1] Obtain permission from downstream property owners and improve the receiving channel so as to bring it into compliance. Such drainage improvements shall extend downstream until an adequate channel section is reached.
[2] Develop a site design that will not cause an increase in the existing predevelopment peak runoff rate for ten-year storms. Such a design may be accomplished by enhancing the stormwater infiltration capacity of the site or by providing on-site stormwater detention measures. The estimation of pre-development and post-development peak runoff rates shall be verified by engineering calculations submitted to the Town.
[3] Provide a combination of channel improvement, stormwater detention or other measures satisfactory to the Town designed to prevent overflow and to prevent channel erosion.
d. All channel improvements or modifications shall comply with applicable laws and regulations. Modifications to flowing waterways shall be performed in accordance with Best Management Practices for Hydrologic Modifications, Virginia State Water Control Board Planning Bulletin 319, 1979, or as may be subsequently amended.
4. Drainage easements and fencing.
a. Where a subdivision or development is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, the Town shall be granted a drainage easement, conforming to the line of such watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, of such width as required under Section 148-840.E. to preserve the unimpeded flow of natural drainage or such additional width as may be necessary to provide for the widening, deepening, relocation, improvement or protection of the watercourse and drainage facilities.
b. All stormwater outlet pipes installed on residential lots shall extend to a point beyond the buildable area of the lot.
c. Dedicated drainage easements shall be granted to the Town for all stormwater management facilities. Fencing of stormwater drainage facilities designed to retain or detain runoff may be required by the Town for facilities exceeding 25% side slopes or water depth of three (3) or more feet. When fencing is required, a fifteen (15) foot wide gate shall be installed at the access point to the facility.
d. All stormwater drainage systems that depend on off-site channels or conveyances shall secure an easement for the channel to an adequate public facility designed to receive stormwater runoff, and shall include any necessary improvements required for adequate
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-46
conveyance of storm water runoff to the nearest public facility, be it a ditch, sewer or pond.
e. All designs for stormwater management facilities shall be reviewed by the Town Engineer to verify compliance of the requirements within this Chapter.
E. Utility Easements.
1. Utility easements with a minimum width of ten (10) feet for underground electric facilities and twenty (20) feet for overhead electric facilities shall be dedicated to the Town for all electrical facilities and appurtenances intended to service subdivisions or developments. Easements for water, sanitary sewer, and stormwater facilities shall be dedicated to the Town with the following minimum widths:
TABLE 148-840.E. System Minimum Easement Width
Open Stormwater Channel
20’
Up to 33” Pipe
20’
34” – 48” Pipe
25’
49” – 72” Pipe
30’
For trench depths greater than six (6) feet, the easement width shall be increased by an additional five (5) feet for each incremental five (5) feet of depth. Additional easement width shall be required for areas of steep slopes as required by the Town.
2. To the fullest extent possible, utility easements shall be centered on or adjacent to side lot lines.
3. Utility easements shall be granted in accordance with the specifications and requirements of appropriate utility companies.
F. Underground Wiring and Electric Service.
1. All electric, telephone, television and other communication lines, both main and service connections, installed for new subdivisions or developments shall be made by underground wiring. Underground wiring shall be contained within a single unified utility easement located under dedicated public rights-of-way or other public easements. The Town Council may waive the requirements of this section only where the substantial presence of rock at a depth of less than four (4) feet below finished grade makes the installation of underground wiring impractical.
2. The location of all lines and facilities shall be subject to the approval of the Town of Front Royal. Except where street crossings are required or where otherwise approved by the Town, underground electric lines shall not be located beneath street pavement, structures or other dedicated improvements and generally shall be located in a ten-foot easement parallel to the street right-of-way.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-47
3. Lots and development that abut easements where there are existing overhead electric or communication distribution supply lines or service connections may be supplied with service from these overhead lines, but the service connections to these overhead lines shall be installed underground. In the event that existing overhead lines are replaced or relocated in the course of subdivision development, the replaced or relocated lines shall be installed underground, unless the section so replaced or relocated is, in the determination of the Town, too insignificant to make underground installation practical.
4. Where overhead lines are permitted by the Town, the placement and alignment of the poles shall be designed to lessen the visual impact of the overhead lines. Alignments and pole locations shall be carefully routed to avoid locations along horizons. The clearing of swaths through areas of trees shall be avoided by selective cutting and staggered alignment. Trees shall be planted in open areas and at key locations to minimize the alignment of poles.
5. The subdivider, developer or builder shall be responsible for all engineering, trenching, backfilling and installation and expense of conduits for the underground electric system. All conduits shall be fitted with pull wires for the electric conductor. Conductors shall be Schedule 40 PVC or such other quality material as may be approved by the Town of Front Royal. Primary line conduits shall be three (3) inches in diameter. Secondary line conduits and conduits used for street crossings shall be four (4) inches in diameter. All work, design and material shall be in accordance with the conditions and specifications of the Department of Energy Services.
6. The Town of Front Royal shall supply and install electrical conductors and such transformers, pedestals and other electrical equipment, except as otherwise stated in this Chapter, as are necessary for the operation of the underground electric system. In the event that the conduit pull wire should break prior to or in the course of line installation, for whatever reason, it shall be the subdivider's sole responsibility to replace the pull wire within the conduit at his own expense.
7. The Town shall supply up to one-hundred twenty-five (125) feet of conductor for each lot from the pedestal to the electric meter located on the lot’s structure. The builder of said structure shall pay for all conductor over one hundred twenty-five (125) feet. In addition, the builder shall be responsible for all trenching and backfilling and shall supply three-inch Schedule 40 PVC conduit with pull wire from the pedestal to the electric meter installed on the lot’s structure, and schedule 80 PVC conduit for all sweeps. In addition, a slip joint shall be installed between the last elbow and the bottom of the meter base. Should the conduit pull wire break, the builder shall be responsible for replacement of the pull wire at his sole expense. All work and materials shall be in accordance with the conditions and specifications of the Department of Energy Services. Electric meters shall be furnished and installed by the Town of Front Royal.
8. All underground electric systems shall include connections for streetlight poles located every three hundred (300) feet along subdivision streets. Pole location shall be subject to the approval of the Town of Front Royal. Except where otherwise approved, pole location shall be staggered on the opposite sides of the street. No overhead wires shall be permitted
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-48
to serve streetlights. All streetlights poles and bases shall be equipped with wiring and connections to the underground electric system and shall be in accordance with the conditions and specifications of the Department of Energy Services. Streetlight poles and bases shall be supplied and installed by the subdivider or developer at his sole expense, or, at the Town's option, streetlight poles and bases may be installed by the Town of Front Royal at the subdivider's or developer’s expense. All pole lights shall be supplied and installed by the. The Town retains complete discretion as to when and if streetlight poles and lights will be installed.
9. All materials and improvements comprising the underground electric system shall be dedicated to the Town of Front Royal and shall be depicted on the subdivision plat. A ten-foot-wide easement shall be dedicated to the Town of Front Royal for the operation, maintenance and repair of the underground electric system.
148-850 STREET IMPROVEMENTS
A. Streetlights.
1. Streetlights shall be installed to illuminate streets and other public highways. The installation of streetlights shall be accordance with the design standards and specifications of the Town.
2. Streetlights shall be spaced at a maximum of three hundred (300) feet apart and staggered on opposite sides of the street with one streetlight every six hundred (600) feet on both sides of the road.
B. Monuments.
1. Street Monuments. Street right-of-way lines shall be marked at all points of tangent and points of curve with a steel rod or iron pipe not less than one-half (1/2) inch in diameter and eighteen (18) inches in length. Following completion of road work, a steel rod or iron pipe shall also be placed at street centerline, centerline points of tangent and points of curve and the radius point of each new cul-de-sac.
2. Corner Monuments. All lot corners shall be marked with a steel rods or iron pipe not less than one-half (1/2) inch in diameter and eighteen (18) inches in length, driven flush with the finished grade.
3. In the event a steel rod or iron pipe cannot be set due to an obstruction, an offset monument may be set or the point may be marked by drill hole, chisel mark or other method deemed appropriate by the professional and so documented to the Director.
4. All required monuments shall be installed by the subdivider or developer. Upon completion of subdivision streets, sewers and other improvements, the subdivider or developer shall make certain that all monuments required by the Town are clearly visible
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-49
for inspection and use. All monuments must be set before any site or street improvements are accepted by the Town.
C. Curb and Gutter.
1. Curbs and gutter shall be required for the purpose of drainage and safety and delineation and protection of the pavement edge. Curbs and gutters and all driveway entrances shall meet the design standards found within the Construction Standards and Specifications Manual.
2. Curbs and gutters shall be installed by the applicant along both sides of all new streets. For all subdivisions involving the creation of an additional lot and for all new development projects, curb and gutter sections shall be required along the frontage of all existing public streets. This requirement may be waived upon approval by Town Council in residential areas where the majority of surrounding developed properties do not have curb and gutter, where the character of the area is relatively low-density, after consideration of the traffic impact created by the subdivision and the total lots on a given street, drainage considerations and other environmental design parameters. The Town Engineer may waive curb & gutter for development projects comprising of no more than two (2) dwelling units in residential areas along existing streets where curb & gutter is not currently present within 200 feet of the property.
D. Sidewalks.
1. Sidewalks shall be installed by the applicant along both sides of all new streets. For subdivisions involving the creation of an additional lot and for all new development projects, sidewalk sections shall be required along the frontage of all existing public streets. This requirement may be waived on vote of the Town Council in residential areas under the following conditions: where the character of the area is relatively low-density, after consideration of the traffic impact created by the subdivision and the total lots on a given street, drainage considerations and other environmental design parameters. The Town Engineer may waive sidewalks for development projects comprising of no more than two (2) dwelling units in residential areas along existing streets where sidewalks are not currently present within 1000 feet of the property.
2. The minimum design standards for sidewalks shall be at least six (6) feet in width when abutting the curb, and a minimum of five (5) feet when offset from the curb. For the latter, the land located between the sidewalk and the curb shall comply with the Construction Standards and Specifications.
3. Sidewalks shall normally be parallel to the street. Nonparallel sidewalks and/or walkways may be approved by the Town in order to preserve topographical or natural features and to provide visual interest.
4. Where pedestrian walkway systems have been approved as an alternative to sidewalks, the walkways may be located away from streets, linking groups of dwelling units with other groups of dwelling units and/or facilities such as parking areas, recreational areas and
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-50
activity centers. In reviewing the location of alternative walkway systems, the Town shall consider safety, practical accessibility and aesthetics.
5. Public easements shall be granted for sidewalks and/or walkways located outside the public right-of-way.
6. All sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with Town standards and specifications and shall conform to the requirements of Section 15.2-2021, Code of Virginia, as amended, requiring curb ramps for the handicapped. Curb ramps shall comply with the Virginia Department of Transportation’s Road and Bridge Standards.
E. Solid Waste Disposal and Collection.
1. All developments with exterior trash disposal or collection areas shall locate these sites so as to facilitate collection and minimize the negative impact on residents, neighboring properties and public rights-of-way.
2. All visible trash disposal or collection and storage areas shall be screened from neighboring residential properties and from public property, including streets, parks, sidewalks and other public areas.
3. Screening shall consist of a combination of landscaping and fencing. A solid wood or masonry fence at least six (6) feet in height shall be provided on three (3) sides, with a solid opaque gate on the fourth side. Landscaping shall be incorporated to improve the visual appearance.
4. All permanently installed trash containers shall be adequately sized to handle the needs of the facility or development and shall be equipped with fitted lids to prevent odor leakage and infestation from rodents, insects, and other pests.
148-860 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPROVEMENTS
A. Steep Slopes.
1. Purpose: Steep slopes, when developed, require more grading and land disturbance than development of flat to gently sloping topographical areas. Therefore, the purpose of this section is to establish protective regulations to:
a. Minimize soil disturbance on steep or critical slopes due to the potential for erosion problems;
b. Assist in the prevention of soil erosion from storm water runoff, protect downstream buildings and yards from water and soil intrusion, and protect the Town’s surface and groundwater resources from siltation and contamination;
c. Promote stable building sites that prevent soil erosion and are structurally sound so as to maintain slope stability;
d. Promote accessibility for fire and rescue apparatus;
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-51
e. Maintain the visual and environmental resources that are part of the character of Front Royal; and
f. Encourage innovative development in Front Royal by providing the flexibility necessary to produce environmentally sensitive subdivisions which direct building, parking and street locations to terrain more suitable to development while maximizing conservation of the original slopes, native cover, prominent land forms, rocky outcrops, natural open space, wildlife habitat and scenic resources.
2. Applicability: All proposed subdivisions which result in the creation of an additional building lot or lots with the exception of boundary line adjustments, must submit a plan, in addition to any required subdivision development, street construction or erosion & sediment control plan, identifying predevelopment areas of steep slope. Clear cutting or grading for the purpose of altering predevelopment slopes shall not be permitted.
3. Establishment of Steep Slope Areas: The predevelopment slopes shall be computed by rise over run from naturally occurring contour lines based on topographic information showing two foot contour intervals and based on NAVD 88 vertical datum. The topographic data may be field run or from aerial photography, provided the information is current and the contouring method provides the precision expected for the contour interval used.
a. Identification of Steep Slope Areas: Steep slopes areas are classified into one of the following two categories:
[1] All areas of slope between 15% and 25% which contain highly erodible, highly permeable or shrink-swell soils. Determination of soils which are highly erodible, highly permeable or shrink-swell shall be based on the USDA Soil Conservation Service Soil Survey of Warren County, Virginia, or based on soils analysis prepared by a geotechnical engineer or other appropriate licensed professional.
[2] All areas of slope greater than 25%.
b. Minimum Size of Steep Slope Area: Steep slope standards do not apply to isolated steep slope areas that are less than 5,000 square feet in land area. For the purposes of this provision, the entire contiguous area of the steep slopes shall be included in the minimum size calculations, regardless of the number of individual lots or different land ownerships involved.
4. Creation of Slope Overlays: The plan identifying steep slopes and critical slopes must include overlays over the entire tract involved identifying by color coding the following:
a. All areas of slope between 15 to 25% which contain highly erodible, highly permeable or shrink-swell soils.
b. All areas of slope greater than 25%.
5. Plan Requirements: An overlot grading plan, prepared by a professional licensed by the State of Virginia to prepare such a plan, for the development, management, stabilization and preservation of steep slope areas shall be prepared in accordance with the detail requirements of Town Code Section 148 and upon submission of a report by a certified soil or geotechnical engineer, and/or
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-52
other appropriate licensed professional, indicating if and how the steep slope may be safely developed.
The final subdivision plat showing any lot or portion of any lot located within a steep slope overlay area must contain a note stating that the property shown hereon is subject to the provisions of Section 148-42, Steep Slopes, of the Town of Front Royal Subdivision Ordinance, in accordance with the conditions shown on the approved overlot grading plan and/or geotechnical report filed with the applicable and appropriate subdivision application.
6. Building Site Requirements: In addition to the requirements of the grading plan described herein, the plan shall include the following standards:
a. Site development shall be designed in a manner that requires a minimum amount of alteration to the steep slope.
b. Existing vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible.
c. No finished slopes are to be created with a final grade greater than 15% unless deemed feasible by a geotechnical report.
d. Residential driveway grades exceeding 10% are not recommended. Residential driveway grades greater than 10% shall be constructed in conformance with Virginia Department of Transportation’s (VDOT) standard CG-9 or other applicable entrance detail requirements. Commercial or industrial driveway grades shall be constructed in conformance with VDOT standard CG-11 or other applicable entrance detail requirements. All driveways shall have a nonerodable surface treatment, such as asphalt or concrete pavement. Side slopes for driveway cuts shall not exceed 25% (4:1) unless deemed feasible by a geotechnical report.
e. Use of retaining wall is encouraged to reduce the steepness of man-made slopes and to provide planting pockets conducive to vegetation and landscaping. All retaining walls shall require an engineered design with the exception of non-tiered retaining walls with level backfill and no surcharge loading with a height of 24 inches (2.0 feet) or less from the finished grade. Retaining walls shall not exceed 72 inches (6.0 feet) in height from the finished grade, however, the Town Council, at its discretion, may waive the maximum height requirement for retaining walls located within non-residentially zoned areas. This provision is not intended to preclude a structure’s foundation or basement wall or the creation of a walkout basement.
f. Landscaping and plantings shall be in accordance with Town Standards.
7. As-Built Plan Required: A post construction as-built survey of the approved steep slope overlot grading plan shall be required prior to the issuance of an approved occupancy permit. The as-built drawings shall clearly show any changes or variations from the approved design, and if deemed significant by the Director, may require any such change or variation be brought into compliance with the approved plan. The as-built information shall be shown on the original plan and include the following:
a. Horizontal variations greater than 1.0 foot should be shown dimensionally or through plus stations. Horizontal variations greater than 5.0 feet should also show the graphic relocation of the object. Vertical elevation variations greater than 0.1 feet shall be provided for all shown design elevations.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-53
b. All as-built information shall be shown on the original plan either as blocked in or drawn in a different text style or font from that as shown on the original plan.
c. Each sheet of the plan shall contain the words “AS-BUILT” in bold text on or near the title block.
d. Date, plan legend, bar scale and north arrow.
e. Retaining walls. Indicate type and show elevations of the top of wall and the lowest adjacent finished grade.
f. Curb cut, driveway and material. Centerline grade of driveway with spot elevations.
g. Spot elevations of graded areas to determine grade of finished slope. Highlight all areas of finished slopes exceeding design grade by more than 1%.
h. Horizontal location with dimensions of all structures with dimensions including porches, decks, garages, etc. Show vertical elevations of first floor and basement floor.
i. Horizontal and vertical location of roof drains, foundation drains and other drainage outlets. Locations of utility services.
j. Location of required plantings.
k. The final as-built plan must be stamped by Licensed Land Surveyor or Professional Engineer and include certification that the as-built plan is substantially in conformance with the original plan. If a geotechnical report is used, the appropriate licensed professional must certify that the as-built is in conformance with the report.
8. Exemptions: Except as otherwise provided herein, no disturbance of steep slopes will be allowed except for the following activities which may be permitted by exemption from the Director of Planning & Zoning:
a. Utility service lines, walkways, steps, landings.
b. Emergency action to remediate an unstable slope which poses an imminent threat to health, safety or welfare of the public.
c. Normal landscape maintenance or routine arboreal activities, including small scale planting of ornamental flowers or shrubs, and/or the removal of diseased or damaged trees, and/or the removal of undesirable trees, provided revegetation is in conformance with Town Standards.
d. Disturbance for public roadway or street crossings, or other public purposes as determined by the Director of Planning.
e. Construction of approved landscaping berms, drainage ditches or swales, ponds and dams and other required storm drainage conveyance facilities.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-54
B. Erosion and Sediment Control.
All land disturbing activities shall conform to the requirements of the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook.
C. Preservation of Natural Features.
The arrangement of lots, blocks, streets, parking areas and structures shall be designed to make the most advantageous use of topography and natural physical features. Tree masses and large individual trees shall, whenever possible and consistent with the provisions of this chapter, be preserved. Any system of sidewalks, roadways and lot layout shall be designed to take advantage of the visual qualities of the area.
D. Floodplain Regulations.
1. Land within a one-hundred-year floodplain may be platted, provided that such lands are not used to meet the minimum required lot size and are designated on the plats as a floodplain easement area and that the subdivision would not necessitate changes to topographic conditions that alter the floodway district.
2. All development within floodplain areas, as established by Chapter 175, Sections 76 through 78 of the Town Code, including dam and impounding structure break zones, shall be subject to the regulations of Chapter 175, Sections 74 through 81.3 of the Town Code.
3. Except where floodplain development is permitted, floodplain areas shall be maintained in their natural state.
E. Landscaping.
All major subdivisions and developments meet the landscaping requirements found under Chapter 156 of the Town Code, including, but not limited to, screens and buffers, development tree plantings, street trees, and parking lot landscaping.
F. Light and Air.
1. All outdoor lighting fixtures shall be arranged or shielded to direct, or reflect, light away from adjoining residential uses.
2. Where a site development plan is required, new outdoor lighting fixtures shall be designed, constructed, and operated to meet the International Dark-Sky Association (IDA) design standards or certifications for lighting; except that, the Planning Director may authorize alternative design standards or certifications that reasonably achieve the purpose of controlling the spillover of light onto adjacent properties and the sky, and protecting the public safety by preventing glare from outdoor light.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-55
3. All outdoor lighting that produces harmful electromagnetic energy, including arc welding or acetylene torches, shall be completely screened from view sufficiently to be imperceptible beyond the lot lines.
4. All development shall conform to the regulations of the Virginia State Air Pollution Control Board concerning the emissions of smoke, particulate matter, odors and other gaseous pollutants.
5. All development shall comply not exceed the maximum height and setback regulations of the underlying zoning district, as found under Chapter 175 of the Town Code.
148-870 PARKING AND LOADING AREAS
A. Parking Areas.
1. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with this subsection on every lot or parcel on which any use is established or expanded.
2. Based on the type of use, the minimum quantity of required off-street parking spaces is show in the following table.
TABLE 148-870.A.2 TYPE OF USE REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES
Residential
Two (2) parking spaces per dwelling unit.
Motels/hotels
One (1) parking space per room and one (1) additional parking space for every ten (10) rooms.
Lodging/boarding/bed and breakfasts
One (1) parking space per room and an additional two (2) parking spaces for employees.
Shopping Centers
Five (5) parking spaces per one thousand (1,000) gross square feet for every shopping center facility ten thousand (10,000) square feet in size or less.
Four (4) parking spaces per one thousand (1,000) gross square feet for every shopping center over ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
Commercial/retail
One (1) parking space per two hundred (200) gross square feet.
Furniture/appliance/lumber and building supply
One (1) parking space per four hundred (400) gross square feet.
Wholesale, storage and contractor’s facilities
One (1) parking space per one thousand (1,000) gross square feet for nonpublic areas.
One (1) parking space per one hundred (100) net square feet for public sales areas.
Self-service storage facilities
One (1) parking space per twenty (20) individual units, and one (1) additional space per three
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-56
hundred (300) gross square feet of office area.
Art galleries/museums
One (1) parking space per three hundred (300) gross square feet.
Professional offices
One (1) parking space per three hundred (300) gross square feet.
Medical/dental offices
One (1) parking space per two hundred (200) gross square feet.
Indoor recreation facilities
One (1) parking space per two hundred (200) gross square feet.
Bowling alleys
Three (3) parking spaces per alley.
Outdoor recreation facilities
One (1) parking space per two hundred (200) net square feet of improved area.
Personal service facilities
One (1) parking space per two hundred (200) gross square feet.
Churches/theaters/other assembly buildings/auditoriums
One (1) parking space per four (4) fixed seats in the main assembly area or one (1) parking space per one hundred (100) net square feet.
Day-care/nursery facilities
One (1) parking space per employee and one (1) parking space for every ten (10) children.
Nursing homes
One (1) parking space for every four (4) beds, and one (1) parking space per employee.
Hospitals
One (1) parking space for every two (2) beds, and one (1) parking space for each employee, excluding medical doctors.
Funeral homes
One (1) parking space for every four (4) fixed seats or one (1) parking space per one hundred (100) square feet net visitation area, plus five (5) employee parking spaces.
Restaurants (sit-down)
One (1) parking space for every four (4) seats.
Restaurants (carry-out)
One (1) parking space per fifty (50) net square feet of customer service area.
Restaurants (drive-through)
Three (3) parking spaces plus stacking lanes for six (6) vehicles.
Industrial Uses/Office Component
One (1) parking space per three hundred (300) gross square feet of office area.
Industrial Use/Manufacturing/Distribution Areas
One (1) parking space per employee and one (1) space for every vehicle used on-site, plus one (1) parking space per delivery/loading bay.
Automobile/motor vehicle service facilities
Two (2) spaces per service bay or two (2) spaces for every three hundred sixty (360) square feet. Every such facility shall have a minimum of three (3) parking spaces.
Car sales/rental facilities
One (1) parking space per each two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of open sales display area and one (1) parking space per employee. In
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-57
addition, there shall be two (2) parking spaces per service bay or two (2) parking spaces for every three hundred sixty (360) square feet of service bay area. There shall be a minimum of three (3) spaces for the service bay areas of these facilities.
Car wash (self-service)
One (1) parking space for drying vehicles, plus two (2) stacked spaces per car wash bay.
Car wash (automatic)
Two (2) parking spaces for drying vehicles, plus five (5) stacking spaces per car wash bay.
Libraries
One (1) parking space per one thousand (1,000) gross square feet.
Public/private schools
One (1) parking space per employee, plus parking space for school auditoriums as noted above for auditoriums.
Greenhouse and landscape nursery facilities
One (1) parking space per four hundred (400) square feet of structured public selling area; one (1) parking space per one thousand (1,000) square feet of greenhouse/warehouse/plant storage areas; and one (1) parking space for each company vehicle.
Veterinary hospitals and kennels
One (1) parking space per three hundred (300) gross square feet.
3. When a use is not specifically listed above, the Director shall determine which of the above categories to use to determine the spaces required, based on similarities between the characteristics of the uses. When a use is not specifically listed above, the Director may also use information provided by the applicant or other sources of information to determine the number of spaces required.
4. Off-street parking areas shall be oriented to the buildings they are designed to serve and shall be within three hundred (300) feet walking distance. Before off-site parking facilities are approved, a written agreement thereto assuring their retention for such purposes shall be properly drawn and executed by the parties concerned, and approved as to form by the Town Attorney, and for compliance with the requirements of this Chapter by the Director.
5. The Access to off-street parking areas shall be designed so as not to obstruct the free flow of street traffic. There shall be adequate provision for ingress and egress to ensure ease of mobility, ample clearance and the safety of vehicles and pedestrians. For corner lots, the distance from the center line of the parking lot entrance to the curbline or pavement edge of the street intersection shall be adequate to, in the opinion of the Director, provide a safe and sufficient margin for normal traffic patterns and pedestrians at or about the intersection in question.
6. Up to 20 percent of the total number of required off-street parking spaces may be designated for compact cars if signage is posted in front of the space to notify vehicles that the space is only for compact vehicles.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-58
7. With the exception of off-street compact car spaces, and off-street parallel spaces, off-street parking spaces shall include an area of not less than 162 square feet (9’ x 18’). Compact car spaces shall include an area not less than 144 square feet (8’ x 18’).
8. The width of all interior parking lot aisles providing direct one-way access to individual parking spaces shall be as follows:
TABLE 148-870.A.8. Parking Angle (degrees) Aisle Width (feet)*
30
12
45
15
60
18
90
22
*The minimum width of all interior parking lot aisles designed for two way traffic flow shall be twenty (20) feet, except where 90 degree aisles are used, which shall require twenty-two (22) feet.
9. A parking space shall be at least three (3) feet from a side or rear property line, except where the parking is designed to be shared by the abutting property. No parking space for multiple-family dwelling shall be less than ten (10) feet from a residential structure.
10. Parking areas shall be setback a minimum of five (5) feet from any building or structure. This setback area may be used for sidewalks or landscaping.
11. Parking space already provided to meet off-street parking requirements for stores, office buildings and industrial establishments lying within three hundred (300) feet of the place of public assembly, as measured along lines of public access, which are not normally in use on Sundays or between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight on other days may be used to meet not more than seventy-five percent (75%) of the off-street parking requirements of a church or other similar place of public assembly.
12. Any flea market, farmers' market or other open-air commercial activity not listed above shall provide one (1) parking space for each one hundred (100) square feet of land to be used by said flea market, farmers' market or other commercial activity in its open-air operations. The amount of land to be used shall be designated by the respective open-air business in its application for a special permit. If no special permit is required under this chapter, the land to be used shall be designated in the application for a business license. No business shall then use more land than has been designated in its application for special permit or business license without the filing of a new application for a special permit or business license as required herein and then complying with the parking space requirements of this section.
13. For every commercial or industrial parking area located within fifteen (15) feet of the side or rear boundary of a residentially zoned lot or a lot with a residential use, an opaque ornamental fence or masonry wall with a minimum height of four (4) feet shall be erected
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-59
and maintained. The provisions of this section shall not compel such fence or wall to extend into the required front yard of the premises.
14. Parking areas, including aisles and maneuvering areas, shall be paved with bituminous concrete, or similar hard surface material. The Director may approve stone, in lieu of pavement, for parking areas of no more than 4,500 square feet in size.
15. Lights used to illuminate parking areas shall be arranged and shielded to minimize light pollution to adjoining properties.
16. All parking areas shall meet the landscaping requirements of Section 156-6 of the Town Code.
17. Off-street parking shall not be required on any lot fronting on that portion of Main Street which extends from Royal Avenue to Happy Creek or upon that portion of Jackson Street which extends between South Royal Avenue and Church Street.
18. As with the other standards of this chapter, off-street parking requirements may be waived by special exception, in accordance with Section 148-211 of this Chapter.
19. Off-street parking requirements shall be waived by the Zoning Administrator for expansion of an existing use for any property located within the Historic Front Royal District where the following criteria are met:
a. The development activity proposed includes the retention and/or the substantial renovation of a contributing structure in the district.
b. The square footage of additions or new construction shall not be more than twice that of the original structure.
c. The proposed project has been found by the Board of Architectural Review to be in keeping with the scale of development in the surrounding area and with the character of the district as a whole.
d. All efforts have been made to provide parking whenever possible.
20. Alleys shall be upgraded to a minimum pavement width of 24 feet when they are used as the primary access to parking areas, excluding individual parking for single-family, two-family, and duplex uses.
21. Existing parking facilities shall be maintained in a safe condition, including the repair of damaged areas, restriping, and resurfacing when necessary.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-60
B. Loading Areas.
1. On the same premises with every building, structure or part thereof erected and occupied for uses involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles, materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the lot adequate space for standing, turning, loading and unloading services in order to avoid interference with public use of the streets and alleys.
2. Loading areas shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet wide and fifty-five (55) feet in length, with a minimum clear height of fifteen (15) feet. An off-street truck loading space shall be provided at a rate of one (1) space for the first ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less of gross floor area, plus a minimum of one (1) additional space for each additional forty thousand (40,000) square feet of gross floor area or part thereof. For the purpose of this section, "gross floor area" shall also include gross outdoor storage area, whether covered or uncovered.
148-880 COMPLETION OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
A. It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider/developer to complete all required site improvements prior to final plat approval, except when a development surety is accepted by the Town, in accordance with Section 148-890.
B. All required site improvements shall be completed at the expense of the subdivider/developer, including all required engineering and legal expenses necessary for construction and dedication, except where the subdivider and the Town enter into a cost-sharing or reimbursement agreement.
C. All required site improvements shall be constructed in compliance with the approved final plat, subdivision development plan, overlot grading plan and/or site development plan, and the Town’s Construction Standards and Specifications Manual, as may be periodically amended.
D. All required improvements shall be constructed only upon the issuance of a permit(s) by the agent of the Town. Such a permit, or permits, of the Town shall be conducted solely to determine compliance with the requirements and specifications provided by law and the approved site development plan, subdivision development plan, overlot grading plan and/or final plat. The submittal of any application required by this chapter shall constitute consent by the subdivider/developer to all officers and employees of the Town, the service authority, and any other authority, and any state department or agency, reasonable administrative and enforcement of this chapter to enter upon the property at all reasonable times for the purpose of making periodic inspections related to application or plan review, or inspection of improvements.
E. The subdivider shall certify to the agent of the Town that all of the construction costs for the improvements, including those for materials and labor, have been paid to the person constructing the improvements, or at the option of Town Council, shall present evidence satisfactory to Town Council that the time for recordation of any mechanics lien has expired or evidence that any debt for said construction that may be due and owing is contested and further provides indemnity with adequate surety in an amount deemed sufficient by Town Council, or its designated
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-61
administrative agent.
F. When a developer’s surety is provided in accordance with Section 148-890, all required site improvements shall be completed within one (1) year from issuance of the first zoning permit, or such other period of time as may be approved by the Town or mandated by the Virginia Code, up to a maximum of five (5) years from the time of final plat approval. Any extension of time beyond such one (1) year period shall require the annual reevaluation of construction estimates and the amount of surety. The Planning Commission shall be authorized to grant an extension of time up to two (2) years from the date of final plat approval. Any extension of time granted beyond two (2) years from the date of final plat approval shall only be granted upon approval by Town Council. Failure to complete all required improvements within the applicable time period shall be a forfeiture of the bond or other security by the subdivider to the Town for completion of the required improvements.
G. Upon completion of required site improvements, and as a condition of the acceptance thereof by the Town and the release of performance bonds, or other securities, the subdivider or developer shall provide the Town with as-built plans, consistent with the detail requirements of Section 148-890.I.
H. Nothing in this chapter, including the approval of the final plat, shall obligate the Town, an authority, or a state agency or department to accept and take over for operation and maintenance any improvements completed by a subdivider/developer as required by this chapter. Acceptance or approval of an improvement shall be made only if the improvement satisfies all applicable statues, regulations, ordinances, guidelines and design and construction standards for acceptance or approval of the improvement, upon completion of inspections.
148-890 DEVELOPMENT SURETY
A. In lieu of completion and acceptance by the Town of all required improvements, as determined by the approved site development plan, subdivision development plan, overlot grading plan or final plat, a developer shall provide a development surety, such as a performance bond, cash escrow or letter of credit, for the purpose of ensuring that the required site improvements are satisfactorily completed within a time period agreed upon by the Town. The amount of the development surety shall be calculated by the Town Engineer based on the projected cost of installation of the improvements. The amount of such development surety shall not exceed the total of the estimated cost of construction based on unit prices for new public or private sector construction in the locality and a reasonable allowance for estimated administrative costs, inflation, and potential damage to existing roads or utilities, which shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the estimated construction costs, except in circumstances when Virginia Code § 15.2-2241.A.5 requires localities to limit such estimated costs to ten percent (10%). Such development surety shall be payable to and held by the Town, in a form approved by the Town Attorney. No development security shall be terminated without the Town’s consent, nor without at least sixty (60) days notice to the Town.
B. No site development plan, subdivision development plan, overlot grading plan and/or final plat that is subject to a development surety shall be approved, nor a building or land disturbance
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-62
permit issued for development, until the development surety instrument for that particular development, or phase of development, has been submitted and certified by the Director as being consistent with the indemnification and other requirements and format of the Town.
C. Upon completion of part or all of the individual facilities covered by a development security, the subdivider/developer may request for a partial or final release of the development surety, as provided below.
1. All requests from the subdivider/developer shall be submitted in writing.
2. The Director of Planning shall make periodic partial releases of the development surety as provided in Virginia Code § 15.2-2245.
3. Periodic partial releases may not occur before the completion of at least thirty percent of the public facilities covered by any bond, escrow, letter of credit, or other performance guarantee. The governing body or administrative agency shall not be required to execute more than three periodic partial releases in any twelve-month period.
4. Within thirty (30) days after receipt of a written notice by the subdivider/developer of completion of part or all of any improvements required to be constructed by this chapter, the Director of Planning shall respond in writing to the subdivider in one of the following ways: (i) grant the partial or final release, if the applicable state agency, department or any applicable authority or other entity has accepted the improvements; or (ii) inform the subdivider that the improvement has not been accepted by the applicable state agency, department, authority or other entity and/or identify any specified defects or deficiencies in construction and suggested corrective measures.
5. If the Director of Planning fails to take action within the thirty (30) day period, the request of the subdivider/development shall be deemed approved and a partial release shall be granted. No final release shall be granted until after expiration of the thirty (30) day period and there is an additional request in writing sent by certified mail by the subdivider to the Town Manager. If the Town Manager fails to take action on the request within ten (10) working days of receipt of the request, it shall be deemed approved and final release shall be granted to the subdivider.
6. No development surety shall be reduced to less than 10 percent of the original development surety amount.
D. Upon final completion and acceptance or approval of the site improvements and upon receipt from the subdivider/developer of a certification of final completion from a professional engineer, land surveyor, or Planning Director, the Planning Director shall release any remaining development surety to the subdivider/developer. A public improvement shall be deemed to be accepted when it is accepted by and taken over for operation and maintenance by the Town, an authority, or state agency or department responsible for maintaining and operating the improvement.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-63
E. For the acceptance of site improvements by the Town, the Town may require a maintenance bond in an amount determined reasonable by the Director not to be held for a period of time over twelve (12) months, for the purpose of ensuring that all facilities meet the requirements of the Town Code. For the purpose of final release, the term "acceptance" is deemed to mean when said public facility is accepted by and taken over for operation and maintenance by the Town or such other public authority which is responsible for maintaining and operating such a facility upon acceptance.
F. For all securities issued pursuant to Subsection A and in an original amount of $10,000 or less, the Director hereby is designated as the Town Council's administrative agent for authorizing partial and final releases as set forth in Subsection C herein.
G. For the purpose of this section the terms "developer's securities" and "securities" shall mean any bond, escrow, letter of credit or other performance guarantee required by the Council in a form approved by the Town Attorney and in such amount(s) approved by the Director and/or the Town Engineer sufficient to guarantee the completion of public improvements shown on a subdivision development plan, final plat or site development plan and to be completed by the developer as part of the approval of a subdivision plat or site plan process.
H. Prior to any partial or full release of securities, the developer shall provide the Town with evidence that the plat has been recorded.
I. As-built required. Upon completion of all required improvements shown on approved site development plans and/or final plats, the owner or applicant shall submit and as-built drawing to the Director of Planning. The as-built shall be prepared in conformance with the as-built detail requirements of Section 148-1025. At least three (3) paper copies and a digital copy shall be submitted, which shall be certified by an engineer, architect or land surveyor. The "as-built plan" shall be submitted within a year of issuance of occupancy permits for the review and approval by the Town Engineer and the Director of Planning for conformity with the approved site development plan, subdivision development plan, overlot grading plan and/or final plat, and the ordinances and regulations of the Town of Front Royal and state agencies. Final approval of the as-built by the Director of Planning, after review by the Town Engineer, shall be required before the final release of applicable development sureties to determine if the required site improvements were constructed in compliance with the approved site development plan, overlot grading plan, and/or final plat.
J. The Town reserves the right to vacate previously approved and platted subdivisions as permitted under the Virginia Code.
K. The Town may make use of the development surety if either: (i) the subdivider/developer fails to timely renew the development surety, when necessary to prevent the development surety from terminating, or (ii) the Planning Director, upon consultation with the Town Engineer and Town Attorney, determines that any of the improvements have not been completed in a timely manner and the completion of the improvements is deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety or general welfare.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-64
L. When a new street is incomplete, permits for new construction may not be issued to more than (1) incomplete street segment at a time.
ARTICLE 9 - DEFINITIONS
148-900 DEFINITIONS
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ADT (AVERAGE DAILY TRIPS) - The average number of motor vehicles per day that pass over a given point or are generated by a specific use, in a 24-hour period.
ALLEY - A permanent serviceway providing a means of vehicular access to the side or rear of abutting properties whose principal frontage is on some other street, and not intended for general traffic circulation.
APPLICANT - A developer or subdivider submitting an application for subdivision or development.
APPLICATION - The application form and all accompanying documents and fees required under this Chapter for approval of a subdivision plat or site development plan.
AS-BUILT: A drawing, other than a plat, prepared by the appropriate licensed professional, showing existing post construction data and topography in comparison to the proposed site improvements shown on the approved overlot grading, subdivision or site development plan and is a required submission for bond release or issuance of a final occupancy permit.
BEARINGS – See “Dimensions, Angular”.
BLOCK - A tract of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines of waterways or boundary lines of municipalities.
BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENT - The combination or relocation of property boundaries of previously platted and recorded lots where the total number of lots is not increased.
BUILDING - Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or chattel.
BUILDING (SETBACK) LINE - A line defining the required minimum distance from any building or structure and the adjacent property or street line. Such line shall be measured at right angles to and parallel with the property or street line.
COMMISSION - The Planning Commission of the Town of Front Royal.
COMMON DRIVEWAY – A driveway jointly owned, used and maintained by the owners of the properties it gives access to.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-65
COMMON PARKING COURT – A parking area jointly owned, used and maintained by the owners of properties it provides parking for.
COMMUNITY SEWERAGE SYSTEM - A private community sewer system, including collection and treatment facilities established by the developer to serve a subdivision.
COMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM - A private water company formed by a developer to serve a community development. It includes water treatment and distribution facilities.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN - The most recent Comprehensive Plan for the Town of Front Royal, Virginia, adopted by the Town Council, and any subsequently adopted amendments or supplements.
CONDOMINIUM - A system of separate ownership of individual units in a multiple-unit building or development (See Code of Virginia, Section 55-79.39 et seq.)
CONSERVATION EASEMENT - An easement granting a right or interest in real property that is appropriate to retaining land or water areas predominantly in their natural, scenic, open or wooded condition; retaining such areas as suitable habitat for fish, plants or wildlife; or maintaining existing land uses.
COUNCIL - The Town Council of Front Royal, Virginia.
CUL-DE-SAC - A local street with a single means of ingress and egress, and having an appropriate turnaround for a safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement.
DEDICATION - The deliberate appropriation of land by its owner for any general and/or public use, reserving to himself no other rights than those that are compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the public uses to which the property has been devoted.
DESIGNATED STORMWATER DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT AREA - An area established by the Front Royal Town Council, having related and common stormwater drainage conditions.
DEVELOPER - Any person, persons or entity who owns and/or seeks to subdivide or develop land under the provisions of this ordinance. See also "subdivider" and “applicant”.
DEVELOPER SECURITY (see “performance bond”)
DEVELOPMENT - A planning or construction project involving property improvement and, usually, a change in land use character within the site.
DIMENSIONS, ANGULAR – The angle between a line connecting two points and a north-south line or meridian and expressed in degrees, minutes and seconds.
DIMENSIONS, LINEAR – The horizontal distance between two points, expressed in feet, and as appropriate, to the nearest tenth or one hundredth of a foot.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-66
DIRECTOR OF PLANNING - The Director for the Town of Front Royal or other agent as designated by the Town Council for the administration of this Chapter.
EASEMENT - Authorization by a property owner which runs with the land of any designated part of his property for use by another for a specific purpose.
ENDORSEMENT - The application of the reviewing and/or approving authority's stamp and the signature of the appropriate authority on the record plat.
ENGINEER – A person licensed to practice as such in the Commonwealth of Virginia.
FINAL PLAT – See “Final Subdivision Plat”
FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT – The plat of subdivision (including resubdivision, major subdivision, and minor subdivision) showing detailed size and boundaries of each lot, street, easement and other items in accordance with the regulations described herein.
GENERAL DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM - A plan adopted by resolution of the Town Council for the construction of stormwater drainage facilities within a designated stormwater drainage improvement area.
GRADE – The slope of a road, street or other right-of-way, specified in percentage terms (also see: “Slope”)
GRADING PLAN: A drawing, other than a plat, prepared by the appropriate licensed professional, showing existing and proposed topography, environmental controls, demolition and/or improvements to the property in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance and/or other applicable local, state or federal regulations.
HALF STREET - A street, generally parallel with and adjacent to a property line, having a lesser right-of-way width than normally required.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT - The Health Department of the Commonwealth of Virginia.
HEALTH OFFICER - The legally designated health authority of the State Health Department for Warren County or his authorized representative.
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION - A private nonprofit association or corporation of property owners and/or residents of a fixed area for the purpose of owning, operating and maintaining various common properties.
IMPROVEMENTS - All required utilities and facilities as specified in this Chapter, including but not limited to streets, streetlights, landscaping, sidewalks, storm and sanitary sewers, water lines and curbing.
INDIVIDUAL ON-SITE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM - A septic tank, seepage tile
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-67
sewage disposal or any other such sewage treatment device approved by the State Health Department.
JOINT OWNERSHIP - "Joint ownership" of any type among persons shall be construed as the same owner.
JURISDICTION - The area or territory subject to the legislative control of the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia.
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT - A person licensed to practice as such in the Commonwealth of Virginia.
LAND SURVEYOR - A person licensed to practice as such in the Commonwealth of Virginia.
LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAY - A highway especially designed for through traffic, over which abutters have no easement or right of light, air or access to by reason of the fact that their property abuts upon such limited access highway.
LOT - A recorded tract, plot or portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended as a unit for the purpose of transfer of ownership or for building development.
LOT CONSOLIDATION – see Lot Line Vacation.
LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT – see Boundary Line Adjustment.
LOT LINE VACATION – Elimination of a common boundary line between two parcels of land as part of a properly approved and recorded plat of subdivision or re-subdivision in accord with Virginia Code §15.2-2264, provided that such action does not involve the relocation or alteration of streets, alleys, easements for public passage, or other public areas, and that no easements or utility rights-of-way are relocated or altered without the express consent of all persons holding any interest therein.
LOT, CORNER - A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection; the shortest side fronting upon a street shall be considered the front of the lot, and the longest side fronting upon a street shall be considered the side of the lot. A lot abutting on a curved street or streets shall be considered a "corner lot" if straight lines drawn from the foremost point of the lot meet at an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five degrees (135 degrees).
LOT, DEPTH OF - The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
LOT, INTERIOR - A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT OF RECORD - A lot which has been recorded among the land records in the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Warren County.
LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE - An interior lot having frontage on two (2) streets.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-68
LOT, WIDTH OF - The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at the front setback line.
MONUMENT - A permanent survey marker identifying lot corners, street centerline and right-of-way lines or control points meeting the requirements of this ordinance.
OPEN AIR USE – Located or taking place in the open air; out-of-doors, outdoors, outside; happening or existing outside.
OPEN SPACE - Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for the public or private use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space.
OVERLOT GRADING PLAN: See ‘Grading Plan’.
OWNER - Any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or corporations or any other legal entity having legal title to or sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided under these regulations; also applicant, developer and subdivider.
PARTIAL STREET - See "half street".
PERFORMANCE BOND - Security in the form of a cash deposit, surety bond or instrument of credit, approved by the governing body and Town Attorney, in an amount equal to the full cost of improvements required by these regulations and providing for completion of said improvement within a definite period.
PLAN – A drawing, other than a plat, prepared by the appropriate professional, showing a proposed or tentative project and/or course of action and prepared in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance and/or other applicable local, state or federal regulations.
PLAN AND PROFILE – A detailed engineering drawing showing both the plan view and a profile view of required and/or existing infrastructure improvements and generally included with and made a part of the submission of a Site Development or Subdivision Development plan.
PLANNING COMMISSION - The Planning Commission of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia.
PLAT - A drawing of a specific tract or parcel of land made to scale prepared by a land surveyor or engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of Virginia. The drawing shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance and conform to the Standards for Plats of the Virginia State Library Board (17VAC15-60-10 et seq.)
PRELIMINARY PLAN - The preliminary drawing or drawings, described in these regulations, including the supplemental information and data required herein, indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision and related information that is submitted to the Planning Commission for preliminary approval.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-69
PRELIMINARY PLAT – See “Preliminary Plan”.
PRIMARY SUBDIVIDED PARCEL - The object of or reason for the subdivision request, to include all portions of the source tract submitted for approval as new subdivided lots which are to be developed in some fashion by the erection of buildings or construction of improvements thereon or which are to be sold following subdivision to other individuals or entities.
PROPERTY - Any tract, lot or parcel of land or several of the same collected together for the purpose of subdividing or developing.
PRO RATA FEE - The fee paid by the subdivider or developer for a proportionate share of the cost of construction under the general drainage improvement program for a designated stormwater drainage improvement area.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT - Any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrian way, tree, off-street parking area, lot improvement or other facility for which the local government may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation or which may affect an improvement for which local government responsibility is established.
RECORD PLAT - The copy of the plat showing major or minor subdivision, resubdivision, boundary line adjustment, lot consolidation or other drawing meeting the requirements described herein containing the endorsement of the Town of Front Royal and intended to be recorded among the County land records.
REGULATION, GENERAL – Any design standard or technical requirement of Chapter 48, Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, of the Town of Front Royal Municipal Code, that applies to a subdivision or development within the Town of Front Royal.
REMNANT PARCEL –A portion of property left over after a subdivision or boundary line adjustment that does not meet the minimum lot size, frontage, or other general regulation of this Chapter, as applicable for the creation of a new lot.
REQUIREMENT, DESIGN STANDARD – All of the requirements of Article 8 of this Chapter that pertain to qualitative and quantitative characteristics that set criteria to be satisfied in designing or constructing a subdivision or development within the Town of Front Royal.
REQUIREMENT, TECHNICAL – All of the requirements of this Chapter, other than a design standard, that apply to the application, permitting, plan or plat contents, information, or other processes or procedures necessary to obtain approval of a subdivision or development.
RESIDUAL SUBDIVIDED PARCEL - A portion of property left over after a subdivision, typically retained by the property owner that complies with the minimum lot size, frontage and other general regulations of this Chapter, as applicable for the creation of a new lot.
RESUBDIVISION - A change to an approved or recorded subdivision plat if such change affects any street layout on such area reserved thereon for public use or any lot line thereon or if it affects any plat legally recorded as a subdivision prior to the adoption of any regulations
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-70
controlling subdivisions.
REVERSE FRONTAGE LOT - See "lot, reverse frontage".
RIGHT-OF-WAY - A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees or another special use. The usage of the term "right-of-way" for land platting purposes shall mean that every "right-of-way" hereafter established and shown on a final subdivision plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such "right-of-way" and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. "Rights-of-way" intended for streets, crosswalks, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains, shade trees or any other use involving maintenance by a public agency shall be dedicated to public use by the maker of the plat on which each "right-of-way" is established.
ROAD– Also “street - a strip of land, other than private driveways serving a single structure, subject to vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic providing means of access to property; also designated as "street", "road", "lane", "drive", "avenue", "right-of-way", "highway", "boulevard", "trail", "court", "place", "terrace", etc.
ROAD, ARTERIAL - A major street that serves as an avenue for the circulation of traffic and carries a high volume of traffic; as defined in the Town’s adopted Construction Standards & Specifications, as amended.
ROAD, COLLECTOR - A street that carries and distributes traffic from adjoining local streets to arterial streets; traffic is generally limited to motorists having origin or destination within the immediate neighborhood; as defined in the Town’s adopted Construction Standards & Specifications, as amended.
ROAD, LOCAL - A street that provides access to lots and carries traffic having destination or origin on the street itself; as defined in the Town’s adopted Construction standards & Specifications, as amended.
ROAD PRIVATE – A street that is owned and maintained by a non-government entity such as a property owners association and not necessarily open to public use.
ROAD OF RECORD - Any street shown on any subdivision plat recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court, whether such street is constructed or not.
ROAD OR ALLEY, PUBLIC USE OF - The unrestricted use of a specific area of right-of-way for ingress and egress to two (2) or more abutting properties.
ROAD, SERVICE DRIVE - A public right-of-way generally parallel with and contiguous to a major highway, primarily designed to promote safety by eliminating ingress and egress to the major highway right-of-way by providing safe and orderly points of access to the major highway.
ROAD, THROUGH - A street that carries and distributes traffic to adjoining subdivisions and
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-71
to streets and highways outside of the subdivision. Such streets function as collector streets.
ROAD WIDTH - The total width of the strip of land dedicated or reserved for public travel, including roadway, curb and gutter, sidewalks, planting strips and, where necessary, utility easements.
SETBACK - See "building (setback) line".
SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN – A detailed engineering plan required for the development of an existing parcel of land that shows existing conditions as well as depicting details of a proposed development and prepared in accordance with the regulations described herein.
SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN, MAJOR – Any site development plan other than a minor site development plan.
SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN, MINOR – A site development plan that involves technical, procedural and submission requirements that are generally less restrictive than a major site development plan, and are only allowed for specific types of development. For the purposes of this definition, the specific types of development that may submit a minor site development plan application, in lieu of a major site development plan application, include the following, except that, a major site development plan may be required by the Director for the following uses when the proposed development exceeds the criteria listed under Section 148-210.B. of this chapter:
a. For Residential Uses. An existing parcel or lot of record in a residential district for three (3) or fewer dwelling units in a single structure.
b. For Non-Residential Uses. The development or re-development of an existing parcel of record where the required number of parking spaces is ten (10) or less and the size of the structure and/or land use area does not exceed two thousand (2,000) square feet.
c. Changes of Use. A change of use with no proposed site improvements, other than minor improvements to existing improvements.
Proposed development that includes 2 (two) or fewer dwelling units on an existing lot or parcel in a residential district shall not require a site development plan, minor or major, but will require the submission of a Proposed House Location Survey prepared in accordance with the requirements of Section 148-1050. An As-Built Survey, prepared in accordance with the requirements of Section 148-1025, shall be submitted prior to the issuance of final approval or authorization for a final occupancy certificate.
SITE PLAN – See “Site Development Plan”.
SKETCH PLAN – A drawing that does not require engineering detail and is an early first draft of a proposed subdivision or development.
SLOPE – The steepness, incline, gradient or grade of the natural incline of the ground expressed
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-72
as a percentage based on computations of rise over run between existing contours.
SLOPE, STEEP – (1) Areas of slope of the natural incline of between 15% to 25% which contain highly erodible, highly permeable or shrink-swell soils. (2) Areas of slope of the natural incline greater than 25%.
SOURCE TRACT - In a proposed subdivision, the entire parcel or parcels of land which exists as the single cohesive lot or unit of land in the records of Warren County and the Town of Front Royal, from which all subdivided parcels, are to be taken.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION – The approval of a subdivision or development with variations to the general regulations of this Chapter, under the criteria established under Section 148-211, and as authorized by Virginia Code §15.2-2242.
STREET – see Road.
STRUCTURE - Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground.
STRUCTURE, PRINCIPAL - A structure in which the principal or primary use of the property is carried out.
SUBDIVIDE - The process of creating new lots to establish a subdivision.
SUBDIVIDER - A person or persons having a freehold, contractual or possessory interest in a parcel of land, who are commencing proceedings under this Chapter to effect a subdivision or development within the Town.
SUBDIVISION - The division of a parcel of land into separate parts, under the terms of this Chapter, regardless of whether the parts are held, developed, sold, leased, rented or transferred. The term includes resubdivision, and, when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided.
SUBDIVISION AGENT - Any person who represents or acts for or on behalf of a subdivider or applicant in selling, leasing or developing or offering to sell, lease or develop any interest, lot, parcel, unit, site or plat in a subdivision, except an attorney at law whose representation of another person consists solely of rendering legal services.
SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT PLAN – A detailed engineering plan of the proposed site improvements required for the development of a proposed subdivision and prepared in accordance with the regulations described herein.
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR - Any subdivision other than a minor subdivision.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR - A subdivision that does not involve any of the following: the creation of more than a total of eight (8) lots, the creation of any new public streets, the extension
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-73
of a public water or sewer system, or the installation of drainage improvements through one (1) or more lots to serve one (1) or more other lots.
SURVEYOR - A person licensed as such by the Commonwealth of Virginia.
TOWN - Town of Front Royal, Virginia.
TREE COVER - All areas of coverage by plant materials exceeding five (5) feet in height, to include the area directly beneath the canopy and within the dripline of a tree.
TREE COVER, PROJECTED TWENTY-YEAR - The area projected to be directly beneath the canopy and within the dripline of a given tree species after a twenty-year growing period. The reference text used in determining the projected twenty-year cover is Michael W. Dirr's Manual of Woody Landscape Plants - Their Identification Ornamental Characteristics, Culture, Propagation and Uses, 4th Edition, 1990.
TREE, STREET - A tree of a deciduous species capable of providing shade that is located in a public place, along the right-of-way adjoining a street or along the street frontage of a property. Such trees shall be a minimum two-inch caliper in size.
USCGS - The United States Coast and Geodetic Survey.
USGS - The United States Geological Survey.
UTILITY LOT – Any parcel or area of land or water that is set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved exclusively for public utilities.
VIRGINIA COORDINATE SYSTEM OF 1983 – The systems of plane coordinates which have been established by the National Ocean Survey/National Geodetic Survey or its successors for defining and stating the positions or locations of points on the surface of the earth within the Commonwealth of Virginia. Coordinate system = US State Plane 1983; Zone = Virginia North 4501; Datum = NAD 1983; Units = US Survey Feet.
WAIVER – The approval of a subdivision or development with variations to the technical regulations of the Chapter, as delegated by Town Council to the Director, under the specific criteria of Section 148-210.
ARTICLE 10 – PLAN AND PLAT DETAIL REQUIREMENTS
148-1005 SKETCH PLAN DETAIL REQUIREMENTS
The sketch plan should be prepared at a scale of no greater than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet and should be drawn in on sheets no larger than eighteen by twenty four (18 x 24) inches and no smaller than eight and one-half by eleven (8.5 x 11) inches. The sketch plan should include the following:
1. All lands in the source tract and that which is in common ownership and contiguous to the
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-74
source tract.
2. Significant topographical and physical features (steep slopes, floodplains, watercourses, wooded areas, wetlands, etc.)
3. The proposed general street and lot layout, with approximate dimensions.
4. Preliminary proposals for connection with the existing water supply and sanitary sewerage systems.
5. Preliminary provisions for collecting and controlling surface water drainage.
6. Other information as requested by the Director.
7. Preliminary traffic impact analysis.
8. North arrow with meridian reference on each sheet.
9. Scale of drawing, written and graphic, on each sheet.
10. Title Block requirements, on each sheet.
a. Plan type.
b. Owner’s name or
c. Lot, block and subdivision name.
d. Town and County designation.
e. Sheet number.
f. Plan date.
11. Cover Sheet (or first sheet) requirements:
a. Index of sheets and match lines.
b. Name, address and phone number of plan preparer.
c. Zoning designation(s).
d. FEMA Flood Zone designations.
e. Vicinity map (1’=1000’), with sheet index for multiple sheets.
f. Tax map number and/or parcel identification.
g. Legend of symbols, abbreviations and line types used
148-1010 PRELIMINARY PLAN DETAIL REQUIREMENTS
The preliminary plan shall indicate the proposed layout of the subdivision including supplemental information and data required for the location of proposed lots, parcels, streets, storm drainage and public utilities. The preliminary plan or any portion thereof involving engineering, planning, landscape architecture or land surveying shall be prepared by the appropriate professional licensed in the Commonwealth of Virginia. All proposed improvements shall reference design standards in ARTICLE 8 – DESIGN STANDARDS, and other applicable
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-75
sections of this ordinance. Unless otherwise approved by the Director, the preliminary plan shall include the following:
1. Sheets prepared at a scale of no greater than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet and drawn in ink on pages no larger than twenty four by thirty six (24 x 36) inches unless otherwise approved by the Director. Plan view portions of the plan shall be drawn to scale and show the location of all proposed improvements. Profiles, if required, shall be submitted on standards federal aid plan and profile sheets and shall have a scale of one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet horizontal and one (1) inch equals five (5) feet vertical, unless otherwise approved. Special studies as required may be submitted on standard cross section paper at the above-noted scale and size. If prepared on more than one sheet, match lines shall clearly indicate where the several sheets join.
2. All dimensions, angular and linear, for locating property lines, lots, street centerlines, alleys, easements and other proposed improvements. Angular measurements shall be expressed in bearings shown in degrees, minutes and seconds. Linear dimensions shall be expressed in feet to the nearest one hundredth of a foot. All curves shall be defined by their radius, arc length, central angle, tangent length, chord bearing and chord distance. A line and/or curve table may be used provided the data being tabulated and numbered corresponds with the respective information shown throughout the plan.
3. Proposed phasing of the subdivision, including maximum length of road segments for each phase, temporary street turnarounds and assurance of utility line continuity.
4. The total tract boundaries of the proposed subdivision and the source of title for all boundary information. Indicate if boundary information shown is based on a current field survey or based on deeds of record. When the property is of land acquired from more than one source of title, the outlines of the several tracts shall be indicated by means of a dotted line or within an inset block.
5. Existing topography shown with a contour interval of not greater than five (5) feet and based on USGS datum. The source of the topography shall be identified
6. Show proposed and existing water supply and distribution with available fire flow data. Note source of fire flow information. Show location and detail of proposed connection to existing line. Location of existing and proposed fire hydrant(s).
7. Show location, type, grade, and size of all proposed and existing sanitary sewers, manholes, gas lines, storm sewers, inlets, ditches, culverts and other utilities. Show location of proposed connections to existing utilities.
8. A conceptual plan for stormwater management and surface drainage on the entire proposed subdivision. Show proposed overlot grading with contours. Provide preliminary computations for storm drainage outfall into existing system and/or calculations proving outfall to adequate channel.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-76
9. All existing or proposed utility transmission lines, bridges, culverts and railroads.
10. Preliminary design of any proposed bridges or large culverts which may require review by other state or local agencies. The preliminary design must meet all applicable requirements of the appropriate state and local agencies and shall be submitted to such agencies by the applicant.
11. Building restriction setback lines with dimensions.
12. Lot numbers. All lots within each block shall be numbered consecutively.
13. Blocks consecutively numbered or lettered in alphabetical order. The blocks in numbered additions to subdivisions bearing the same name shall be numbered or lettered consecutively throughout the several additions.
14. Names and widths of all proposed streets and the functional classification of each, along with a statement of any condition governing the use of the streets.
15. Names and/or route numbers of all existing roads or streets adjoining the property. Indicate if access is limited. NOTE: If the subdivision proposes a new street within three thousand (3000) feet of an existing state road, the Virginia Department of Transportation (VDOT) must review all such streets.
16. Proposed average daily trip (ADT) information. Indicate if a traffic impact analysis was prepared.
17. Tie-in of proposed streets with existing streets. Show intersection sight distance.
18. Show any VDOT required improvements to existing streets or roads, if applicable.
19. Location, character, size, height and orientation of any required street sign or other proposed signage.
20. Typical street section of proposed street showing entire width of right-of-way, depth and type of pavement, base and subbase and curb line or ditch section, sidewalk and cut or fill slope.
21. Preliminary street centerline sight distance calculations.
22. The location and width of existing and proposed right-of-ways and easements and their intended use and purpose.
23. Soils map and soils data. Show location of any required test borings.
24. Show any special flood hazard area(s) subject to inundation by the 1% annual chance flood as shown on FEMA Flood Insurance Maps. Provide floodplain limit study, if required.
25. Approximate location of existing buildings on the property and within two hundred (200)
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-77
feet outside of the perimeter boundary lines.
26. The location and area of any parcel of land proposed for non-residential use, such as a park or playground or other public use or for the use of the proposed subdivision lot owners. Indicate any conditions governing the use, dedication or preservation of such areas, including provisions for permanent maintenance.
27. The location of any cemetery, grave, object or other structure indicating a place of burial.
28. Show any historical buildings, structures or sites designated on the Virginia Landmarks Register that are located within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision.
29. Steep Slope analysis.
30. Any necessary notes that may be required to explain the intent and purposes of specific items on the plan or profile.
31. Adjoining property owner information, including name, use, deed reference and/or subdivision lot designations.
32. Significant physical features on the property (watercourses, wetlands, wooded areas, etc) and other significant man-made or natural features within the subdivision.
33. Preparer’s seal, signature and date on each sheet. (Original signature on first sheet)
34. North arrow and meridian reference on each sheet.
35. Scale of plan, written and graphic, on each sheet.
36. Title Block requirements, on each sheet.
a. Plan type.
b. Owner’s name or
c. Lot, block and subdivision name.
d. Town and County designation.
e. Sheet number.
f. Plan date.
37. Cover Sheet (or first sheet) requirements:
a. Revision block. Show date and nature of all revisions.
b. Index of sheets.
c. Name, address and phone number of owner and developer.
d. Name, address and phone number of plan preparer.
e. Zoning designation(s) with minimum lot size requirements.
f. Front, side and rear yard setback dimensions.
g. FEMA Flood Zone designations, if applicable.
h. Vicinity map (1’=1000’), with sheet index for multiple sheets.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-78
i. Area Tabulation showing total area and number of lots, streets, open space and residue. The number of units by type when mixed uses are proposed.
j. Off-street parking tabulation.
k. Tax map number and/or parcel identification.
l. Legend of symbols, abbreviations and line types used.
m. Approval Block:
All Town Real Estate Taxes Have Been Paid in Full
______________________________________
Director of Finance Date
Reviewed and Approved by the Town of Front Royal
______________________________________
Director of Planning & Zoning Date
______________________________________
Town Council Date
______________________________________
Director of Environmental Services Date
______________________________________
Director of Energy Services Date
148-1015 SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT PLAN DETAIL REQUIREMENTS
The subdivision development plan shall show the location and design of proposed site improvements required for the subdivision. The subdivision development plan or any portion thereof involving engineering, planning, landscape architecture or land surveying shall be prepared by the appropriate professional licensed in the Commonwealth of Virginia. All proposed improvements shall be designed in accordance with the requirements of ARTICLE 8 – DESIGN STANDARDS, and other applicable sections of this ordinance. Unless otherwise approved by the Director, the subdivision development plan shall include the following:
1. Sheets prepared at a scale of no greater than one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet and drawn in ink on pages no larger than twenty four by thirty six (24 x 36) inches. Plan view portions of the plan shall be drawn to scale and show the accurate location of proposed improvements. Profiles shall be submitted on standards federal aid plan and profile sheets and shall have a scale of one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet horizontal and one (1) inch equals five (5) feet vertical, unless otherwise approved. Special studies as required may be submitted on standard cross section paper at the above-noted scale and size. If prepared on more than one sheet, match lines shall clearly indicate where the several sheets join.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-79
2. All dimensions, angular and linear, for locating property lines, lots, street centerlines, alleys, easements and other proposed improvements. Angular measurements shall be expressed in bearings shown in degrees, minutes and seconds. Linear dimensions shall be expressed in feet to the nearest one hundredth of a foot. Curve data shall include the delta, radius, arc, tangent, chord distance and chord bearing. A line and/or curve table may be used provided the data being tabulated and numbered corresponds with the respective information shown throughout the plan.
3. Existing topography shown at two (2) foot contour intervals based on NAVD 88 datum. The topographic information may be field run or from aerial photography, but the information must be current, and the contouring method must provide the precision expected for two (2) foot contours.
4. Boundary and lot line information based on companion final subdivision plat.
5. Plan information for proposed water supply and distribution with available fire flow data. Note source of fire flow information. Show location and detail of proposed connection to existing line. Show location and type of fire hydrant(s).
6. Plan information on location, type, grade, size, top and invert elevations of all existing and proposed sanitary sewers, sanitary laterals, manholes, gas lines, curb & gutter, storm sewers, inlets, ditches, culverts, water meters and other utilities. Show location of proposed connections to existing utilities.
7. Sanitary sewer lateral schedule.
8. Design computations confirming adequate control and disposition of natural and storm water.
9. Computations for storm drainage outfall into existing system and/or calculations proving outfall to adequate channel.
10. Profiles for all proposed sanitary and storm sewers, storm drainage outfall to adequate channel, street centerlines, right & left building setback lines, water lines and other utilities.
11. Street centerline vertical curve data with sight distance calculations.
12. Stations shown on the profile shall match stations shown on the plan.
13. Typical street section of proposed street showing entire width of right-of-way, depth and type of pavement, base and subbase and curb line or ditch section, sidewalk and cut or fill slope. Provide calculations for depth of pavement and subbase, if applicable.
14. Town of Front Royal Standard Construction Detail(s) of all proposed improvements and/or VDOT designation.
15. Provide and show the location, elevation and description of two (2) on-site reference marks which are properly correlated to the plan elevations. Indicate source and name of existing
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-80
benchmark used.
16. Proposed finished grading by contour, supplemented where necessary by spot elevations.
17. The width of right-of-ways and easements and their intended use and purpose.
18. The limits of clearing and/or construction for all work to be done, including off-site turnarounds, sewer and water extensions and storm sewer outfalls.
19. Soils map and soils data. Show location of any required test borings.
20. Radius of all curb returns to face of curb. On street where curb & gutter is not required, show radius of edge of pavement.
21. Location and type of street monuments.
22. Show any special flood hazard area(s) subject to inundation by the 1% annual chance flood as shown on FEMA Flood Insurance Maps. Provide floodplain studies, if required.
23. Names and widths of all proposed streets. Names and/or route numbers of all existing roads or streets adjoining the property and their posted speed limit. Indicate if access is limited.
24. Proposed average daily trip (ADT) information. Indicate if a traffic impact analysis was prepared.
25. Tie-in of proposed streets with existing streets. Show intersection sight distance.
26. VDOT required improvements to existing streets or roads, if applicable.
27. Street light placement.
28. Location, character, size, height and orientation of any required street sign or other proposed signage.
29. Location of any cemetery, grave, object or other structure indicating a place of burial.
30. Location and type of all driveway entrances and curb ramps, including railing, slopes and surface treatment.
31. Overlot grading plan showing proposed grading for lot development. Show location of proposed housing or building units, driveways and disposition of surface water.
32. Steep Slope analysis.
33. Any necessary notes that may be required to explain the intent and purposes of specific items on the plan or profile.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-81
34. Adjoining property owner information, including name, deed reference and/or subdivision lot designations.
35. Preparer’s seal, signature and date on each sheet. (Original signature on first sheet)
36. North arrow and meridian reference on each sheet.
37. Scale of plan, written and graphic, on each sheet.
38. Title Block requirements, on each sheet.
a. Plan type.
b. Owner’s name or
c. Lot, block and subdivision name.
d. Town and County designation.
e. Sheet number.
f. Plan date.
39. Cover Sheet (or first sheet) requirements:
a. Revision block.
b. Index of sheets.
c. Name, address and phone number of owner and developer.
d. Name, address and phone number of plan preparer.
e. Zoning designation(s) with minimum lot size requirements.
f. Required front, side and rear yard setback dimensions.
g. FEMA Flood Zone designations.
h. Vicinity map (1’=1000’), with sheet index for multiple sheets.
i. Area Tabulation showing total area and number of lots, street, open space and residue. Indicate area of construction or disturbed area.
j. Tax map number and/or parcel identification.
k. Town of Front Royal General Construction Notes.
l. ‘Miss Utility’ note regarding marking of underground utilities.
m. Town of Front Royal ‘Notice Required’ utility excavation note.
n. Legend of symbols, abbreviations and line types used.
o. Approval Block:
All Town Real Estate Taxes Have Been Paid in Full
______________________________________
Director of Finance Date
Reviewed and Approved by the Town of Front Royal
______________________________________
Director of Planning & Zoning Date
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-82
______________________________________
Town Manager Date
______________________________________
Director of Environmental Services Date
______________________________________
Director of Energy Services Date
148-1020 SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN DETAIL REQUIREMENTS
The site development plan shall show the location and design of proposed site improvements required for the subdivision. The Site Development Plan or any portion thereof involving engineering, planning, landscape architecture or land surveying shall be prepared by the appropriate professional licensed in the Commonwealth of Virginia. All proposed improvements shall be designed in accordance with the requirements of ARTICLE 8 – DESIGN STANDARDS, and other applicable sections of this ordinance. Unless otherwise approved by the Director, the Site Development Plan shall include the following:
1. Sheets prepared at a scale of no greater than one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet and drawn in ink on pages no larger than twenty four by thirty six (24 x 36) inches. Plan view portions of the plan shall be drawn to scale and show the accurate location of proposed improvements. Profiles shall be submitted on standards federal aid plan and profile sheets and shall have a scale of one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet horizontal and one (1) inch equals five (5) feet vertical, unless otherwise approved. Special studies as required may be submitted on standard cross section paper at the above-noted scale and size. If prepared on more than one sheet, match lines shall clearly indicate where the several sheets join.
2. All dimensions, angular and linear, for locating property lines, lots, street centerlines, alleys, easements and other proposed improvements. Angular measurements shall be expressed in bearings shown in degrees, minutes and seconds. Linear dimensions shall be expressed in feet to the nearest one hundredth of a foot. Curve data shall include the delta, radius, arc, tangent, chord distance and chord bearing. A line and/or curve table may be used provided the data being tabulated and numbered corresponds with the respective information shown throughout the plan.
3. Existing topography shown at two (2) foot contour intervals based on NAVD 88 datum. The topographic information may be field run or from aerial photography, but the information must be current, and the contouring method must provide the precision expected for two (2) foot contours.
4. Boundary and lot line information.
5. Plan information for proposed water supply and distribution with available fire flow data. Note source of fire flow information. Show location and detail of proposed connection to
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-83
existing line. Show location and type of fire hydrant(s).
6. Plan information on location, type, grade, size, top and invert elevations of all existing and proposed sanitary sewers, sanitary laterals, manholes, gas lines, curb & gutter, storm sewers, inlets, ditches, culverts, water meters and other utilities. Show location of proposed connections to existing utilities.
7. Sanitary sewer lateral schedule.
8. Design computations confirming adequate control and disposition of natural and storm water.
9. Computations for storm drainage outfall into existing system and/or calculations proving outfall to adequate channel.
10. Profiles for all proposed sanitary and storm sewers, water lines and storm drainage outfall to adequate channel.
11. Stations shown on the profile shall match stations shown on the plan.
12. Typical section of proposed street improvements showing depth and type of pavement, base and subbase and curb line or ditch section, sidewalk and cut or fill slope. Provide calculations for depth of pavement and subbase, if applicable.
13. Town of Front Royal Standard Construction Detail(s) of all proposed improvements and/or VDOT designation.
14. Provide and show the location, elevation and description of two (2) on-site reference marks which are properly correlated to the plan elevations. Indicate source and name of existing benchmark used.
15. Proposed finished grading by contour, supplemented where necessary by spot elevations.
16. The width of right-of-ways and easements and their intended use and purpose.
17. The limits of clearing and/or construction for all work to be done, including off-site turnarounds, sewer and water extensions and storm sewer outfalls.
18. Soils map and soils data. Show location of any required test borings.
19. Radius of all curb returns to face of curb or radius of edge of pavement.
20. Location and type of property corner monuments.
21. Show any special flood hazard area(s) subject to inundation by the 1% annual chance flood as shown on FEMA Flood Insurance Maps. Provide floodplain limit studies, if required.
22. Names and/or route numbers of all existing roads or streets adjoining the property and their posted speed limit. Indicate if access is limited.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-84
23. Proposed average daily trip (ADT) information. Indicate if a traffic impact analysis was prepared.
24. VDOT required improvements to existing streets or roads, if applicable.
25. Show location and type of exterior lighting.
26. Location, character, size, height and orientation of any required street sign or other proposed signage.
27. Location of any cemetery, grave, object or other structure indicating a place of burial.
28. Location and type of all driveway entrances and curb ramps, including railing, slopes and surface treatment. Provide sight distance calculations for entrance.
29. Steep Slope analysis.
30. Any necessary notes that may be required to explain the intent and purposes of specific items on the plan or profile.
31. Adjoining property owner information, including name, deed reference and/or subdivision lot designations.
32. Preparer’s seal, signature and date on each sheet. (Original signature on first sheet)
33. North arrow and meridian reference on each sheet.
34. Scale of plan, written and graphic, on each sheet.
35. Title Block requirements, on each sheet.
a. Plan type.
b. Owner’s name or
c. Lot, block and subdivision name.
d. Town and County designation.
e. Sheet number.
f. Plan date.
36. Cover Sheet (or first sheet) requirements:
a. Revision block.
b. Index of sheets.
c. Name, address and phone number of owner and developer.
d. Name, address and phone number of plan preparer.
e. Zoning designation(s) with minimum lot size requirements.
f. Required front, side and rear yard setback dimensions.
g. FEMA Flood Zone designations, if applicable.
h. Vicinity map (1’=1000’), with sheet index for multiple sheets.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-85
i. Area Tabulation showing total area and number of lots, street, open space and residue. Indicate area of construction or disturbed area.
j. Tax map number and/or parcel identification.
k. Town of Front Royal General Construction Notes.
l. ‘Miss Utility’ note regarding marking of underground utilities.
m. Town of Front Royal ‘Notice Required’ utility excavation note.
n. Legend of symbols, abbreviations and line types used.
o. Approval Block:
All Town Real Estate Taxes Have Been Paid in Full
______________________________________
Director of Finance Date
Reviewed and Approved by the Town of Front Royal
______________________________________
Director of Planning & Zoning Date
______________________________________
Town Manager Date
______________________________________
Director of Environmental Services Date
_________________________________
Director of Energy Services Date
148-1025 AS-BUILT DETAIL REQUIREMENTS
An as-built shall be prepared for site improvements required by the approved site development plan, subdivision development plan, overlot grading plan, and/or final plat that are intended for public use. The as-built shall show the existing horizontal and vertical dimensions of the constructed site improvements on a copy of the site development plan and/or final plat in a fashion that distinguishes them from the proposed or designed dimensions, such as in ‘italic’ or ‘boxed’ format. In addition to the items shown on the site development plan or final plat, the as-built shall include the following:
1. The horizontal location and dimensions of sanitary manholes, storm inlets, ditches, swales, water valves, water meters, fire hydrants, utility poles and pedestals, driveway entrances, handicap curb cuts, streets, sidewalks and signs. (Provide coordinate values, or acad line file, of said horizontal locations)
2. Horizontal variations greater than 1.0 foot should be shown dimensionally or through plus stations. Horizontal variations greater than 5.0 feet should also show the graphic relocation of the object. Vertical elevation variations greater than 0.1 foot shall be provided for all shown design elevations.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-86
3. Retaining wall: indicate type and show elevations of the top of wall and the lowest finished grade.
4. Spot elevations of graded areas to determine the finished grade of all areas of steep slope. Highlight all areas of finished slopes exceeding design grade by more than 1%.
5. Horizontal location with dimensions of all structures with dimensions including porches, decks, garages, etc. show vertical elevations of first floor and basement floor.
6. Horizontal and vertical location of roof drains, foundation drains and other drainage outlets. Locations of utility services.
7. Location of required plantings.
8. Invert and top elevations of sanitary manholes and storm inlets.
9. Size (diameter) and type of sanitary and storm sewer lines.
10. Length and percentage of slope of individual runs of sanitary and storm sewer lines.
11. Length, percentage of slope, invert elevations, and cross section dimensions of storm drainage ditches or swales.
12. Topography by contours of stormwater management ponds or other stormwater detention devices and provide calculations of existing storage. Include spot elevations as needed.
13. Topography by contours of all graded areas, including street slopes and areas of overlot grading. Include spot elevations as needed.
14. Elevation of centerline of streets at fifty foot intervals.
15. Elevation of curb & gutter flowline at fifty foot intervals.
16. Widths of sidewalks, trails, street pavement, driveway entrances, and other concrete or asphalt items.
17. A statement that the street and lot corner monuments have been set.
18. Signature and seal of the as-built plan preparer.
19. Date of the as-built.
20. The as-built plan must be stamped by a licensed land surveyor or professional engineer and include certification the as-built plan is substantially in conformance with the original plan. If a geotechnical report is used, the appropriate licensed professional must certify that the as-built is in conformance with the report.
148-1030 OVERLOT GRADING PLAN DETAIL REQUIREMENTS
The overlot grading plan shall show the proposed grading and improvements for proposed subdivision lots. The overlot grading plan or any portion thereof involving engineering, planning, landscape architecture or land surveying shall be prepared by the appropriate professional licensed in the Commonwealth of Virginia. All proposed improvements shall be designed in accordance with the requirements of ARTICLE 8 – DESIGN STANDARDS, and other applicable sections of this ordinance. Unless otherwise approved by the Director, the overlot grading plan shall include the following:
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-87
1. Sheets prepared at a scale of no greater than one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet and drawn in ink on pages no larger than twenty four by thirty six (24 x 36) inches. Plan view portions of the plan shall be drawn to scale and show the accurate location of proposed improvements. Profiles shall be submitted on standards federal aid plan and profile sheets and shall have a scale of one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet horizontal and one (1) inch equals five (5) feet vertical, unless otherwise approved. If prepared on more than one sheet, match lines shall clearly indicate where the several sheets join.
2. All dimensions, angular and linear, for locating property lines, lots, street centerlines, alleys, easements and other proposed improvements. Angular measurements shall be expressed in bearings shown in degrees, minutes and seconds. Linear dimensions shall be expressed in feet to the nearest one hundredth of a foot. Curve data shall include the delta, radius, arc, tangent, chord distance and chord bearing. A line and/or curve table may be used provided the data being tabulated and numbered corresponds with the respective information shown throughout the plan.
3. Existing topography shown at two (2) foot contour intervals based on NAVD 88 datum. The topographic information may be field run or from aerial photography, but the information must be current, and the contouring method must provide the precision expected for two (2) foot contours.
4. Boundary and lot line information.
5. Plan information for proposed water supply and distribution with available fire flow data. Note source of fire flow information. Show location and detail of proposed connection to existing line. Show location and type of fire hydrant(s).
6. Plan information on location, type, grade, size, top and invert elevations of all existing and proposed sanitary sewers, sanitary laterals, manholes, gas lines, curb & gutter, storm sewers, inlets, ditches, culverts, water meters and other utilities. Show location of proposed connections to existing utilities.
7. Sanitary sewer lateral schedule.
8. Design computations confirming adequate control and disposition of natural and storm water.
9. Computations for storm drainage outfall into existing system and/or calculations proving outfall to adequate channel.
10. Profiles for all proposed sanitary and storm sewers, water lines and storm drainage outfall to adequate channel.
11. Stations shown on the profile shall match stations shown on the plan.
12. Town of Front Royal Standard Construction Detail(s) of all proposed improvements and/or
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-88
VDOT designation.
13. Provide and show the location, elevation and description of two (2) on-site reference marks which are properly correlated to the plan elevations. Indicate source and name of existing benchmark used.
14. Proposed finished grading by contour, supplemented where necessary by spot elevations.
15. The limits of clearing and/or construction for all work to be done.
16. Soils map and soils data. Show location of any required test borings.
17. Radius of all curb returns to face of curb or radius of edge of pavement.
18. Show any special flood hazard area(s) subject to inundation by the 1% annual chance flood as shown on FEMA Flood Insurance Maps. Provide floodplain limit studies, if required.
19. Names and/or route numbers of all existing roads or streets adjoining the property and their posted speed limit. Indicate if access is limited.
20. Proposed average daily trip (ADT) information. Indicate if a traffic impact analysis was prepared.
21. VDOT required improvements to existing streets or roads, if applicable.
22. Show location and type of exterior lighting...
23. Location of any cemetery, grave, object or other structure indicating a place of burial.
24. Location and type of all driveway entrances and curb ramps, including railing, slopes and surface treatment. Provide sight distance calculations for entrance.
25. Steep Slope analysis.
26. Any necessary notes that may be required to explain the intent and purposes of specific items on the plan or profile.
27. Adjoining property owner information, including name, deed reference and/or subdivision lot designations.
28. Preparer’s seal, signature and date on each sheet. (Original signature on first sheet)
29. North arrow and meridian reference on each sheet.
30. Scale of plan, written and graphic, on each sheet
31. Title Block requirements, on each sheet.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-89
a. Plan type.
b. Owner’s name or
c. Lot, block and subdivision name.
d. Town and County designation.
e. Sheet number.
f. Plan date.
32. Cover Sheet (or first sheet) requirements:
a. Revision block.
b. Index of sheets.
c. Name, address and phone number of owner and developer.
d. Name, address and phone number of plan preparer.
e. Zoning designation(s) with minimum lot size requirements.
f. Required front, side and rear yard setback dimensions.
g. FEMA Flood Zone designations, if applicable.
h. Vicinity map (1’=1000’), with sheet index for multiple sheets.
i. Area Tabulation showing total area and number of lots, street, open space and residue. Indicate area of construction or disturbed area.
j. Tax map number and/or parcel identification.
k. Town of Front Royal General Construction Notes.
l. ‘Miss Utility’ note regarding marking of underground utilities.
m. Town of Front Royal ‘Notice Required’ utility excavation note.
n. Legend of symbols, abbreviations and line types used.
o. Approval Block:
All Town Real Estate Taxes Have Been Paid in Full
______________________________________
Director of Finance Date
Reviewed and Approved by the Town of Front Royal
______________________________________
Director of Planning & Zoning Date
______________________________________
Town Manager Date
______________________________________
Director of Environmental Services Date
______________________________________
Director of Energy Services Date
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-90
148-1035 FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT DETAIL REQUIREMENTS
The final subdivision plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor or professional engineer licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia and shall conform to the Standards for Plats of the Virginia State Library Board (17VAC15-60-10, et seq). The final plat shall be prepared at a scale of no greater than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet and shall be drawn in ink on sheets no larger than eighteen by twenty four (18 x 24) inches and no smaller than eight and one-half by eleven (8.5 x 11) inches. Unless otherwise approved by the Director, the Final Plat shall include the following:
1. A statement that the final plat is substantially in accordance with the approved preliminary plan, if applicable. The final plat may include all or any part of the area covered by the preliminary plan, in accord with phasing designations shown on the preliminary plan.
2. A statement or certificate signed by the preparer certifying to the correctness of the survey, the drawn plat, the placement of lot corner and street monuments and stating the source of title to the land subdivided and the place of record of the last instrument in the chain of title. When the property is of land acquired from more than one source of title, the outlines of the several tracts shall be indicated by means of a dotted line or within an inset block.
3. A statement or certificate that “The subdivision and dedication of the land shown hereon is with the free consent and in accordance with the desire of the undersigned owner(s), proprietor(s) and trustee(s)”. The statement shall be signed by such persons and duly acknowledged before an officer authorized to make such acknowledgements.
4. The boundary lines of the land being subdivided shall be determined from a field survey meeting the requirements of the ‘Minimum Standards and Procedures for Land Boundary Surveying Practice’ (18 VAC 10-20-370) of the regulations promulgated by the Virginia State Board for Architects, Professional Engineers, Land Surveyors, Certified Interior Designers and Landscape Architects. The survey shall be referenced to the Virginia Coordinate System of 1983 and the plat shall show the coordinate values of at least two corners of the subdivision.
5. The location, number and area (square feet or acres) of proposed lots and parcels (both residential and non-residential).
6. All dimensions, angular and linear, for locating boundary lines, lots, parcels, streets, street centerlines, alleys and easements (public and private). Angular measurements shall be expressed in bearings shown in degrees, minutes and seconds. Linear dimensions shall be expressed in feet to the nearest one hundredth of a foot. All curves shall be defined by their radius, arc length, central angle, tangent length, chord bearing and chord distance. A line and/or curve table may be used provided the data being tabulated and numbered corresponds with the respective information shown throughout the plat.
7. A statement regarding the use and dedication of all non-residential parcels and lots.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-91
8. Proposed easements or right-of-ways, their widths and use, and any limitation on such easements or right-of-ways. Easements must be located in cooperation with the appropriate public utility provider.
9. Existing easements or other encumbrances of record known to the professional. Indicate if a title report was furnished.
10. Lot numbers in numerical order and block identification in accordance with the approved preliminary plan.
11. Proposed streets and widths. Use street name(s) per approved preliminary plan with statement regarding dedication and use.
12. Names and/or route numbers of existing roads or highways adjoining the property. Indicate if access is limited.
13. Distance to nearest road intersection where applicable.
14. A bearing and distance tie to the exterior boundary for parcels or sections located entirely within the perimeter boundary lines.
15. The location of any easement, right-of-way or street to be vacated, if any.
16. The location and type of all boundary line and permanent reference monuments.
17. Adjoining property owner information, including name, deed reference and/or subdivision lot designation.
18. Building restriction setback lines with dimensions.
19. North arrow with meridian reference on each sheet.
20. Scale of drawing, written and graphic, on each sheet.
21. Preparer’s seal, signature and date on each sheet. (Original signature on first sheet)
22. Title Block requirements, on each sheet.
a. Plat type.
b. Owner’s name or
c. Lot, block and subdivision name.
d. Town and County designation.
e. Sheet number.
f. Plan date.
23. Cover Sheet (or first sheet) requirements:
a. Revision block. Show date and nature of all revisions.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-92
b. Index of sheets and match lines.
c. Name, address and phone number of owner and developer.
d. Name, address and phone number of plan preparer.
e. Zoning designation(s) with minimum lot size requirements.
f. Front, side and rear yard setback dimensions.
g. FEMA Flood Zone designations, if applicable.
h. Vicinity map (1’=1000’), with sheet index for multiple sheets.
i. Area Tabulation showing total area and number of lots, streets, open space and residue. The number of units by type when mixed uses are proposed.
j. Tax map number and/or parcel identification.
k. Legend of symbols, abbreviations and line types used.
l. Approval Block:
All Town Real Estate Taxes Have Been Paid in Full
______________________________________
Director of Finance Date
Reviewed and Approved by the Town of Front Royal
______________________________________
Town Council* Date
______________________________________
Director of Planning & Zoning Date
*use Town Manager for Minor Subdivision.
148-1040 LOT CONSOLIDATION/BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENT PLAT DETAIL REQUIREMENTS
The lot consolidation/boundary line adjustment plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor or professional engineer licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia and shall conform to the Standards for Plats of the Virginia State Library Board (17VAC15-60-10, et seq). The final plat shall be prepared at a scale of no greater than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet and shall be drawn in ink on sheets no larger than eighteen by twenty four (18 x 24) inches and no smaller than eight and one-half by eleven (8.5 x 11) inches. Unless otherwise approved by the Director, the final plat shall include the following:
1. A statement or certificate signed by the preparer certifying to the correctness of the drawn plat and stating the source of title to the land shown and the place of record of the last instrument in the chain of title. When the property is of land acquired from more than one source of title, the outlines of the several tracts shall be indicated by means of a dotted line or within an inset block.
2. A statement or certificate that “The lot consolidation or boundary line adjustment of the land shown hereon is with the free consent and in accordance with the desire of the undersigned owner(s), proprietor(s) and trustee(s)”. The statement shall be signed by such persons and
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-93
duly acknowledged before an officer authorized to make such acknowledgements.
3. Indicate if the boundary lines shown on the plat are from record information or have been determined from a field survey meeting the requirements of the ‘Minimum Standards and Procedures for Land Boundary Surveying Practice’ (18 VAC 10-20-370) of the regulations promulgated by the Virginia State Board for Architects, Professional Engineers, Land Surveyors, Certified Interior Designers and Landscape Architects.
4. Original property lines with bearings and distances.
5. Show vacated property line(s) as a dashed or dotted line and use lettering indicating the vacation of the lines. (‘Property line hereby vacated’).
6. New property lines shown with bearings and distances. Use lettering indicating the new lines. (‘Property line hereby created).
7. Existing easements or other encumbrances of record known to the professional. Indicate if a title report was furnished.
8. Total area of original lot(s).
9. Total area of new lot(s).
10. Area of the adjustment(s).
11. New lot number (alpha numeric). Show vacated lot numbers as dashed or dotted text.
12. Names and/or route numbers of existing roads or highways adjoining the property. Indicate if access is limited.
13. Distance to nearest road intersection where applicable.
14. The location and type of all boundary line and permanent reference monuments.
15. Adjoining property owner information, including name, deed reference and/or subdivision lot designation.
16. Building restriction setback lines with dimensions.
17. Show the distance from any structure to nearest property line.
18. North arrow with meridian reference on each sheet.
19. Scale of drawing, written and graphic, on each sheet.
20. Preparer’s seal, signature and date on each sheet. (Original signature on first sheet)
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-94
21. Title Block requirements, on each sheet.
a. Plat type.
b. Owner’s name or
c. Lot, block and subdivision name.
d. Town and County designation.
e. Sheet number.
f. Plat date.
22. Cover Sheet (or first sheet) requirements:
a. Index of sheets and match lines.
b. Name, address and phone number of plan preparer.
c. Zoning designation(s).
d. FEMA Flood Zone designations.
e. Vicinity map (1’=1000’), with sheet index for multiple sheets.
f. Tax map number and/or parcel identification.
g. Legend of symbols, abbreviations and line types used.
h. Approval Block:
All Town Real Estate Taxes Have Been Paid in Full
______________________________________
Director of Finance Date
Reviewed and Approved by the Town of Front Royal
______________________________________
Town Manager Date
______________________________________
Director of Planning & Zoning Date
148-1045 GENERALIZED DEVELOPMENT PLAN DETAIL REQUIREMENTS
The generalized development plan shall indicate the general layout of site improvements, including supplemental information and data required for the location of proposed lots, parcels, streets, storm drainage and public utilities. The generalized development plan or any portion thereof involving engineering, planning, landscape architecture or land surveying shall be prepared by the appropriate professional licensed in the Commonwealth of Virginia. All proposed improvements shall reference design standards in ARTICLE 8 – DESIGN STANDARDS, and other applicable sections of this ordinance. Unless otherwise approved by the Director, the generalized development plan shall include the following:
1. Sheets prepared at a scale of no greater than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet and drawn in ink on pages no larger than twenty four by thirty six (24 x 36) inches unless otherwise approved by the Director. If prepared on more than one sheet, match lines shall clearly indicate where the several sheets join.
2. Proposed phasing of the development.
3. The general locations, dimensions, height, number of floors and setbacks of all existing and
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-95
proposed buildings, structures and other improvements.
4. The total tract boundaries of the proposed subdivision and the source of title for all boundary information. Indicate if boundary information shown is based on a current field survey or based on deeds of record. When the property is of land acquired from more than one source of title, the outlines of the several tracts shall be indicated by means of a dotted line or within an inset block.
5. A table estimating the lot coverage ratio and impervious surface area.
6. The boundaries of any lakes, rivers, streams, ponds or wetlands.
7. The general location and material descriptions of all other existing and proposed screens, buffer areas or landscaping.
8. The location and dimensions of existing and proposed parking and loading areas, and any other impervious areas such as driveways, streets and sidewalks.
9. The location of all points of access and all proposed interparcel connections.
10. Existing topography shown with a contour interval of not greater than five (5) feet and based on USGS datum. The source of the topography shall be identified
11. Show proposed and existing water supply and distribution with available fire flow data. Note source of fire flow information. Show location and detail of proposed connection to existing line. Location of existing and proposed fire hydrant(s).
12. Show location, type, grade, and size of all proposed and existing sanitary sewers, manholes, gas lines, storm sewers, inlets, ditches, culverts and other utilities. Show location of proposed connections to existing utilities.
13. A conceptual plan for stormwater management and surface drainage on the entire site. Provide preliminary computations for storm drainage outfall into existing system and/or calculations proving outfall to adequate channel.
14. A conceptual plan for overlot grading with contours.
15. All existing or proposed utility transmission lines, bridges, culverts and railroads.
16. Preliminary design of any proposed bridges or large culverts which may require review by other state or local agencies. The preliminary design must meet all applicable requirements of the appropriate state and local agencies and shall be submitted to such agencies by the applicant.
17. Building restriction setback lines with dimensions.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-96
18. Lot numbers.
19. Names and/or route numbers of all existing roads or streets adjoining the property. Indicate if access is limited.
20. Proposed average daily trip (ADT) information. Indicate if a traffic impact analysis was prepared.
21. Show any VDOT required improvements to existing streets or roads, if applicable.
22. Location, character, size, height and orientation of any required street sign or other proposed signage
23. The location and width of existing and proposed right-of-ways and easements and their intended use and purpose.
24. Soils map and soils data. Show location of any required test borings.
25. Show any special flood hazard area(s) subject to inundation by the 1% annual chance flood as shown on FEMA Flood Insurance Maps. Provide floodplain limit study, if required.
26. Approximate location of existing buildings on the property and within two hundred (200) feet outside of the perimeter boundary lines.
27. The location of any cemetery, grave, object or other structure indicating a place of burial.
28. Show any historical buildings, structures or sites designated on the Virginia Landmarks Register that are located within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision.
29. Preliminary steep slope analysis.
30. Any necessary notes that may be required to explain the intent and purposes of specific items on the plan.
31. Adjoining property owner information, including name, use, deed reference and/or subdivision lot designations.
32. Significant physical features on the property (watercourses, wetlands, wooded areas, etc) and other significant man-made or natural features within the subdivision.
33. Preparer’s seal, signature and date on each sheet. (Original signature on first sheet)
34. North arrow and meridian reference on each sheet.
35. Scale of plan, written and graphic, on each sheet.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-97
36. Title Block requirements, on each sheet.
a. Plan type.
b. Owner’s name or
c. Lot, block and subdivision name.
d. Town and County designation.
e. Sheet number.
f. Plan date.
37. Cover Sheet (or first sheet) requirements:
a. Revision block. Show date and nature of all revisions.
b. Index of sheets.
c. Name, address and phone number of owner and developer.
d. Name, address and phone number of plan preparer.
e. Zoning designation(s) with minimum lot size requirements.
f. Front, side and rear yard setback dimensions.
g. FEMA Flood Zone designations, if applicable.
h. Vicinity map (1’=1000’), with sheet index for multiple sheets.
i. Area Tabulation showing total area and number of lots, streets, open space and residue. The number of units by type when mixed uses are proposed.
j. Off-street parking tabulation.
k. Tax map number and/or parcel identification.
l. Legend of symbols, abbreviations and line types used.
148-1050 PROPOSED HOUSE LOCATION SURVEY DETAIL REQUIREMENTS
The proposed house location survey shall show the proposed grading and improvements for residential parcel or lot of record. The proposed house location survey shall be prepared by a land surveyor or professional engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of Virginia. All proposed improvements shall be designed in accordance with the requirements of ARTICLE 8 – DESIGN STANDARDS, and other applicable sections of this ordinance. Unless otherwise approved by the Director, the proposed house location survey shall include the following:
1. The proposed house location survey shall be prepared at a scale of no greater than one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet and shall be drawn in ink on sheets no larger than eighteen by twenty four (18 x 24) inches and no smaller than eight and one-half by eleven (8.5 x 11) inches.
2. Existing topography shown at two (2) foot contour intervals based on NAVD 88 datum. The topographic information may be field run or from aerial photography, but the information must be current, and the contouring method must provide the precision expected for two (2) foot contours.
3. Boundary and lot line information. Indicate if boundary information is based on a current field survey or based on deeds of record.
4. The location, dimensions, height, number of floors and setbacks of all existing and proposed
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-98
buildings, structures and other improvements.
5. Building restriction setback lines with dimensions.
6. Area of lot or parcel.
7. Type, grade, size, top and invert elevations of all existing sanitary sewers, manholes, curb & gutter, storm sewers, inlets, ditches, culverts, water meters and other utilities. Show location of proposed connections to existing utilities.
8. Show location and details of proposed connections to existing utilities.
9. Computations for storm drainage outfall into existing system and/or calculations proving outfall to adequate channel.
10. Provide and show the location, elevation and description of an on-site reference mark which is properly correlated to the survey elevations. Indicate source and name of existing benchmark used.
11. Proposed finished grading by contour, supplemented where necessary by spot elevations.
12. The limits of clearing and/or construction for all work to be done.
13. Radius of all curb returns to face of curb or radius of edge of pavement.
14. Show any special flood hazard area(s) subject to inundation by the 1% annual chance flood as shown on FEMA Flood Insurance Maps. Provide floodplain limit studies, if required.
15. Names and/or route numbers of all existing roads or streets adjoining the property and their posted speed limit. Indicate if access is limited
16. Location of any cemetery, grave, object or other structure indicating a place of burial.
17. Location and type of all driveway entrances and curb ramps, including railing, slopes and surface treatment.
18. Any necessary notes that may be required to explain the intent and purposes of specific items on the plan or profile.
19. Adjoining property owner information, including name, deed reference and/or subdivision lot designations.
20. Preparer’s seal, signature and date on each sheet. (Original signature on first sheet)
21. North arrow and meridian reference on each sheet.
22. Scale of plat, written and graphic, on each sheet.
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-99
23. Title Block requirements, on each sheet.
a. Plat type.
b. Owner’s name or
c. Lot, block and subdivision name.
d. Town and County designation.
e. Sheet number.
f. Plat date.
24. Cover Sheet (or first sheet) requirements:
a. Revision block.
b. Index of sheets.
c. Name, address and phone number of plan preparer.
d. Zoning designation.
e. FEMA Flood Zone designations.
f. Tax map number and/or parcel identification.
g. ‘Miss Utility’ note regarding marking of underground utilities.
h. Legend of symbols, abbreviations and line types used.
ARTICLE 11 – SCHEDULE OF FEES
148-1100 FEES
A. The following fees are hereby assessed for the applications or services as indicated:
1. For processing an application for a Boundary Adjustment - $100.00
2. For lot line vacation plat - $100.00
3. For review of a boundary/plat of survey - no charge for review
4. For processing a partial release of a Performance Bond (each) - $100.00
5. For Right-of-Way Utilization Permit - $25.00
6. For processing Site Development Plan -
a. Minor: $100.00
b. Major: $750.00
7. For processing a Sketch Plan - $100.00
8. Copy of Town Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance - $15.00
9. For processing as Subdivision Variance or Special Exception - $250.00 per application submission, not per variance or exception standard.
10. For processing Subdivision Final Plat (Major) - $1,000.00 plus $100.00 per lot
11. For processing Subdivision Final Plat (Minor) - $200.00 plus $100.00 per lot
12. For processing Subdivision Preliminary Plat (Major) - $500.00 plus $25.00 per lot
13. For processing Subdivision Preliminary Plat (Minor) - $300.00 plus $25.00 per lot
14. GIS Data: a. Aerials (1,250' x 1,250' Panel): $5.00/panel
b. Base Maps (5,000' x 5000' Panel): $25.00 per panel or $400.00 Townwide
c. Other Layers (as available): $50.00/Townwide
d. Parcel Layers (as available): $100.00/Townwide
148 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE 148
148-100
e. Scanned Document: $12.50 per sheet
B. Until all fees, charges, etc. described above have been paid in full, no action shall be taken to any application for any of the services described above.
C. Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests for available information shall be submitted to the appropriate Department that maintains the records sought for processing. Any request for records or documents from the Town is considered a FOIA request. All FOIA requests shall be communicated by the Department to the Town Manager and Town Attorney. FOIA regulations allow the Town to assess a reasonable charge for the costs to access, search, duplicate, and supply the requested materials if they exist. The Town shall not assess fees if staff time is less than thirty (30) minutes and ten pages of 8 ½” x 11” paper. An individual requesting materials through a FOIA request will be notified as soon as practicably possible. The Town shall conform to all FOIA regulations established by the Commonwealth of Virginia to ensure access to all available Town documents.
Chapter 154 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 154
154-1
Chapter 154
TRESPASSING
Sections:
154-1 GOING UPON PROPERTY OF ANOTHER WITHOUT PERMISSION
154-2 INVESTIGATION OF TRESPASS BY OTHERS
154-3 PEEPING OR SPYING INTO DWELLINGS
154-4 ENTERING CEMETERY BY OTHER THAN A GATE
154-5 ENTERING CEMETERY AT NIGHT
154-6 ENTERING UPON CHURCH OR SCHOOL PROPERTY AT NIGHT
154-7 ENTERING UPON PROPERTY FOR PURPOSE OF CAUSING DAMAGE
154-8 POLICE DEPARTMENT AS AGENT FOR FORBIDDING TRESPASSING
154-9 TRESPASSING AT THE BOAT LANDING
154-10 TRESPASSING ON THE SHENANDOAH RIVER DAM
Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal 3-11-85 (Chapter 30 of the 1965 Code). Other amendments noted where applicable.
154-1 GOING UPON PROPERTY OF ANOTHER WITHOUT PERMISSION
A. If any person shall, without authority of law, go upon or remain upon the lands, buildings or premises of another, or any part, portion or area thereof, after having been forbidden to do so, either orally or in writing, by the owner, lessee, custodian or other person lawfully in charge thereof or after having been forbidden to do so by a sign posted on such lands, buildings, premises or part, portion or area thereof at a place where it may be reasonably seen, he shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred ($500.) or by confinement in jail not exceeding twelve (12) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
B. This section shall not be construed to affect in any way the provisions of Section 29-170 of the Code of Virginia.
154-2 INVESTIGATION OF TRESPASS BY OTHERS
If any person shall solicit, urge, encourage, exhort, instigate or procure another or others to go upon or remain upon the lands, buildings or premises of another, or any part, portion or area thereof, knowing such other person to have been forbidden, either orally or in writing, to do so by the owner, lessee, custodian or other person lawfully in charge thereof of knowing such other person to have been forbidden to do so by a sign posted on such lands, buildings, premises or part, portion or area thereof at a place where it may reasonably be seen; or if any person shall, on such lands, building, premises or part, portion or area thereof, prevent or seek to prevent the owner, lessee, custodian, person in charge or any of his employees from rendering service to any person not so forbidden, he shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.) or by confinement in jail not exceeding twelve (12) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Chapter 154 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 154
154-2
154-3 PEEPING OR SPYING INTO DWELLINGS
If any person shall unlawfully enter upon the property of another, in the nighttime, and secretly or furtively peep through or attempt to so peep into, through or spy through a window, door or other aperture of any building, structure or other enclosure of any nature occupied or intended for occupancy as a dwelling, whether or not such building, structure or enclosure be permanently situated or transportable and whether or not such occupancy be permanent or temporary, such person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
154-4 ENTERING CEMETERY BY OTHER THAN A GATE
If any person shall climb into or enter in any other manner than by the gates or entrances provided for that purpose any graveyard or cemetery in the corporate limits, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
154-5 ENTERING CEMETERY AT NIGHT
If any person, without the consent of the owner, proprietor or custodian, shall go or enter, in the nighttime, upon the premises, property, driveways or walks of any cemetery, either public or private, for any purpose other than to visit the burial lot or grave of some member of his family, he shall be guilty of a trespass and, upon a conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than twenty-five dollars ($25.).
154-6 ENTERING UPON CHURCH OR SCHOOL PROPERTY AT NIGHT
It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of some person authorized to give such consent, to go or enter upon, in the nighttime, the premises or property of any church or upon any school property for any purpose other than to attend a meeting or service held or conducted in such church or school property. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a trespass and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5.) nor more than twenty-five dollars ($25.).
154-7 ENTERING UPON PROPERTY FOR PURPOSE OF CAUSING DAMAGE
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter the land, dwelling, outhouse or any other building of another for the purpose of damaging such property or any of the contents thereof or in any manner to interfere with the rights of the owner, user or the occupant thereof to use such property free from interference. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
154-8 POLICE DEPARTMENT AS AGENT FOR FORBIDDING TRESPASSING
Any owner of real property within the Town of Front Royal may designate in writing that the Front Royal Police Department and any of its officers and patrolmen shall be a "person lawfully in charge of the property" for the purpose of forbidding other persons to go or remain upon specifically designated property of the owner as provided for in Section 154-1 of the Front Royal
Chapter 154 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 154
154-3
Municipal Code and Section 18.2-119 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended. Such written designation shall be made in the following manner:
A. The Front Royal Police Department shall publish a written designation form containing the owner's name, address, home and work telephone numbers, the address, tax map, and any other pertinent description of the real property about which the Front Royal Police Department is to be designated as the "person lawfully in charge of the property", the names of any specific individual(s) who the Front Royal Police Department is authorized to forbid to go or remain upon such designated property, any other conditions or circumstances upon which the Front Royal Police Department is authorized to forbid any person(s) not specifically named in advance from going or remaining on such designated property, and the duration of the authorization the Front Royal Police Department to act as such person lawfully in charge of the property.
B. The Front Royal Police Department shall maintain all such written designations in a permanent file or notebook, which shall be available to any interested person for viewing or copying upon reasonable request.
C. The Front Royal Police Department shall create a "Notice Not to Trespass" which will advise persons in writing not to go or remain upon specifically designated real property as authorized in this section.
D. Each officer or patrolmen in the Front Royal Police Department shall be issued an updated list of such designated properties, specifically named individuals, and conditions and circumstances, and written Notices Not to Trespass to serve on persons subject to this ordinance.
E. No person shall be forbidden to go or remain on the real property of another or to be prosecuted therefore if such person is able to produce written consent of the owner of a property for such person to go or remain thereon.
(Ord. 15-02 Added Entire Section 8-12-02-Effective Upon Passage)
154-9 TRESPASSING AT THE BOAT LANDING
A. The hours of operation for the Town-owned property located at the western end of Luray Avenue, commonly known as the "Boat Landing" shall be each day from 7:00 A.M. to 7:00 P.M. from November through March of each year, and from 7:00 A.M. to 11:00 P.M. from April through October of each year. Any person who shall go upon such real estate without lawful reason or excuse at times which are outside of the said hours of operation shall be charged with a violation of Section 154-1 of this Code, and shall, upon conviction, be punished as therein provided.
B. Nothing in this Section shall apply to persons or organizations who have obtained a Permit under Chapter 72 of this Code while such Permit is in effect.
(Ord. No. 11-08 Added Entire Section 9-22-08-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 154 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 154
154-4
154-10 TRESPASSING ON THE SHENANDOAH RIVER DAM
A. Any person who shall walk upon, use, or touch the Town-owned dam on the North fork of the Shenandoah River, located just east of the U.S. Route 340/522 bridge, shall be guilty of trespassing on Town property and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in Section 154-2 of this Code.
B. The Town Manager shall cause appropriate signage and, where required, buoys, to be installed upon the dam and in the areas above and below the dam and on the banks immediately adjacent to the dam, all as described in Section 29.1-509(F) of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, which shall give notice to the general public of the provisions of subsection (A) hereof and which shall warn the public of the hazards posed by the dam.
(Ord. No. 11-09 Added Entire Section 11-9-09-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 156 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 156
156-1
Chapter 156
URBAN FORESTRY
Sections:
156-1 PURPOSE AND INTENT OF THIS CHAPTER
156-2 SEVERABILITY
156-3 URBAN FORESTRY ADVISORY COMMISSION (UFAC)
156-4 PLANTING, MAINTENANCE AND PROTECTION OF TREES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
156-5 SCREENS AND BUFFERS
156-6 DEVELOPMENT TREE PLANTINGS
156-7 STREET TREES
156-8 PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING
156-9 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
156-10 APPEALS
156-11 DEFINITIONS
Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal 12-20-99. Amended 156-2.B.; 156-5.C.2.b.; 156-5.C.2.c. and enacted 156-5.C.2.d.; 156-5.C.2.e. and 156-7 on 5-28-02. Chapter Amended in its entirety 6-8-15.
156-1 PURPOSE AND INTENT OF THIS CHAPTER
It is the intent and purpose of this Chapter to promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare by providing for the regulation of the planting, maintenance, preservation, and removal of trees within the Town of Front Royal on both public property and private property during land-disturbing activities. The purpose of this Chapter is to further promote the following:
1. Provide for the preservation and planting of trees in the development process to create a specified tree canopy cover pursuant to the authority granted in Section 15.2-961 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended and set forth herein.
2. The planting, maintenance, and preservation of desirable trees to increase the tree canopy cover in the Town of Front Royal. A goal of this Chapter is to increase tree canopy cover from 41% (2008) to 46% by 2030.
3. The protection of residents living in the community and visitors from personal injury and property damage, and the protection of the Town from property damage, caused or threatened by the improper planting, maintenance, or removal of trees located on public property and private property proposed for land disturbance after adoption of this ordinance.
4. The reduction of erosion, sedimentation, stormwater run-off, and associated costs.
Chapter 156 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 156
156-2
5. The protection and enhancement of property values, unique or significant landscapes, and aesthetic qualities in the Town for the enhancement of the overall environment and the quality of life.
6. The economic benefits of reduced energy use and wind resistance, which results from strategically planted trees shading homes, schools and businesses.
7. The environmental and social benefits related to the ability of trees and other vegetation to mitigate sound and light pollution, and reduce sunlight and heat loss.
8. Improved air quality through the use of trees which filter the air by removing dust and other particulates. Trees also absorb carbon dioxide from the air and other air pollutants, such as ozone, carbon monoxide, and sulfur dioxide, and provide oxygen.
9. The filtering of water, reducing nutrients, stabilizing and recharging the groundwater, slowing velocity of overland sheet flow, and uptaking floodwaters through root systems.
10. The improvement of traffic safety by controlling sightlines and calming traffic.
11. The provision of areas for wildlife habitat.
156-2 SEVERABILITY
Should any part or provision of this Chapter be declared invalid by any Court, the same shall not affect the validity of the Chapter as a whole or any part thereof other than the part held to be invalid.
156-3 URBAN FORESTRY ADVISORY COMMISSION (UFAC)
A. Duties of UFAC. An Urban Forestry Advisory Commission shall be established to perform the following duties:
1. To develop and monitor a Tree Canopy Cover Plan.
2. To develop, implement, and maintain an urban forestry management program and adopt an Urban Forestry Management Plan.
3. To develop, implement and maintain a program that recognizes trees of significance for heritage, memorial or specimen designation.
4. To develop standards and guidelines for planting, maintenance, preservation, and replacement of trees on public property and any land disturbing activities on private property.
5. To promote education of the general public, Town Officials, and Town Employees regarding proper tree-care and planting practices.
Chapter 156 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 156
156-3
6. To support the efforts of other groups interested in urban forestry in Front Royal, such as Master Gardeners, Beautification of Front Royal Committee and the Front Royal / Warren County Tree Stewards.
7. To provide expert advice regarding urban forestry, as needed, to the Town Manager, Town Council, Director of Planning & Zoning, Director of Public Works, Town Engineer, Planning Commission, and other Boards or Commissions of the Town.
8. To provide guidance regarding appropriate tree species for specific landscaping projects, including education regarding non-native invasive vegetation.
9. Review plantings, maintenance, and removal of trees and other vegetation on Town-owned public property, landscaping easements and rights-of-way.
10. Review and make recommendations to the Director of Planning & Zoning regarding landscape plans related to subdivisions and/or developments. Except where authorized by the applicant, any subdivision or development application may not be delayed or denied solely because of a delay or lack or review by the UFAC.
B. Establishment of UFAC.
1. Composition & Appointment.
a. The Urban Forestry Advisory Commission shall be made up of not fewer than five (5) members, each member being a citizen of Warren County. In addition, the Virginia Department of Forestry's Chief Forest Warden for Warren County shall serve as a standing committee member.
(Amended to include “not fewer than” 1-28-19-Effective Upon Passage)
b. The members shall be appointed by the Town Council.
2. Qualifications.
The Urban Forestry Advisory Commission shall be made up of citizens with skills and an expressed interest in at least one of the following areas:
a. Urban Forestry
b. Landscaping
c. Arboriculture
3. Terms of Office.
a. Each member shall be appointed for a term of four (4) years, or until their successors are appointed, except that the initial appointment of two (2) members
Chapter 156 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 156
156-4
shall be for a three (3) year term, one (1) member for a two (2) year term; the remaining members for a four (4) year term.
(Amended to remove “two (2)” 1-28-19-Effective Upon Passage)
b. Members may be re-appointed to serve consecutive terms as determined appropriate by the Town Council.
c. The Commission shall elect a Chair and Vice Chair who shall serve annual terms and may succeed themselves.
4. Agenda, Minutes and Rules.
a. The Commission shall adopt such rules and regulations as it may consider necessary.
b. The Commission shall prepare meeting agendas in advance of meetings and make available to the public prior to the start of the meeting. The Commission shall also keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact. It shall keep records of its examinations and other such official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Commission and shall be a public record.
c. All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public.
d. A quorum shall be at least three (3) members.
C. Authority for the UFAC to Receive Donations and Apply for Grants.
1. All persons interested in urban forestry in the Town are invited to make gifts, devises and bequests to the Town to be used for that purpose. All donations of money shall be made through the Department of Finance, and it is hereby authorized and directed to receive such donations. All such monies shall be used only for the purpose of planting, maintenance, and promotion of the urban forest in the Town. Expenditures from of these donations shall be made by the Town Manager as authorized, from time to time, by the Town Council.
2. The Urban Forestry Advisory Commission may, with the consent of the Town Council, apply for federal, state, or private grants or funding, and/or assistance, and to aid in the performance of their duties.
D. Sharing of Information and Services.
Upon request of the Urban Forestry Advisory Commission with approval by the Town Manager, the departments, boards, commissions, offices and agencies of the Town
Chapter 156 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 156
156-5
government shall furnish to the Commission such available information and render such service as may be needed in the performance of their duties.
E. Designation of a Heritage, Memorial or Specimen Tree Designation.
Designation of a Heritage, Memorial, or Street trees are afforded recognition and protection by this ordinance. These trees, on either public or private property, have been recommended by UFAC for significant status designation. The process for designation includes submittal of a nomination application form to the Director of Planning & Zoning documenting the subject tree’s significance in age, size, location, aesthetics, historical association, species and any other characteristic that justifies its uniqueness. The nomination is then forwarded to UFAC for review, unless otherwise submitted by the UFAC. If the tree is recommended for designation by the UFAC, the Director of Planning and Zoning shall present the nomination to Town Council for consideration of significant designation status. Trees designated as heritage, memorial, or specimen trees have a significant designation status transferable with change in property ownership. In addition, such trees are afforded protection status by the Town and are discouraged from removal.
156-4 PLANTING, MAINTENANCE AND PROTECTION OF TREES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
A. Planting.
1. Any tree planted on public property shall be of an approved species as outlined in "The Preferred Species List" adopted by the UFAC, as found within the “Landscape Preservation and Planting Guide.”
2. Any tree not on the preferred species list shall not be planted on public property without the specific approval of the Urban Forestry Advisory Commission.
3. Any tree shall be properly planted according to the standards and guidelines, as stipulated in the most current version of the “American Standard For Nursery Stock.”
B. Maintenance.
1. All outside contractors hired for pruning and/or maintenance of Town owned trees shall meet the following minimum requirements:
a. Have current Town Business License.
b. Provide proof of liability and Workmen's Compensation Insurance in amount established by the Town Council.
c. Have employed at least one certified arborist to generally oversee all work.
Chapter 156 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 156
156-6
2. All Town-owned trees shall be maintained in accordance with the most recent version of the “American National Standards Institute's ANSI A300 (Part 1): Tree, Shrub, and Other Woody Plant Maintenance – Standard Practices (Pruning)” and the “American National Standards Institute’s ANSI Z-133.1: Safety Requirements.” No town-owned tree shall be "topped" nor shall any climbing spurs be used when working on live trees.
3. All tree pruning around utility lines shall be performed in accordance with the guidelines in “American National Standards Institute's ANSI A300 (Part 1): Tree, Shrub, and Other Woody Plant Maintenance – Standard Practices (Pruning), “Best Management Practices Utility Pruning of Trees.”
4. No private citizen shall cut, prune, or elevate any Town-owned tree in conflict with guidelines adopted by the Urban Forestry Advisory Commission, without prior approval by the Town Manager after review and recommendation by the UFAC.
5. The Town of Front Royal should maintain elevation of Town owned trees to a height of thirteen (13) feet over roadways and a height of eight (8) feet over public sidewalks where possible.
6. The Town is not required to cut and/or remove weeds, brush, plants, grass or other vegetation growing in the public alleys, unimproved streets and other unimproved rights-of-way except as provided in Section 170-2 of the Town Code. Any adjacent property owner, tenant or citizen, at their own expense, may cut and/or remove any weeds, brush, plants, grass or other vegetation, except trees in excess of three (3) inches (3") caliber measured 12" from the ground, growing in the public alleys, unimproved streets and other unimproved rights-of-way and in the unimproved portion of the public right-of-way lying between any public property and private property lines.
7. If any tree growing in a public alley, unimproved street or other unimproved right-of-way is dead or growing in such a manner that the branches, limbs or other parts of the tree extend or protrude onto private property in a manner that constitutes a danger to citizens or property, the Town will cut and remove or prune such tree once it has been notified of the condition of the tree. It shall be the responsibility of the adjoining property owner or tenant to notify the Town when a tree is growing in such a manner that it needs to be cut and removed or pruned.
C. Protection.
1. Excavation or construction of any building or structure shall be kept outside of the protective root zone of a tree proposed to be saved on a site plan. Such tree shall be guarded with a highly visible protective fence with signage placed at least three (3) feet from the trunk of the tree, or the dripline, whichever is greater. Signage shall include language to the effect that all equipment, building material, dirt or other debris shall be kept outside the protected area.
Chapter 156 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 156
156-7
2. To the maximum extent possible, all Town Departments will coordinate with the UFAC during the planning phase of public improvements that might require the removal of or cause injury to any street tree, or its root system, or interfere with the fulfillment of any adopted street tree plan.
3. When a tree is removed on an emergency basis, UFAC will be notified so proper tree replacements can be made, where appropriate. After consideration of the tree species, tree size and location, UFAC's response should include recommendations as to whether removed trees are to be replaced, and if so, the type of replacement to be planted.
4. When advance coordination with the UFAC is not practicable due to unforeseen or emergency circumstances, the Town Departments should request the UFAC's recommendations on an expedited basis. In such instances, the UFAC will make every effort to respond within forty-eight (48) hours and will forward its recommendations through the Office of the Town Manager.
5. No tree may be removed if the UFAC establishes that the tree is a heritage specimen, or other tree of significant historic status, except upon approval by Town Council.
6. Any existing plant material less than six (6) inches in diameter (dbh) shall be exempt under the preservation requirements in this ordinance.
7. Except for normal household refuse collection activities, no person shall deposit, place, store or maintain, upon any public place of the Town, any stone, brick, sand, concrete or other materials that may impede the free passage of water, air and fertilizer to the roots within the dripline of any tree growing thereon, except by written approval by the Town Manager after review and recommendation by the UFAC.
8. Whenever any tree is planted or set out in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, the UFAC may pursue removal of said tree and initiate effective remedies.
9. Unless specifically authorized by the Town Manager, after review and recommendation by the UFAC, it shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree on public property, nor attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters or other contrivance to any public tree, nor allow any gaseous liquid or solid substance which is harmful to such trees to come in contact with them, nor set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or the heat thereof will injure any portion of any public tree. Any person found to violate the provisions of this section shall be responsible for the cost of repair, or removal and replacement, of any public tree so damaged. The owner of any vehicle that accidentally damages any tree on public property shall be responsible for the cost of repair, or removal, and replacement, of any public tree damaged.
Chapter 156 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 156
156-8
156-5 SCREENS AND BUFFERS
A. Vegetative Buffers.
1. A vegetative buffer shall be provided on the rear of any double frontage lot and on any commercial or industrial development abutting a residential district. All required vegetative buffers shall consist of a minimum area, as shown in the following table:
Type
Minimum Width (feet)
Rear yard abutting right-of-way 60 feet or wider
20 (3 Rows)
Rear yard abutting right-of-way less than 60 feet
15 (2 Rows)
Commercial/industrial uses abutting residential uses
15 (2 Rows)
2. Any required vegetative buffer shall be designed, planted and maintained in accordance with a landscaping plan approved by the Director of Planning, upon review and recommendation by the UFAC. The landscaping plan shall satisfy the following standards:
a. The vegetative buffer may be comprised of existing vegetation, provided that the majority of such existing vegetation consists of trees that are listed in the Town’s Construction Standards & Specifications Manual, and have at least two-inch (2”) caliper. When complete, the vegetation and plantings shall provide a year-round screen visually opaque at five (5) feet above finished grade when viewed from fifteen (15) feet away, which satisfies the standards set out in this section.
b. The vegetative buffer may consist of a mixture of deciduous and evergreen trees or a planting of evergreen trees.
c. The vegetative buffer shall be subject to on-site inspection by the Department of Planning which, if necessary, may prescribe that additional plantings be made in order to satisfy the standards set out herein.
d. The width of the vegetative buffer may be reduced by administrative waiver in an amount determined by the Director, if a wall or fence is provided to supplement the planting to an equivalent degree, and/or if the size of the lot prevents a full-width buffer. In no case shall the requirement for vegetative material be totally waived.
3. All required vegetative buffers shall be located on a permanent landscaping easement, and established so that perpetual maintenance is ensured. Where possible, the permanent landscaping easement should be located within open space and maintained by the homeowner’s association. If the landscaping easement is established on private property, the easement shall ensure that the property owner is provided disclosure of their responsibilities for future maintenance, including the replacement of dead trees. Upon review and recommendation by the UFAC, the Planning Commission may waive the requirement of perpetual maintenance when it
Chapter 156 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 156
156-9
is determined that such maintenance will create an unreasonable hardship on the property owner(s).
156-6 DEVELOPMENT TREE PLANTINGS
A. All major subdivisions and developments shall provide a minimum tree canopy cover for the gross area of the subdivision or development in accordance with the following table.
*Notes: See Tree Canopy Calculation Worksheet. The acronym “du” means “dwelling unit.”
B. The minimum tree canopy cover may be achieved by new tree plantings or preservation of existing trees. Existing trees that are to be preserved may be approved to meet all or part of the tree cover requirements of this section according to subsection C below. New tree plantings may include the trees provided as part of required interior or perimeter parking lot landscaping, landscaped open space, vegetative screens and buffers, street trees or other trees that are planted on the site.
C. The tree cover calculations for planted trees shall be based on the projected twenty-year tree cover area for each tree as shown in the adopted “Landscape Preservation and Planting Guide for the Town of Front Royal”, or other generally accepted tree resource guide accepted by the UFAC. Calculation of credit for preservation of existing trees shall be as determined by the UFAC, based on the UFAC’s “Tree Canopy Calculation Worksheet”, and consideration of the following addition additional information.
1. Location of existing trees on a subdivision plan or plat.
2. Tree species.
3. Identification of all observable diseases, wounds, decay, cavities, or organisms that may threaten the health of the tree.
4. Tree truck diameter.
5. Approximate tree height.
6. Identification of any trees that have been designated as a heritage, memorial or specimen tree.
7. Any other noteworthy conditions.
D. All major subdivision plans, or site plans for uses on property 1 acre or greater, shall include the existing canopy cover.
E. Tree cover requirements may be waived or modified by the Director to permit the reasonable development of farm land or other areas devoid of woody materials.
Type of Development
Percent Tree Canopy*
Business, Commercial, or Industrial Development
10
Residential Development ( >20 du per acre )
Residential Development ( >10, but <20 du per acre )
10
15
Residential Development ( < 10 du per acre )
20
Chapter 156 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 156
156-10
F. The following areas shall be exempt from the requirements of the Landscape Preservation and Planting Guide for the Town of Front Royal, as follows:
1. Dedicated school sites.
2. Playing fields and other non-wooded recreation areas.
3. Floodplains and wetlands.
4. Other areas where, in the opinion of the Director, the strict application of the requirements would result in unnecessary or unreasonable hardship to the developer.
G. Tree cover and planting requirements shall be completed by the developer or subdivider prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit or business licenses. Exceptions may be made when weather conditions or other justifiable circumstances exist or occur that impede tree planting. In such cases, the subdivider or developer shall provide a performance bond with surety satisfactory to the Town for the installation of required planting in accordance with a completion schedule.
H. For one (1) year from the date of acceptance, the subdivider or developer shall be required to replace any trees that do not survive, or that, in the opinion of the Town, are undesirable due to disease, malformation, infestation, damage, or are otherwise not expected to thrive under the existing conditions. The subdivider or developer shall execute a landscape maintenance agreement with the Town to ensure performance under this section.
I. Tree Bank. When neither tree preservation nor on-site tree planting is feasible, a developer may submit a written request to the Director to make payment in-lieu of all, or a portion of, the required landscaping. The written request shall include the rationale for not being able to meet the tree preservation or tree planting requirements. The UFAC shall advise the Director of the in-lieu fee amount, which shall be based on the estimated cost of the landscaping that is required by code. If approved, the payment shall be placed within an escrow account, generally referred to as a “tree bank”, that may be used by the Town to advance urban forestry goals, such as, but not limited to, increasing the Town’s tree canopy coverage.
156-7 STREET TREES
A. According to the following standards, all subdivisions and developments shall provide for the planting of trees on both sides of new streets and along existing streets.
1. Street trees shall be planted in accordance with a submitted landscape plan approved by the Town. Existing trees, undisturbed by the construction process, may be incorporated and credited as part of the landscape plan.
Chapter 156 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 156
156-11
2. The minimum quantity of required street trees shall be based on the amount of street frontage and estimated size of the proposed tree’s canopy at maturity. The standards of the following table shall be used to calculate the minimum quantity of street trees.
Mature Tree Canopy Size (width)
Planting Interval*
Large trees (40’ plus)
1 per 50’
Medium trees : (30’ to 40’)
1 per 40’
Small trees: (up to 30’)
1 per 30’
*Note: These standards are based only on one side of a street. Additional trees would be required for the opposite side of the street if also included within the development.
3. Street trees may either be spaced evenly, massed, or a combination of the two styles along the street.
4. The number of massed trees shall not be less than the number calculated for the street under the even spacing guidelines.
5. Street trees may be placed within the street right-of-way when the street is a collector or arterial street. Street trees along local streets shall be planted on individual lots.
6. All street trees that are required along local streets shall be provided a landscaping easement that ensures perpetual maintenance and protection. The easement shall also ensure that the property owner is provided disclosure of their responsibilities for future maintenance and protection of the street trees, including the replacement of dead trees. Upon review and recommendation by the UFAC, the Planning Commission may approve, or approve conditionally, a waiver to the requirements of this section when it is determined that such maintenance creates an unreasonable hardship.
B. Tree plantings shall not interfere with utilities, roadways, sidewalks, sight distance or streetlights. Tree location, species and spacing shall be approved by the tTown as part of the landscape plan.
C. All street trees shall have a minimum caliper of two (2) inches in diameter and shall be nursery grown in order to better ensure survival and help meet the Town’s requirements for canopy height at twenty (20) years. All tree plantings shall be in accordance with the adopted Landscape Preservation and Planting Guide for the Town of Front Royal.
D. The subdivider or developer shall be required to replace, within one (1) year from the date of street acceptance, any trees that do not survive or that, in the opinion of the Town, are diseased, malformed, or otherwise undesirable. The subdivider or developer shall execute a landscape maintenance agreement with the Town of Front Royal to ensure performance under this section.
Chapter 156 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 156
156-12
156-8 PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING
A. Interior parking lot landscaping.
1. Parking areas shall be suitably landscaped to minimize noise, glare and heat. Large parking areas shall be broken down into sections appropriate for the type and size of the development. Sections shall be separated by landscaped dividing strips, berms or similar features. The landscaped areas shall be reasonably dispersed throughout parking areas.
2. Parking lots of fifteen (15) or more spaces shall have a total interior landscaped area of not less than five percent (5%) of the total area of the parking lot. Parking lot landscaped areas shall be more than five (5) feet from any principal structure.
3. The primary landscaping materials to be used in parking lots shall be shade trees. Other types of trees, including, but not limited to, those commonly referred to as shrubs, may be used to complement the tree landscaping, but shall not constitute the only landscaping.
4. The requirements for interior parking lot landscaping shall not apply to any lots used solely for the storage of vehicles or the display of vehicles for sale. Such lots shall comply, however, to the requirements for peripheral parking lot landscaping.
B. Peripheral parking lot landscaping.
In addition to the requirements for interior parking lot landscaping, parking areas with fifteen (15) or more parking spaces shall provide peripheral parking lot landscaping as follows:
1. A landscaped buffer strip at least five (5) feet in width shall be located between the parking lot and each abutting property line, except where parking or access is designed to be shared by the abutting property. A total of one (1) tree for each fifty (50) feet of landscaped buffer shall be planted. Trees may be massed or spaced evenly.
2. In the event that the parking lot adjoins a public street with no intervening structures, a landscaped buffer strip of at least ten (10) feet in width, which shall not include a sidewalk or other paved surface, shall be located between the parking lot and the street right-of-way. A total of one (1) tree for each forty (40) feet of landscaped buffer shall be planted. Trees may be massed or spaced evenly.
C. All deciduous trees planted shall be a minimum caliper of two (2) inches in diameter and shall be nursery grown. Evergreen trees shall be planted at a height of no less than six (6) feet. All materials and installation shall be in accordance with the adopted Landscape Preservation and Planting Guide for the Town of Front Royal.
Chapter 156 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 156
156-13
D. The requirements of this section shall be required for all new parking lots, and for the enlargement or substantial alteration of any existing lot. The requirements shall not apply to the resurfacing of any existing parking lot.
E. The Town may, in its discretion, waive or modify the requirements for parking lot landscaped buffer strips in cases where berms, grade separation, plantings or other approved designs provide an effective screen and do not adversely impact on adjoining properties, traffic patterns or safety.
156-9 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
1. Administration and Enforcement. The requirements of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Town Manager in regards to public property. The requirements of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Director of Planning and Zoning in regards to private property, and new subdivisions and/or developments, provided that, the approval authority for landscaping plans shall be as specified under Chapter 148 of the Town Code.
2. Violations. Any person, firm or corporation violating, causing or permitting the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a class I misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, may be punishable by up to 12 months in jail and a $2500 fine.
156-10 APPEALS
Town Council reserves the right to grant special exceptions to the requirements of this Chapter. Furthermore, Town Council reserves the authority to affirm, overrule or modify any administrative decision. Any person aggrieved by an administrative decision related to this Chapter, may submit a written appeal to the Director of Planning & Zoning or Town Manager for consideration by Town Council. Any person aggrieved by a requirement of this Chapter may submit a written request for a special exception, however, such requests for special exception shall only be considered after all other administrative remedies of this ordinance have been exhausted.
156-11 DEFINITIONS
Buffer - Linear bands of vegetation, preferably consisting of native and locally adapted species, associated with many features including wetlands, greenways, transportation corridors, and wildlife corridors. Vegetated buffers uptake pollution and minimize impact on adjacent surrounding areas.
Caliper: the diameter measurement of the tree trunk taken six (6) inches above ground level for trees up to and including four (4) inch caliper size. Measurement shall be taken twelve (12) inches above the ground level for larger trees.
Chapter 156 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 156
156-14
Canopy - The full extent of existing leaves crowning a tree or groups of trees, or the full extent of future leaves crowning a tree or group of trees at a tree maturity of twenty (20) years.
Certified Arborist - A tree professional certified by the International Society of Arboriculture. Certified Arborists have achieved a level of knowledge in the art and science of tree care through at least three years of experience and have passed a comprehensive examination to provide proper tree care.
Cutting - The felling or removal of a tree, or any procedure which leads to the death or substantial destruction of a tree. Cutting does not include normal pruning within the bounds of accepted arboricultural practice.
DBH - diameter of tree trunk at breast height; measured at 4.5 feet above the ground.
Dripline - An imaginary perpendicular line that extends downward from the outermost branches of a tree to the ground.
Hazard - A tree with structural defects likely to cause failure of all or part of the tree, which could strike a “target.” A target can be a vehicle, building, or a place where people gather such as a park bench, picnic table, street, or backyard. (per Department of Agriculture’s Urban Tree Risk Management: A Community Guide to Program Design.)
Heritage Tree - Any tree that because of its historical association (associated with a notable local or regional historical event, person, or landscape) is of special importance to the Town. Such a tree, on either public or private property, will be nominated and adopted by the Town for significant designation. The significant designation of a heritage tree is transferable through the property deed and will extend to any new owner.
Invasive, Nonnative Vegetation - Any plant not indigenous to the Commonwealth of Virginia, which exhibits, or has the potential to exhibit, uncontrolled growth and invasion or alteration of the natural qualities and functions of any native habitat.
Memorial Tree - A tree donated to commemorate a person or event is of special importance to the Town as a living tribute. Such a tree, on either public or private property, will be nominated and adopted by the Town for significant designation. The significant designation of a memorial tree is transferable through the property deed and will extend to any new owner.
Public Property - Property that is owned or maintained by the Town of Front Royal.
Private Tree - Any tree not located on property owned or controlled by the Town. For the purposes of this ordinance, a private tree is subject to this ordinance if it is either (1) designated as a Memorial, Heritage, or Specimen tree; or (2) is on property proposed for land disturbance after adoption of this ordinance and is subject to site landscape plan and conformance with the Town canopy plan guidelines; or (3) is a Hazard tree.
Chapter 156 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 156
156-15
Protective Root Zone - The entire surface and subsurface soil area encompassed by radius for protected trees (per Landscape Preservation and Planting Guide) typically the distance around tree trunk equal to the drip line of the tree; also generally referred to as tree preservation target or critical root zone.
Public Trees - Trees on land owned and or managed by the Town of Front Royal.
Specimen Tree - Individual trees which are healthy with a diameter at breast height of 24 inches or greater, or which otherwise are noteworthy because of species, age, size, location, aesthetics, or any other exceptional quality, such as, uniqueness, rarity, ecological value, or status as a landmark or species specimen. Such a tree, on either public or private property, will be nominated and adopted by the Town for significant designation. The significant designation of a specimen tree is transferable through the property deed and will extend to any new owner.
Topping - Topping involves cutting limbs back to stubs or lateral branches not large enough to assume dominance. A lateral branch that is acceptable is generally greater than 1/3 the size of the branch that is being removed. This includes pruning that leads to the disfigurement of the normal shape of the tree. Topping is the indiscriminate cutting of tree branches to stubs or lateral branches that are not large enough to assume the terminal role.
Tree - Any self-supporting woody plant, growing upon the earth with one trunk, or a multi-stemmed trunk system with a definitely formed crown, or other woody plant material exceeding five (5) feet in height.
Tree Bank - Funds for tree replacement paid into account managed by the Director for Planning & Zoning for the purposes of future tree replacement or restoration in-lieu of tree planting.
Tree Canopy - Also referred to as “tree cover”, or “tree canopy coverage”, an area of land covered by plant material exceeding five feet in height, and the extent of planted tree canopy at 10 or 20 years maturity. Planted canopy at 10 or 20 years maturity shall be based on published reference texts generally accepted by landscape architects, nurserymen, and arborists in the community, and the texts shall be specified in the ordinance.
Tree Canopy Plan - UFAC will prepare a Tree Canopy Plan in coordination with the Director of Planning and Zoning of the Town which designates preferred sites as priority areas for tree plantings when off-site tree replacement planting is utilized.
UFAC, Urban Forestry Advisory Commission - comprised of volunteers from the community including at least one certified arborist, and appointed by Town Council.
Chapter 156 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 156
156-16
TREE CANOPY CALCULATION WORKSHEET
Tree Canopy Calculation Worksheet Town of Front Royal
Please fill in only the green shaded cells below
A. Site Size
A1
Total Site Area in square feet
Ft 2
Choose the % canopy cover required based on the requirements of Section 156-6.A. of the Town Code.
A2
10%
15%
20%
%
A3
Multiply line A2 % times A1
Ft 2
To calculate Required Canopy Cover for Site in Sq Feet
0
B. Tree Preservation (provides 1.5 credit)
B1
Existing Tree Canopy Cover (Insert Square feet here
calculated from Town Planning Dept or calculate sum of driplines)
Ft 2
B2
Tree Canopy to be preserved of the overall site (Insert Sq Feet here calculated by Town Planning Dept or sum of driplines of preserved trees)
Ft 2
B3
Canopy Preservation Credit (Multiply B2 x 1.5)
Ft 2
0
B4
Canopy Remaining to meet Requirements (Subtract A3 - B3)
Ft 2
0
B5
If a negative number appears in B4; canopy requirements have been met. Otherwise, please go to Section C or D
Have been met.
Have NOT been met.
C. New Tree Plantings
C1
Canopy (sq ft) remaining to meet requirements ( B4)
Ft 2
0
Refer to Front Royal Tree Cover Guide for species list and 10 year projected canopy to fulfill necessary coverage on line C1
C2
Projected canopy coverage (sq ft) from plantings (Insert Sq Feet)
Ft 2
C3
Canopy remaining to meet requirements ( C1 - C2)
Ft 2
0
C4
If C3 is a negative number, canopy requirements have been met. Otherwise, please go to Section D
Have been met.
Have NOT been met.
D. Exception
Has A3 been met? (Preferably through preservation &/or new plantings.) If not calculate amount owed below:
D1
Square feet requirements still remaining to meet A3
Ft 2
0
D2
Amount for Tree Fund (D1 x $3.00)
$
$ -
Chapter 158 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 158
158-1
Chapter 158
VEHICLE AND TRAFFIC
Sections:
HANDICAPPED PARKING
158-1 DISABLED PARKING SPACES - RESTRICTIONS ON USE
158-2 PARKING PRIVILEGES FOR DISABLED DRIVERS
SNOW PARKING AND SNOW EMERGENCIES
158-3 (RESERVED)
158-4 SNOW EMERGENCIES
158-5 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES; TOWING OF VEHICLES IN VIOLATION;
GRACE PERIOD
STATE STANDARDS
158-6 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE OF STATE MOTOR VEHICULAR LAWS
158-6.1 PENALTIES FOR ORDINANCES INCORPORATING STATE MOTOR
VEHICLE LAWS BY REFERENCE
REGULATIONS AND SCHEDULES
158-7 PURPOSE
158-8 DEFINITIONS
158-9 AUTHORITY TO DESIGNATE TRAFFIC SIGNS AND PARKING
REGULATIONS; APPEALS
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
158-10 SPEED LIMITS
158-11 ONE-WAY STREET
158-12 U-TURNS
158-13 THROUGH TRUCKS PROHIBITED
158-14 VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS
158-15 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
PARKING, STANDING AND STOPPING
158-16 PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES
158-17 PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES
158-18 LOADING ZONES
158-19 PARKING IN BUS STOPS AND TAXI CAB STANDS
158-19.1 PARKING OF TRUCKS AND TRAILERS
158-19.2 PENALTIES
158-20 LIABILITY FOR DAMAGE TO VEHICLES IN BUSINESS LOTS
158-21 STOPPING ON HIGHWAYS
158-22 PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED
Chapter 158 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 158
158-2
MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
158-23 UNLAWFUL OPERATION OF A MOTOR VEHICLE
158-24 UNLAWFUL RIDING
158-25 PEDESTRIANS SEEKING RIDES OR BUSINESS
158-26 PARKING INOPERATIVE OR UNLICENSED VEHICLES
158-27 ENFORCEMENT; VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
METERED PARKING
158-28 LEASING AND INSTALLATION OF METERS
158-29 DESIGNATION OF ZONES
158-30 (RESERVED)
158-31 DESIGNATION OF PARKING METER SPACES; ERECTION OF METERS
158-32 OPERATION OF METERS; OVERTIME PARKING
158-33 PARKING WITHIN PARKING METER SPACE
158-34 DEFACING, OPENING OR DAMAGING METERS
158-35 LOADING ZONES, BUS STOPS & OTHER PROHIBITED PARKING AREAS
158-36 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER
158-37 ENFORCEMENT
158-38 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
ABANDONED AND INOPERATIVE VEHICLES; VEHICLE REMOVALS
158-39 REMOVAL AND DISPOSITION OF UNATTENDED, DAMAGED,
ABANDONED, OR ILLEGALLY STOPPED VEHICLES
158-39.1 REMOVAL OR IMMOBILIZATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES WITH MORE
THAN TWO (2) OUTSTANDING PARKING VIOLATIONS
158-40 ESTABLISHMENT OF TOWING ADVISORY BOARD
158-41 ASSESSMENT OF COSTS AGAINST OWNER OF VEHICLE TOWED OR
STORED BY POLICE DEPARTMENT OR AT DEPARTMENT’S REQUEST
VEHICULAR EQUIPMENT
158-42 USE OF FLARES
158-43 REFLECTOR FLARES; RED LANTERNS
158-44 USE OF RED FLAGS INSTEAD OF FLARES
158-45 SLOW-MOVING-VEHICLE EMBLEMS
158-46 TAILGATES ON VEHICLES
158-47 WARNING DEVICES ON BICYCLES
158-47.1 BICYCLISTS REQUIRED TO WEAR SAFETY HELMETS
158-48 LIGHTS ON PARKED VEHICLES
GRANT OF EXCEPTIONS; SPECIAL PERMITS
158-49 RELIEF FROM ONE-WAY RESTRICTIONS
158-50 TRACTION ENGINES AND TRACTORS
158-51 VEHICLES OF EXCESSIVE SIZE AND WEIGHT
158-52 PERMIT TO BE CARRIED IN VEHICLE; INSPECTION; PENALTY
158-53 UNIFORM FINES AND COSTS FOR TRAFFIC AND PARKING VIOLATIONS
Chapter 158 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 158
158-3
LAW ENFORCEMENT REQUESTED TOWING
158-54 PURPOSE
158-55 DEFINITIONS
158-56 GENERAL MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
158-57 APPLICATIION FOR AGREEMENT
158-58 INSPECTIONS OF TOWING OPERATOR
158-59 APPLICATION APPROVAL
158-60 DUTIES AND REQUIREMENTS OF TOWING OPERATORS
158-61 RESPONSIBILITIES AND RECORDS OF TOWING OPERATORS
158-62 ROTATION SYSTEM
158-63 COMPENSATION
158-64 SOLICITATION BY TOWING OPERATORS
158-65 PROHIBITED PRACTICES
158-66 COMPLAINTS
158-67 SUSPENSION OR TERMINATION OF TOWING OPERATORS
158-68 APPEALS PROCESS AND HEARING
158-69 AMENDMENTS TO ORDINANCE
Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal 3-11-85 (Former Chapter 17 of the 1965 Code including 6-13-83; 4-9-84; 5-14-84); Ord. No. 23-99 repealed former 158-53 ”Schedule I: Speed Limits”, 158-54 “Schedule II: One Way Streets”; 158-55 “Schedule III: U-turn Prohibitions” and 158-56 “Schedule IV: Parking Prohibited at All Times”; Amended 158-40 “Establishment of Towing Advisory Board” 1-24-00; Repealed 158-3 “Snow Parking Plan” 9-26-05; Repealed 158-40 “Establishment of Towing Advisory Board” 7-8-13; Other Amendments noted where applicable.
HANDICAPPED PARKING
(Adopted 6-13-83)
158-1 DISABLED PARKING SPACES - RESTRICTIONS ON USE
A. No vehicles other than those displaying disabled parking license plates, organizational removable windshield placards, permanent removable windshield placards, or temporary removable windshield placards issued pursuant to Title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia or the laws of another state shall park in any parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities.
B. No person without a disability that limits or impairs his ability to walk shall park a vehicle with disabled parking license plates, organizational removable windshield placards, permanent removable windshield placards, temporary removable windshield placards, or DV disabled parking license plates issued under Title 46.2 in a parking space reserved for persons with disabilities that limit or impair their ability to walk except when transporting a disabled person in the vehicle.
(Amended 3-22-93-Effective Upon Passage)
C. Enforcement.
1. The Town Manager, in his discretion, may establish a volunteer force to enforce this section of the Front Royal Code provided:
Chapter 158 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 158
158-4
a. Any such force is placed under the supervision of the Police Department;
b. Volunteers acting pursuant to this section shall not have the power or duty to enforce any other traffic or criminal laws of the state or Town; and
c. No volunteer acting pursuant to this section shall carry a firearm or other weapon during the course of his volunteer enforcement duties.
2. A summons or parking ticket for the offense may be issued for violation of this section by law-enforcement officers, uniformed law-enforcement department employees, or volunteers acting pursuant this ordinance without the necessity of a warrant's being obtained by the owner of any private parking area.
3. In any prosecution charging a violation of this ordinance, proof that the vehicle described in the complaint, summons, parking ticket, citation, or warrant was parked in violation of this section of the Town Code, together with proof that the defendant was at the time the registered owner of the vehicle, as required by Title 46.2 of the Code of Virginia, shall constitute prima facie evidence that the registered owner of the vehicle was the person who committed the violation.
4. No violation of this ordinance shall be dismissed for a property owner's failure to comply strictly with the requirements for disabled parking signs set forth in §36-99.1 1, provided the space is clearly distinguishable as a parking space reserved for persons with disabilities that limit or impair their ability to walk.
D. Penalties and Towing
1. Fine - Parking a vehicle in a space reserved for persons with disabilities in violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $ 100.00 nor more than $500.00.
2. Towing
a. The owner or duly authorized agent of the owner of a parking space properly designated and clearly marked as reserved for use by persons with disabilities that limit or impair their ability to walk may have any vehicle not displaying disabled parking license plates, organizational removable windshield placards, permanent removable windshield placards, temporary removable windshield placards, or DV disabled parking license plates removed from the parking space and stored.
b. The owner of a vehicle which has been removed and stored may regain possession of his vehicle on payment to the person or persons who removed and stored the vehicle all reasonable costs incidental to the removal and storage. The owner of the vehicle, on notice to the owner or duly authorized agent of the owner of the parking space, may also petition the general district court having jurisdiction over the location where the parking occurred for an immediate determination as to whether the removal of the vehicle was lawful. If the court finds that the removal was unlawful, the court shall
Chapter 158 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 158
158-5
direct the owner of the parking space to pay the costs incidental to the removal and storage of the vehicle and return the vehicle to its owner.
(Amended Entire Section 6-8-98-Effective 7-1-98)
158-2 PARKING PRIVILEGES FOR DISABLED DRIVERS
A. The disabled person, vehicle owner, or volunteer for an institution or organization to which disabled parking license plates, organizational removable windshield placards, permanent windshield placards, or temporary removable windshield placards are issued or any person to whom disabled parking license plates have been issued under subsection Title 46.2 are allowed to park the vehicle on which such license plates or placards are displayed for up to four hours in metered or unmetered parking zones restricted as to length of parking time permitted and are exempted from paying parking meter fees.
B. This section shall not apply to any local ordinance which creates zones where stopping, standing, or parking is prohibited, or which creates parking zones for special types of vehicles, nor shall it apply to any local ordinance which prohibits parking during heavy traffic periods, during specified rush hours, or where parking would clearly present a traffic hazard.
(Amended Entire Section 6-8-98-Effective 7-1-98)
SNOW PARKING AND SNOW EMERGENCIES
(Adopted 4-9-84)
158-3 (RESERVED)
158-4 SNOW EMERGENCIES
A. The Town Manager of Front Royal, Virginia, is hereby empowered to declare a snow emergency in the event of snow, sleet, hail, freezing rain, ice, water, flood, high wind or storm that is expected to be of a sever nature, or the threat thereof.
(Amended 9-26-05-Effective Upon Passage)
B. The Town Manager shall cause the announcement of a declaration of a snow emergency to be broadcast over local radio stations, and he shall provide said announcement to such other public media as, in his discretion, is necessary to adequately inform the public.
C. During a declared snow emergency, it shall be unlawful for an operator to have a motor vehicle become stuck on any street or highway within the Town limits or to otherwise obstruct or impede traffic, when such vehicle is not equipped with snow tires or chains. A "snow tire," for the purpose of this section, shall be a tire which is designated and marketed by the manufacturer specifically for use in ice and snow, whether it shall be called "snow tire," "all-weather tire" or "all-season tire." (Amended 9-26-05-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 158 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 158
158-6
D. Snow emergencies shall remain in effect until such time as, in the judgment of the Town Manager, the emergency weather conditions have abated, the snow removal efforts have been accomplished and the road conditions have improved to a degree to permit normal vehicular traffic without the need for snow tires and chains. At such time, the Town Manager shall furnish an announcement declaring an end to the snow emergency to local radio stations and may provide said announcement to such other media as, in his discretion, is necessary to adequately inform the public.
158-5 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES; TOWING OF VEHICLES IN VIOLATION; GRACE PERIOD
A. Violations of this Section 158-4 are punishable by a fine of not more than twenty-five dollars ($25.).
B. Any vehicle which becomes stuck, mired, is abandoned or otherwise obstructs or impedes traffic on any street within the limits of the Town of Front Royal during a declared snow emergency, and is not equipped with snow tires or chains, may be towed and stored at the direction of a Town police officer or other law enforcement officer having jurisdiction within the Town limits. The owner of said vehicle shall be responsible for all towing charges and storage costs, which shall be paid before said vehicle is released from the storage area to the owner or his agent.
C. In order that citizens shall be given sufficient opportunity to comply with the provisions of Sections 158-4 and 158-5, there shall be a one-hour grace period following the initial announcement that a snow emergency has been declared. During this one-hour grace period, the provisions of Sections 158-4 and 158-5, shall not be enforced, except for the provisions regarding the towing and storage of vehicles which are stuck, mired, abandoned or otherwise obstructing or impeding traffic, which shall remain in full force and effect.
(Amended Entire Section 9-26-05-Effective Upon Passage)
STATE STANDARDS
(Adopted 5-14-84)
158-6 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE OF STATE MOTOR VEHICULAR LAWS
Pursuant to the authority of Section 46.2-1313, Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, all of the provisions and requirements of the laws of the State as of July 1, 2020, contained in Title 46.2, Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, and Article 2 of Chapter 7 of Title 18.2, Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended, except those provisions and requirements the violation of which constitutes a felony and except those provisions and requirements which, by their very nature, can have no application to or within the Town, are adopted and incorporated by reference and made applicable within the Town. References to "highways of the state" contained in such provisions and requirements hereby adopted shall be deemed to refer to the highways and other public ways within the Town. Such provisions and requirements are hereby adopted, mutatis mutandis, and made part of this chapter as fully as those set forth at length herein; and it shall be unlawful for any person within the Town to violate or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any provision of
Chapter 158 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 158
158-7
Title 46.2, Code of Virginia, and Article 2 of Chapter 7 of Title 18.2, Code of Virginia, which is adopted by this section, provided that in no event shall the penalty imposed for the violation of any provision or requirement adopted exceed the penalty imposed for a similar offense under Title 46.2, Code of Virginia, and Article 2 of Chapter 7 of Title 18.2, Code of Virginia.
(Amended 6-24-85-Effective 7-1-85; 6-9-86-Effective 7-1-86; 6-8-87-Effective 7-1-87; 5-9-88-Effective 7-1-88)
(Amended 6-26-89-Effective 7-1-89; 6-11-90-Effective 7-1-90; 6-10-91-Effective 7-1-91)
(Amended 5-25-92-Effective 7-1-92; 5-24-93 -Effective 7-1-93; 5-9-94-Effective 7-1-94)
(Amended 12-12-94-Effective 1-1-95; 7-10-95-Effective 7-1-95; 6-1-96-Effective 6-1-96)
(Amended 6-4-97-Effective 7-1-97; 7-13-98-Effective 7-1-98; 6-14-99-Effective 7-1-99)
(Amended 6-26-00-Effective 7-1-00; 6-11-01-Effective 7-1-01; 6-24-02-Effective 7-1-02)
(Amended 6-23-03-Effective 7-1-03; 6-28-04-Effective 7-1-04; 6-27-05-Effective 7-1-05)
(Amended 6-26-05-Effective 7-1-06; 5-14-07-Effective 7-1-07; 5-12-08-Effective 7-1-08)
(Amended 5-26-09-Effective 7-1-09; 6-14-10-Effective 7-1-10; 6-27-11-Effective 7-1-11)
(Amended 6-11-12-Effective 7-1-12; 5-28-13-Effective 7-1-13; 6-23-14-Effective 7-1-14)
(Amended 6-22-15-Effective 7-1-15; 6-27-16-Effective 7-1-16; 6-12-17-Effective 7-1-17)
(Amended 6-11-18-Effective 7-1-18; 6-10-19-Effective 7-1-19; 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
158-6.1 PENALTIES FOR ORDINANCE INCORPORATING STATE MOTOR VEHICLE LAWS BY REFERENCE
A. Any penalties for violation of Town Code Section 158-6, whereby the provisions of Article 2 (Section 18.2-266 et seq.) of Chapter 7 of Title 18.2 of the Virginia State Code, as amended, pertaining to driving while intoxicated, are incorporated by reference pursuant to the Town's authority under Virginia Code Section 46.2-1313, shall be and are the same as the penalties provided for the same or similar offenses under general state law, including penalties set by the provisions of Virginia Code Section 18.2-11, as amended, anything in the Charter of the Town of Front Royal to the contrary notwithstanding.
B. Any penalties for violations of Town Code Section 158-6, whereby the provisions of Title 46.2 of the Virginia State Code, as amended, pertaining to motor vehicles, are incorporated by reference pursuant to the Town's authority under Virginia Code Section 46.2-1313, wherein the incorporated section provides no specific fine but states that the offense shall be punished as a misdemeanor (whether it is Class 1, Class 2, Class 3 or Class 4 misdemeanor) shall be the penalties imposed for misdemeanors as set forth in Town Code Section 1-15. Said penalties shall not be the penalties imposed for misdemeanors under State Code Section 18.2-11, as amended.
(Added Entire Section 6-29-90-Effective 7-1-90)
REGULATIONS AND SCHEDULES
158-7 PURPOSE
Pursuant to Section 46.1-188, Code of Virginia, as amended, the Town of Front Royal does hereby enact the following regulations for the control of traffic and the parking of vehicles on and in the streets and public places of the Town of Front Royal.
Chapter 158 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 158
158-8
158-8 DEFINITIONS
A. The words and phrases used in this Part 4 shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in Title 46.1, Motor Vehicles and Traffic, Code of Virginia.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
HIGHWAY - Any of the streets, alleys, roads and public ways of the Town of Front Royal.
HOLIDAYS - In each year the first day of January (New Year's Day), the third Monday in January (Lee-Jackson Day), the third Monday in February (George Washington Day), the last Monday in May (Confederate Memorial Day), the fourth day of July (Independence Day), the first Monday in September (Labor Day), the second Monday in October (Columbus Day), the fourth Monday in October (Veterans' Day), the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November (Election Day), the fourth Thursday in November (Thanksgiving Day), the 25th day of December (Christmas Day), or whenever any of such days shall fall on Saturday, the Friday next preceding such day, or whenever any of such days shall fall on Sunday, the Monday next following such day, and any day so appointed by the Governor of this commonwealth or the President of the United States.
TRUCK - Every motor vehicle designed to transport property on its own structure independent of any other vehicle and having a gross weight in excess of seven thousand five hundred (7,500) pounds.
158-9 AUTHORITY TO DESIGNATE TRAFFIC SIGNS AND PARKING REGULATIONS; APPEALS
A. The Town Manager may designate intersections at which vehicles shall come to a full stop or yield the right-of-way and may cause to be erected with the appropriate signs or markers at such in accordance with the standards contained in the Uniform Manual for Traffic Control Devices.
(Amended 11-22-99-Effective Upon Passage)
B. The Front Royal Town Manager is authorized to classify vehicles with reference to parking, may designate the time, place and manner such vehicles may be allowed to park on Town streets and may make and enforce such additional rules and regulations as parking conditions may require. The Town Manager shall cause to be erected appropriate signs or markers so that an ordinarily observant person who may be affected by the parking regulation will be aware of such regulation, except that no sign shall be necessary to effectuate the parking prohibitions set forth in other areas of this Chapter.
(Removed reference of On-Street Parking Policy 1-14-19-Effective Upon Passage)
C. Any person, business, organization or institution shall have the right to petition the Town for a charge in parking regulations or for the imposition of new parking regulations for a specific
Chapter 158 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 158
158-9
street or location. All such petitions shall be submitted, in writing, to the Town Manager at the applicant's election. Upon receipt of a petition, the Town Manager shall investigate the parking conditions at the location in question and, shall either regulate parking, change the parking regulations or take no action. The petitioner shall be informed of the Town Manager's decision, in writing, and shall be advised of the right to appeal an adverse decision.
(Removed reference of On-Street Parking Policy 1-14-19-Effective Upon Passage)
D. Appeal procedure.
1. A decision of the Town Manager pertaining to a new parking regulation may be appealed by a petitioner under Subsection C who has received an adverse decision or by any person, business, organization or institution directly affected by a new parking regulation placed in effect. Appeals must be filed, in writing, to the Front Royal Planning Commission. Petitioners who have received an adverse decision must file their appeal within ten (10) days from the date of the written decision of the Town Manager. Those affected by a parking regulation must file their appeal within thirty (30) days from the erection of the parking sign or signs imposing said new regulation.
(Amended 1-14-19-Effective Upon Passage)
2. Failure to file the appeal within the required time limits shall result in the loss of the right to appeal. Upon receipt of an appeal, the Planning Commission shall place the matter on the agenda for its next meeting, shall investigate the parking conditions if it deems it necessary and shall, not later than seven (7) days after the following Planning Commission meeting, report its opinion and recommendations to the Front Royal Town Council. Upon receipt of the Planning Commission's recommendations, the Town Council shall decide the appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting. The appealee shall be notified and shall have the right to speak and to present witnesses and evidence at said meeting before the Council votes on the appeal.
(Removed reference of On-Street Parking Policy 1-14-19-Effective Upon Passage)
E. All parking regulations placed in effect by the Town Manager shall remain in effect and shall be enforceable pending appeal.
F. All parking regulations in effect as of the date of this ordinance shall remain in effect hereafter, unless subsequently changed in accordance with the provision of this Section.
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
158-10 SPEED LIMITS
The speed limits for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts thereof shall be set by the Town Manager in accordance with regulations as set by the Virginia Department of Transportation. (Amended 11-22-99-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 158 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 158
158-10
158-11 ONE-WAY STREET
Streets or parts of streets may be designated as one-way streets as designated by the Town Manager.
(Amended 11-22-99-Effective Upon Passage)
158-12 U-TURNS
No person shall make a U-turn on any of the streets or parts of streets as designated by the Town Manager.
(Amended 11-22-99-Effective Upon Passage)
158-13 THROUGH TRUCKS PROHIBITED
A. It shall be unlawful to operate trucks, except for the purpose of receiving loads or making deliveries, on the streets and roads of the Town of Front Royal designated as closed to through truck traffic.
B. The Town Council of Front Royal shall designate those streets and roads of the Town of Front Royal which shall be closed to through truck traffic. Those streets and roads so designated shall be plainly marked with posted signs reading NO THRU TRUCKS.
C. Royal Avenue, between its intersection with Commerce Avenue and South Street, is hereby designated as being closed to through truck traffic within the meaning of Subsection (A) hereof, and this area shall be marked as described in Subsection (B) hereof, together with appropriate signage designating both Commerce Avenue and South Street as a through truck route for U.S. Route 340.
(Added (C) 11-10-08-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended (C) by eliminating expiration date 11-8-10-Effective Upon Passage)
D. For purposes of this section only, “truck” shall mean “commercial motor vehicle” as defined in §46.2-341.4 of the Code of Virginia (1950 as amended).
(Added (D) 6-11-12-Effective Upon Passage)
158-14 VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or drive any vehicle, including bicycles and motorcycles, on the sidewalks of the Town. Such violation shall be punished as a traffic violation subject to the penalties in Section 158-15.
158-15 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates any provisions of this Article shall, upon conviction, be liable to a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.).
Chapter 158 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 158
158-11
PARKING, STANDING AND STOPPING
158-16 PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES
A. No person shall park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
1. On a sidewalk.
2. In front of a public or private driveway
3. Within an intersection.
4. Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant.
5. On a crosswalk.
6. Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection; provided, however, that where there is no crosswalk at an intersection, no person shall so park a vehicle within twenty (20) feet from the intersection of curblines or, if none, then within fifteen (15) feet of the intersection of property lines.
7. Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway.
8. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty (30) feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the end of a safety zone, unless a different length is indicated by official signs or markings.
9. Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad grade crossing.
10. Within fifteen (15) feet of a driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of the entrance, when properly signposted.
11. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such parking would obstruct traffic.
12. On the roadway side of any vehicle parked at the edge or curb of a street.
13. Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a street or highway or within a tunnel.
14. At any place where official signs prohibit parking, or at any location where the curb is officially marked with yellow paint designating no parking at any time.
(Amended (14) 9-10-12-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 158 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 158
158-12
15. In all places designated as fire lanes by posted signs.
(Added (15) 9-10-01-Effective Upon Passage)
16. On the wrong side of any public street. For the purpose of this subsection the term "wrong side of any public street" means the side immediately adjacent to any traffic lane in which the flow of traffic is in the opposite direction from the direction the parked vehicle faces.
(Added (16) 1-28-02-Effective Upon Passage)
158-17 PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts thereof as designated by the Town Manager.
(Amended 11-22-99-Effective Upon Passage)
(Removed reference of On-Street Parking Policy 1-14-19-Effective Upon Passage)
158-18 LOADING ZONES
A. Where a loading and unloading zone has been designated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the following regulations shall apply with respect to the use of such areas:
(Amended (A) 3-22-93-Effective Upon Passage)
1. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time, other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials, in any place marked as a curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. All delivery vehicles, other than regular delivery trucks, using such loading zones shall be identified by the owner's or company's name in letters three (3) inches high on both sides of the vehicle.
2. The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily in a space marked as a curb loading zone for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers or bundles when such stopping does not interfere with any vehicle used for transportation of materials, which is waiting to enter or is about to enter such loading space.
B. No vehicle shall be backed up to a curb, except during the time actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise therefrom.
158-19 PARKING IN BUS STOPS AND TAXI CAB STANDS
Where a bus stop or taxicab stand has been designated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the following regulations shall apply as to the use thereof: No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when such stop or stand has been officially designated and marked with an appropriate sign, except
Chapter 158 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 158
158-13
that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter the designated zone.
(Amended 3-22-93-Effective Upon Passage)
158-19.1 PARKING OF TRUCKS AND TRAILERS
A. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings as stated herein.
MOTOR HOME – Every private motor vehicle with a normal seating capacity of not more than (10) persons, including the driver, designed primarily for use as living quarters for human beings. Motor homes with a registered gross weight in excess of seven thousand five hundred (7,500) pounds are also classified as trucks.
(Added 9-26-11-Effective Upon Passage ; Amended to add (7,500) 1-28-13-Effective Upon Passage)
PICKUP OR PANEL TRUCK - Every motor vehicle designed for the transportation of property with a registered gross weight of seven thousand five hundred (7,500) pounds or less.
SEMITRAILER - Every vehicle of the trailer type so designed and used in conjunction with a motor vehicle that some part of its own weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
TRACTOR TRUCK - Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the load and weight of the vehicle attached thereto.
TRAILER -Every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying property and passengers wholly on its own structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle.
TRUCK - Every motor vehicle designed to transport property on its own structure independent of any other vehicle and having a registered gross weight in excess of seven thousand five hundred (7,500) pounds.
VEHICLE – Every device in, or on or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn on a highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively on stationary rails or tracks. For the purpose of Chapter 8 (§46.2-800 et seq) of this title, bicycles, electric personal assistive mobility devices, electric power-assisted bicycles, and mopeds shall be vehicles while operated on a highway.
(Added 9-26-11-Effective Upon Passage)
B. Residential Zoning Districts - It shall be unlawful to park trucks, tractor trucks, trailers or semitrailers upon the public streets and alleys of the Town of Front Royal located in any residential zoning district. (Added Title 9-26-11-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 158 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 158
158-14
C. Peyton Street Parking Lot
1. It shall be unlawful to park trucks, tractor trucks, trailers or semitrailers within the Peyton Street Parking Lot.
2. Paragraph C.1 shall not apply to any of the following vehicles parked in the Peyton Street Parking Lot between the hours of 5:00am and 12:30am:
a. School buses, church buses and other buses engaged in public transportation
b. Motor homes and recreational vehicles
c. Hospital mobile units and fire and rescue vehicles
d. Vehicles owned and operated by the Town
(Amend “C” 9-26-11-Effective Upon Passage)
D. Gazebo Area Parking Lot
Parking in spaces marked by green stripes shall be restricted between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless otherwise approved by the Town Manager or his designee.
(Added 9-10-12-Effective Upon Passage)
E. This section shall not apply to the parking of pickup or panel trucks, as defined herein, or to the parking of vehicles in the course of legitimate deliveries or service calls.
(Added Entire Section “A-D” 8-11-86-Effective 11-10-86)
(Amended “E” (formerly D) 9-26-11-Eff. Upon Passage)
158-19.2 PENALTIES
Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates any provision of this Article shall be liable to a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.).
(Ord. No. 14-86 Added Section 8-11-86-Effective 11-10-86)
158-20 LIABILITY FOR DAMAGE TO VEHICLES IN BUSINESS LOTS
A. No action shall lie or proceedings be brought against any person conducting any business and maintaining a parking lot at which free parking accommodations are provided for customers or employees of such business, when a motor vehicle is parked in such parking lot, for the total or partial loss of such motor vehicle by reason of theft or damage by any person other than an employee or for the total or partial loss of property left in such motor vehicle by reason of theft or damage by any person other than an employee.
B. As used in this section, "free parking accommodations" means parking accommodations for which no specific charge is made, and the patronage of the business by customers and the
Chapter 158 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 158
158-15
performance of the regular services for the business by employees shall not constitute the payment of any consideration for the use of the parking accommodations.
C. Nothing in this section shall relieve any person of liability resulting from his own wrongdoing.
158-21 STOPPING ON HIGHWAYS
A. No vehicle shall be stopped in such a manner as to impede or render dangerous the use of the highway by others, except in the case of an emergency as the result of an accident or mechanical breakdown, in which case a report shall be made to the nearest police officer as soon as practicable and the vehicle shall be removed from the roadway to the shoulder as soon as possible and removed from the shoulder without unnecessary delay; and, if such vehicle is not promptly removed, such removal may also be ordered by a police officer at the expense of the owner if the disabled vehicle creates a traffic hazard.
B. No person shall leave any vehicle, attended or unattended, upon the paved, improved or main traveled portion of any highway, outside of the business or residence district, when it is practicable to leave such vehicle standing off the paved, improved or main traveled portion of such highway.
C. Except upon one-way streets as provided in this chapter, or where angle parking is permitted as provided in this chapter, and when actually loading or unloading merchandise, no vehicle shall be stopped except close to and parallel to the right-hand curb. In no instance shall such vehicle be parked with the near wheels farther than six (6) inches from the curb.
D. No vehicle shall be stopped at or in the vicinity of a fire, vehicle or airplane accident or other area of emergency, in such a manner as to create a traffic hazard or interfere with the necessary procedures of police, firemen, rescue workers or others whose duty it is to deal with such emergencies. Any vehicle found unattended in the vicinity of such fire, accident or area of emergency may be removed by order of a police officer at the risk and expense, not to exceed five dollars ($5.), of the owner if such vehicle creates a traffic hazard or interferes with the necessary procedures of police, firemen, rescue workers or others whose assigned duty it is to deal with such emergencies. Vehicles being used by accredited information services, such as press, radio and television, when being used for the gathering of news, shall be exempt from the provisions of this section, except when actually obstructing the police, firemen and rescue workers dealing with such emergencies.
E. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any vehicle owned or controlled by the State Department of Highways or the Town while actually engaged in the construction, reconstruction or maintenance of highways.
158-22 PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or place any automobile, truck, trailer or other vehicle upon or in any street, alley or parkway for the purpose of selling or offering the same
Chapter 158 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 158
158-16
for sale or rent. No sign or lettering shall be attached or placed upon any automobile, truck, trailer or other vehicle parked in or upon any public street, alley or parkway of the Town indicating that such vehicle is offered for sale or for rent. It shall also be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street in a business district from which any merchandise is being sold.
B. It shall be unlawful to stop a vehicle at any time upon the highway for the purpose of advertising any article of any kind or to display thereon advertisements of any article or advertisement for the sale of the vehicle itself.
MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
158-23 UNLAWFUL OPERATION OF A MOTOR VEHICLE
A. Any person who operates a motorcycle or other motor vehicle upon the lands of another upon which signs or posters have been placed prohibiting the operation of motorcycles or other motor vehicles by others upon such land without having in his or her possession the written consent of the owner or his agent shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as set forth in Section 158-27, below.
B. Any person who shall mutilate, destroy or take down any "no motor bikes, motorcycles or jeeps allowed" sign or poster or similar sign or poster on the lands of another, or who shall post such sign or poster on the lands of another, without the written consent of the landowner or his agent, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as set forth in Section 158-27, below.
158-24 UNLAWFUL RIDING
No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or intended for use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise.
158-25 PEDESTRIANS SEEKING RIDES OR BUSINESS
No person shall stand in the vehicular travel portion of any street or roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride, employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than one dollar ($1.) nor more than five dollars ($5.) for each offense.
158-26 PARKING INOPERATIVE OR UNLICENSED VEHICLES
A. No person shall park, or permit to stand, upon any of the public streets, alleys or grounds within the Town any vehicle which is unlicensed, which fails to display a current license plate (and sticker, if applicable) for the Commonwealth of Virginia or some other lawful jurisdiction or which displays an expired license plate (and sticker, if applicable).
Chapter 158 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 158
158-17
B. No person shall park, or permit to stand, upon any of the public streets, alleys or grounds within the Town any inoperative vehicle for a period of more than ten (10) days.
158-27 ENFORCEMENT; VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
A. It shall be the duty of the police officers of the Town, in the event that a vehicle is found parked in violation of a Town ordinance, to attach to the vehicle in question a notice to the registered owner thereof that such vehicle was parked in violation of a Town ordinance (“Notice of Violation”), and instructing such owner as follows:
1. If contest of a Notice of Violation is waived, payment of said parking violation may be made in person or by mail to the Treasurer of the Town of Front Royal in the amount provided by law (Town Code §158-53) and as indicated on the face of the Notice of Violation. Payment shall be made within seven (7) days from the date of issuance of the Notice of Violation.
2. The vehicle owner may contest a Notice Violation by submitting a Notice of Violation Contest Form to the Front Royal Police Department within seven (7) days from the date of the Notice of Violation. A court date and time will be provided to those persons contesting a Notice of Violation.
3. Failure to pay or contest within seven (7) days will result in the doubling of the fine indicated on the Notice of Violation.
B. The Clerk of the General District Court for Warren County will be provided with copies of all Notice of Violation Contest Forms.
(Amended Entire Section 9-28-15-Effective Upon Passage)
METERED PARKING
158-28 LEASING AND INSTALLATION OF METERS
The Town Manager is hereby authorized and directed to enter into a contract for the leasing and installation of parking meters, such contract to be made subject to the conditions and in the manner provided by law, the payment of such meters and the installation thereof to be provided for solely from the receipts, funds and revenues obtained by the Town from the operation of the parking meters, without in any manner obligating the Town to pay for same from any other source.
158-29 DESIGNATION OF ZONES
The parking meter zones of the Town to which this Article is applicable shall be those streets and parts of streets designated as parking meter zones by the Town Council.
158-30 (RESERVED)
Chapter 158 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 158
158-18
158-31 DESIGNATION OF PARKING METER SPACES; ERECTION OF METERS
In the parking meter zones referred to in Section 158-29, the proper officers shall cause parking meter spaces to be marked on the curb or pavement, or by other appropriate means, and in each parking meter space so marked shall erect or cause to be erected a parking meter which, upon the deposit of the requisite coin or combination of coins of the United States, will entitle the party parking his car for a limited time as is indicated on the parking meter and which will indicate the time such period has elapsed.
158-32 OPERATION OF METERS; OVERTIME PARKING
In order that the police officers may properly compute the time during which a vehicle is parked, the owner or operator of such vehicle shall, upon entering a parking meter space, designated as provided in Section 158-31, during the time of limited parking, immediately deposit a coin or combination of coins of the United States in the parking meter situated at the side of each parking meter space, and operate such parking meter according to instructions thereon. Failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this section. Upon the deposit of such coin, and placing the parking meter space may be lawfully occupied by such vehicle during the period of parking time, which has been prescribed for the particular amount deposited. The parking meters, when installed and properly operated, shall be so adjusted that the requisite coin or combination of coins may be deposited. If such vehicle shall remain parked in any such parking meter space for such length of time that the parking meter shall indicate by a proper signal that the lawful parking period has expired, such vehicle shall be considered as parking overtime, and the parking of a vehicle shall be unlawful; provided, however, that no vehicle shall remain in such parking meter space for a period longer than one (1) hour during the time of limited parking.
158-33 PARKING WITHIN PARKING METER SPACE
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle within a parking meter space designated as provided in Section 158-31 across any line or marking designating a parking meter space, or to park such vehicles in any way that the same shall not be wholly within a parking space as designated by such lines or markings.
158-34 DEFACING, OPENING OR DAMAGING METERS
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, tamper with, damage, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the terms of this Article. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in Section 158-38.
158-35 LOADING ZONES, BUS STOPS & OTHER PROHIBITED PARKING AREAS
The Town Council may set apart, with the parking meter zones, spaces for loading zones, bus stops and other places in which no parking shall be permitted at any time unless otherwise specified by the Town Council.
Chapter 158 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 158
158-19
158-36 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER.
The owner or operator of any vehicle parked in violation of this Article shall be prima face guilty of such violation.
158-37 ENFORCEMENT
A. It shall be the duty of the police officers of the Town, acting in accordance with the instructions issued by the Town Manager, in the event that a vehicle is found occupying a parking meter space, designed as provided in Section 158-29, to report:
1. The number of each parking meter which indicates that the vehicle occupying the parking meter space adjacent to such parking meter is or has been parked in violation of any of the provisions of this Article.
2. The state license number of such vehicle.
3. Any other facts, a knowledge of which is necessary to a thorough understanding of the circumstances attending such violation.
B. Each such police officer shall attach to such vehicle a notice to the owner or operator thereof that such vehicle has been parked in violation of a provision of this Article and instructing such owner or operator to report to the Town Hall of the Town in regard to such violation.
C. Each such owner or operator may, within forty-eight (48) hours of time when such notice was attached to such vehicle, pay to the person in charge at Town Hall a penalty for and in full satisfaction of such violation, the sum of one dollar ($1.) for each hour, or fraction thereof, during which such vehicle occupied such parking meter space in violation of any provisions of this Article. The failure of such owner or operator to make such payment at the Town Hall within such forty-eight (48) hours shall render such owner or operator subject to a fine of five dollars ($5.) prior to trial of such violation.
158-38 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Except as otherwise provided in this Article, any person violating the provisions of this Article or failing to pay fines prior to trial or aiding, abetting or assisting in the violation of such provisions shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.) for each offense.
ABANDONED AND INOPERATIVE VEHICLES; VEHICLE REMOVALS
158-39 REMOVAL AND DISPOSITION OF UNATTENDED, DAMAGED, ABANDONED, OR ILLEGALLY STOPPED VEHICLES.
A. Any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer may be removed for safekeeping by or under the direction of a police officer to a storage garage or area:
Chapter 158 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 158
158-20
1. Whenever such motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer is found on the streets of the Town or Public grounds, unattended by the owner or operator and constitutes a hazard to traffic or is parked in such manner as to be in violation of the law; or
2. Whenever such motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer is left abandoned for more than forty-eight (48) hours upon any street or publicly owned property; or
3. Whenever such motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer involved in any accident is found upon the highways or streets in the Town and is so located as to impede the orderly flow of traffic, the police may at no cost to the owner or operator remove such motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer from the highways or streets to some point in the vicinity where such motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer will not impede the flow of traffic; or
4. Whenever such motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer is on privately owned property other than the property of the owner of such motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer, within the Town, or is abandoned upon such privately owned property without the permission of the owner, lessee or occupant thereof, provided that no such vehicle shall be so removed from privately owned premises without the written request of the owner, lessee, or occupant thereof. When the owner, lessee or occupant of such privately owned property requests such removal, he shall be required to indemnify the Town against any loss or expense involved by reason of removal, storage or sale thereof.
B. It shall be presumed that a motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer, or part thereof, is abandoned if it lacks either a current license plate, a current county, city or Town plate or sticker, or a valid state inspection certificate or sticker; and it has been in a specific location for ten (10) days without being moved.
C. Each removal shall be reported to the Chief of Police, and notice thereof given to the owner of the motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer as promptly as possible. The owner of such vehicle, trailer, or semi-trailer, before obtaining possession thereof, shall pay to the approved towing company all reasonable costs incidental to the removal, storage and locating the owner of the motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer before the vehicle shall be release.
(Amended Entire Section 1-24-00-Effective Upon Passage)
158-39.1 REMOVAL OF IMMOBILIZATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES WITH MORE THAN TWO (2) OUTSTANDING PARKING VIOLATIONS
A. Any motor vehicle parked on the public highways or public grounds against which there are three (3) or more unpaid or otherwise unsettled parking violation notices may be removed to a place within the Town of Front Royal or in Warren County designated by the chief law enforcement officer for the temporary storage of the vehicle, or the vehicle may be immobilized in a manner which will prevent its removal or operation except by authorized law enforcement personnel. Removal shall be carried out by or under the direction of a law enforcement officer.
Chapter 158 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 158
158-21
B. It shall be the duty of the law enforcement personnel removing or immobilizing the motor vehicle or under whose direction such vehicle is removed or immobilized, to inform as soon as practicable the owner of the removed or immobilized vehicle of the nature and circumstances of the prior unsettled parking violation notices for which the vehicle was removed or immobilized. As promptly as possible, each removal also shall be reported to the Town Manager.
C. The owner of the removed or immobilized motor vehicle, or other person acting on his behalf, shall be permitted to repossess or to secure the release of the vehicle by payment of the outstanding parking violation notices for which the vehicle was removed or immobilized and by payment of all costs incidental to the immobilization, removal, and storage of the vehicle, and the efforts to locate the owner of the vehicle.
D. Should the owner fail or refuse to pay such fines and costs, or should the identity or whereabouts of the owner be unknown and unascertainable, the motor vehicle may be sold in accordance with the procedures set forth below.
E. The Chief of Police shall, within fifteen (15) days, by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, notify the owner of record of the motor vehicle and all persons having security interests in the vehicle of record that it has been taken into custody. The notice shall (i) state the year, make, model, and serial number of the abandoned motor vehicle; (ii) set forth the location of the facility where it is being held; and (iii) inform the owner and any persons, having security interests of their right to reclaim it within fifteen (15) days after the date of the notice after payment of all towing, preservation, and storage charges resulting from placing the vehicle in custody. The notice shall state that the failure of the owner or persons having security interests to reclaim the vehicle within the time provided shall constitute (i) a waiver by the owner and all persons having any security interests of all right, title, and interest in the vehicle and (ii) consent to the sale of the abandoned motor vehicle at a public auction.
If records of the Department of Motor Vehicles contain no address for the owner or no address of any person shown by the Department's records to have a security interest, or if the identity and addresses of the owner and all persons having security interests cannot be determined with reasonable certainty, notice by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation in the area from where the motor vehicle was removed shall be sufficient to meet all requirements of notice.
F. If a motor vehicle removed pursuant to this Section is not reclaimed as provided in this section, the Chief of Police shall sell it at public auction. The purchaser of the motor vehicle shall take title to the motor vehicle free of all liens and clams of ownership of others, shall receive a sales receipt at the auction, and shall be entitled to apply to and receive from the Department of Motor Vehicles a certificate of title and registration card for the vehicle.
From the proceeds of the sale of such removed motor vehicle the Town or its authorized agent shall reimburse itself for the expenses of the auction, the cost of towing, preserving,
Chapter 158 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 158
158-22
and storing the vehicle which resulted from placing the motor vehicle in custody, and all notice and publication costs incurred pursuant to this section. Any remainder from the proceeds of a sale shall be held for the owner of the motor vehicle or any person having security interests in the vehicle, as their interests may appear, for ninety (90) days, and then be deposited into the treasury of the Town.
(Added Entire Section 9-10-01-Effective Upon Passage)
158-40 (RESERVED)
158-41 ASSESSMENT OF COSTS AGAINST OWNER OF VEHICLE TOWED OR STORED BY POLICE DEPARTMENT OR AT DEPARTMENT'S REQUEST
1. Towing: Under this Chapter, a towing charge shall not exceed seventy-five ($75.00) for light vehicles weighing up to eight thousand eight hundred (8,800) pounds gross vehicle weight. The towing charge shall not exceed one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) for towing any mid-size vehicle having a gross vehicle weight greater than eight thousand eight hundred (8,800) pounds and not more than twenty-six thousand (26,000) pounds gross vehicle weight; and the towing charge shall not exceed one hundred seventy-five dollars ($175.00) for towing any vehicle having a gross vehicle weight above twenty-six thousand (26,000) pounds.
2. Storage: There shall be no storage charge if the vehicle is reclaimed within the first twenty-four (24) hour period after a tow. Storage charges shall be assessed at a rate not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) per storage day for trucks having a gross vehicle weight above twenty-six thousand (26,000) pounds and a rate not to exceed twenty-six dollars ($26.00) per storage day for all other vehicles. For purposes of this subsection, each twenty-four (24) hour period shall constitute one (1) storage day.
3. Other costs: Charges for recovery (winching, uprighting, etc.), clean-up of an accident site, and notifications required by state law may be recovered. Such charges shall not exceed the reasonable costs incurred by the Town or the operator of the approved towing company.
4. Pre-tow release: If the owner or custodian of any vehicle unlawfully parked returns after a tow truck has arrived and is engaged in hooking up or has attached the vehicle to tow the vehicle, or is attached to the subject vehicle, he may reclaim the vehicle upon payment of a service fee not to exceed thirty-five dollars ($35.00), plus payment of the administrative charge imposed by subsection (3) above. No fee in excess of thirty-five dollars ($35.00), plus the administrative charge, shall be charged if the vehicle has not been moved from the lot or block where it was unlawfully parked. Payment of the fee provided by this subsection shall not relieve any vehicle owner from paying the fine imposed for having unlawfully parked said vehicle.
5. The Police Department shall make a reasonable effort to notify and advise any vehicle owner of the costs provided for in this section when such person’s vehicle has been towed at the request of the Police Department.
(Ord. No. 3-2000 Amended Entire Section 1-24-00 and 6-13-05-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 158 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 158
158-23
VEHICULAR EQUIPMENT
158-42 USE OF FLARES
Whenever any bus, truck, trailer, house trailer or mobile home is disabled and stops upon any portion of the traveled portion of any street or highway in this Town, except upon streets or highways which are artificially lighted at night, at any time during which lights are required upon motor vehicles, the operator of such bus, truck, trailer, house trailer or mobile home shall place or cause to be placed on the roadway three (3) red reflector flares or torches of a type approved by the Superintendent. One (1) of the flares or torches shall be placed in the center of the lane of traffic occupied by the disabled bus, truck, trailer, house trailer or mobile home and not less than one hundred (100) feet therefrom in the direction of traffic approaching in that lane, one (1) not less than one hundred (100) feet from such bus, truck, trailer, house trailer or mobile home in the opposite direction and one (1) at the traffic side of such bus, truck, trailer, house trailer or mobile home not closer than ten (10) feet from the front or rear thereof, provided that if such bus, truck, trailer, house trailer or mobile home is disabled within five hundred (500) feet of curve or crest of a hill or other obstruction to view, the flares or torches in that direction shall be so placed as to afford ample warning to other users of the street or highway, but in no case less than five hundred (500) feet from the disabled vehicle.
158-43 REFLECTOR FLARES; RED LANTERNS
If any vehicle referred to in the preceding section is used for the transportation of flammable liquids in bulk, whether loaded or empty, or for transporting flammable gases, red reflector flares or red electric lanterns of a type approved by the Superintendent shall be used. Such reflectors or lanterns shall be lighted and placed upon the roadway in the manner provided in the preceding section.
158-44 USE OF RED FLAGS INSTEAD OF FLARES
During such time as lights on motor vehicles are not required, red flags not less than twelve (12) inches both in length and width shall be used in the place of flares, torches, reflectors or lanterns. The flags shall be placed upon the roadway in the manner prescribed in Sections 158-42 and 158-43 for flares, torches, reflectors and lanterns, except that no flags shall be required to be placed at the side of such vehicle, but if the disablement of such vehicle continues into the period when lights on motor vehicles are required, flares, torches, reflectors or lanterns shall be placed as required by Section 158-43.
158-45 SLOW-MOVING-VEHICLE EMBLEMS
A. Every farm tractor and every self-propelled unit of farm equipment or implement of husbandry, and any other vehicle designed for operation at speeds not in excess of twenty-five (25) miles per hour or normally operated at speeds not in excess of twenty-five (25) miles per hour, shall display a triangular, slow-moving-vehicle emblem on the rear of the vehicle when traveling on a public highway during day or night.
Chapter 158 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 158
158-24
B. Should a slow-moving vehicle tow a unit on a public highway, the towing vehicle or the towed unit shall be equipped with a slow-moving-vehicle emblem, as follows:
1. If the towed unit or any load thereon obscures the slow-moving-vehicle emblem on the towing vehicle, the towed unit shall be equipped with a slow-moving-vehicle emblem, in which case the towing vehicle need not display such emblem.
2. If the slow-moving-vehicle emblem on the towing vehicle is not obscured by the towed unit or any load thereon, either or both such vehicles may be equipped with such emblem.
C. The Department of State Police shall adopt standards and specifications for the slow-moving-vehicle emblem and the position of mounting of the emblem to correlate with and, so far as possible, conform with those adopted by the American Society of Automotive Engineers.
D. The use of the slow-moving-vehicle emblem shall be restricted to the uses specified in Subsections A and B of this section, and their use on any other type of vehicle or on stationary objects is prohibited.
158-46 TAILGATES ON VEHICLES
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any truck, trailer or other vehicle equipped with a tailgate to lower or open the tailgate thereon, or to suffer or permit such tailgate to be lowered or opened, except during the time the vehicle is being loaded or unloaded, and except during the time the load on the vehicle necessitates a lowered or opened tailgate as a support for the load. It shall be the duty of the operator of any such vehicle to see that the tailgate on such vehicle is kept closed or raised, except during the times hereinbefore specified. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.) nor more than twenty dollars ($20.) for each offense.
158-47 WARNING DEVICES ON BICYCLES
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle along the streets within the Town without having a bicycle equipped with a warning device. Such device shall be sounded when approaching a street crossing.
158-47.1 BICYCLISTS REQUIRED TO WEAR SAFETY HELMETS
Every person fourteen (14) years of age or younger shall wear a protective helmet that meets the standards promulgated by the American National Standards Institute or the Snell Memorial Foundation whenever riding, or being carried on a bicycle on any highway (as defined in Virginia Code Section 46.2-100), sidewalk, or public bicycle path within the corporate limits of the Town of Front Royal.
Persons of any age shall wear protective helmet that meets the standards promulgated by the American National Standards Institute or approved by the Superintendent of the Virginia Department of State Police whenever riding or being carried on a moped on any highway [as
Chapter 158 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 158
158-25
defined in Virginia Code Section 46.2-100], within the corporate limits of the Town of Front Royal.
Any violation of this ordinance shall be punishable by a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). However, such fine shall be suspended (i) for first-time violators and (ii) for violators who, subsequent to the violation, but prior to imposition of the fine, purchase helmets of the type required by this ordinance.
Violation of this ordinance shall not constitute negligence, assumption of risk, be considered in mitigation of damages of whatever nature, be admissible in evidence, or be the subject of comment by counsel in any action for the recovery of damages arising out of the operation of any bicycle or moped, nor shall anything in this section change any existing law, rule, or procedure pertaining to any civil action.
(Added Section 6-13-96-Effective Upon Passage 7-1-96 ; Amended 12-20-99-Effective Upon Passage)
158-48 LIGHTS ON PARKED VEHICLES
Whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped upon a highway, whether attended or unattended, during the period from one-half (1/2) hour after sunset or one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise, no lights need be displayed upon such vehicle, if it is parked or stopped in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and other ordinances of the Town.
GRANT OF EXCEPTIONS; SPECIAL PERMITS
158-49 RELIEF FROM ONE-WAY RESTRICTIONS
When it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Chief of Police or his duly authorized representative that the strict enforcement of Section 158-11 will cause an unreasonable hardship on some particular person or persons relative to the loading or unloading of trucks or other vehicles on such one-way streets, then in such event the Chief of Police, or his duly authorized representative, is authorized to issue a special permit to such person or persons permitting a variance from the provisions of Section 158-11. Any such special permit shall be in writing and shall specify the nature of such variance and the place and period of time when such variance shall be permitted. Such permit shall only be issued when it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Chief of Police, or his duly authorized representative, that the granting of such permit will alleviate a clearly demonstrable hardship as distinguished form a special privilege or convenience to the person or persons who seek such permit.
158-50 TRACTION ENGINES AND TRACTORS
The Chief of Police may issue special permits limited to such time as he may deem proper, authorizing the operation upon a highway of traction engines or tractors having movable tracks with transverse corrugations upon the periphery of such movable tracks. A fee of two dollars ($2.) shall be charged for each permit at the time of issuance.
Chapter 158 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 158
158-26
158-51 VEHICLES OF EXCESSIVE SIZE AND WEIGHT
The Chief of Police may, in his discretion, upon application in writing and good cause being shown therefor, issue a special permit, in writing, authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle upon the highways of a size or weight exceeding the maximum specified of this Article. Every such permit may designate the route to be traversed and contain any other restrictions or conditions deemed necessary by the Chief of Police; provided, however, that the Chief of Police, upon application in writing made by the owner or operator of three-axle trucks hauling road construction materials and having a gross weight not exceeding forty-three thousand nine hundred (43,900) pounds, a single-axle weight not exceeding eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds and a tandem-axle weight not exceeding thirty-two thousand (32,000) pounds, shall issue to such owner or operator, without cost, a permit in writing authorizing the operation of such vehicles upon the highways. No such permit shall designate the route to be traversed or contain restrictions or conditions not applicable to other vehicles in their general use of the highways. The Chief of Police or other designated official, upon application in writing made by the owner or operator of three-axle vehicles used exclusively for the mixing of concrete in transit and having a gross weight not exceeding fifty thousand (50,000) pounds, a single-axle weight not exceeding eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds and a tandem-axle weight not exceeding thirty-six thousand (36,000) pounds, shall issue to such owner or operator, without cost, a permit in writing authorizing the operation of such vehicles upon the highways. No such permit shall designate the route to be traversed or contain restrictions or conditions not applicable to other vehicles of this weight in their general use of the highways. No permit issued under this section providing for a tandem-axle weight in excess of thirty-two thousand (32,000) pounds shall be issued to include travel on federal interstate system of highways. Every such permit shall be carried in the vehicle in which it refers and shall be open to inspection by any officer and any person violating any condition of the permit shall be guilty of a violation of this Part 4.
158-52 PERMIT TO BE CARRIED IN VEHICLE; INSPECTION; PENALTY
Every permit required by Sections 158-49, 158-50 or 158-51 shall be carried in the vehicle to which it refers and shall be open to inspection by any police officer, and any person violating any of the terms or conditions of such special permit shall be punished as provided in Sections 158-49, 158-50 or 158-51.
158-53 UNIFORM FINES AND COSTS FOR TRAFFIC AND PARKING VIOLATIONS
Fines assessed for parking in violation of Town parking ordinances shall be in accordance with the following fine schedule:
Description of Violation Town Ordinance Fine Double Fine
Parking in Handicapped Space 158-1 $100.00 $200.00
Parking on Sidewalk 158-16(A)(1) $25.00 $50.00
Interfering with Driveway 158-16(A)(2) $25.00 $50.00
Parking within an intersection 158-16(A)(3) $25.00 $50.00
Parking within 15’ of fire hydrant 158-16(A)(4) $25.00 $50.00
Parking on a crosswalk 158-16(A)(5) $25.00 $50.00
Parking within 20’ of corner/crosswalk 158-16(A)(6) $25.00 $50.00
Chapter 158 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 158
158-27
Parking within 30’ of stop sign/ traffic signal 158-16(A)(7) $25.00 $50.00
Parking within 50’ of railroad grade crossing 158-16(A)(9) $25.00 $50.00
Double Parking 158-16(A)(12) $25.00 $50.00
Parking upon a bridge 158-16(A)(13) $25.00 $50.00
Official Sign prohibiting parking / yellow paint 158-16(A)(14) $25.00 $50.00
Parking in Fire Lane 158-16(A)(15) $25.00 $50.00
Failure to park right wheels to curb 158-16(A)(16) $25.00 $50.00
Parking trucks, trailers (residential) 158-19.1(B) $25.00 $50.00
Stopping on highway / Obstructing traffic 158-21 $25.00 $50.00
Failure to display current VA plates 158-26(A) $25.00 $50.00
Parking inoperative vehicle over 10 days 158-26(B) $25.00 $50.00
Failure to display Town auto sticker 160-10(D) $25.00 $50.00
Invalid State Inspection $25.00 $50.00
(Added Entire Section 9-10-01 and 9-28-15-Effective Upon Passage)
LAW ENFORCEMENT REQUESTED TOWING
(Added Sections 158-54 – 158-69 11-27-17)
158-54 PURPOSE
The purpose of this article is to ensure proper storage, availability and service by persons and firms authorized to provide towing services at the request of the Warren County Sheriff’s Office, the Front Royal Police Department, Virginia State Police and other law enforcement personnel. The Towing Operators are deemed independent contractors and not employees of Warren County, the Town of Front Royal, Virginia State Police, or other law enforcement agencies assigned to Warren County or Front Royal.
158-55 DEFINITIONS
APPLICATION means an application for towing service within Warren County.
TOWING OPERATOR means a towing firm or service, with an established business office and location within Warren County, which meets the requirements of this article and has entered into an agreement to provide towing and recovery services at the request of the Sheriff’s Office, Police Department or other law enforcement personnel.
COUNTY means Warren County, Virginia.
DMV means Commonwealth of Virginia Division of Motor Vehicles.
EMERGENCY means a critical traffic problem, snow storm, ice storm, hurricane or other extreme weather condition; parade or similar public event; disaster or similar event.
JOINT TOWING BOARD means the Joint Advisory Board on Towing which consists of seven (7) members: three (3) law enforcement officers, including one from the Sheriff’s Office, one
Chapter 158 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 158
158-28
from the Police Department and one from Virginia State Police, three (3) representatives of Towing and Recovery Businesses and one (1) citizen.
LAW ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL OR LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY means a law enforcement officer of Warren County, Town of Front Royal, Virginia State Police or agency of such officers or other law enforcement agency assigned to Warren County.
POLICE DEPARTMENT means the Town of Front Royal Police Department.
RECEIPT means a printed, numerated and dated receipt that include tow company name, company address and telephone number and receipt signed by owner/operator.
SCC means Commonwealth of Virginia State Corporation Commission.
SHERIFF’S OFFICE means the Warren County Sheriff’s Office.
SUSPENSION means temporary removal from the Towing List for a violation of this article or breach of the towing service agreement.
TERMINATION means permanent removal from Towing List and rescission of towing service agreement.
TOWING LIST means the list maintained of the Towing Operators authorized to respond the Sheriff’s Office, Police Department or other law enforcement personnel’s request for the towing of vehicles.
TOWING OPERATORS means those who own, lease, or operate a Towing Recovery Business.
TOWING RECOVERY BUSINESS means any person, including a business offering services involving the use of a tow truck, including those engaged in the business of (1) removing disabled vehicles, parts of vehicles, or cargo to facilities for repair or safekeeping; and (2) restoring to the highway or other location vehicles that have come to rest where they can’t be operated. Such business shall have at least one (1) location, consisting of an office and storage lot, within Warren County for at least six (6) months.
TOWING SERVICE AGREEMENT means the agreement between the Joint Towing Board and the Towing Operator.
TOWN means the Town of Front Royal, Virginia.
158-56 GENERAL MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
A. Required Vehicles and Equipment.
1. The Towing Recovery Business shall have available at least one (1) of the following vehicles with valid Virginia license plates, inspection sticker and SCC/DMV license.
Chapter 158 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 158
158-29
a. Tow Truck equipped with a wrecking crane capable of lifting a minimum of 8,000 pounds and up to a maximum of 10,000 pounds or the gross vehicle weight rating. Tow truck must be equipped with a wheel lift capable of lifting a minimum of 1,500 pounds.
b. Flatbed Wrecker with at least an 8,000-pound winch and capable of transporting a maximum of 7,000 pounds or the gross vehicle weight rating.
2. Each of the vehicles above shall be originally designed as tow trucks.
3. Each of the vehicles above shall be equipped with the following:
a. A chassis rated with sufficient gross vehicle weight to match the maximum capacity of the crane mounted thereon;
b. All-weather tires on the rear wheels;
c. At least one (1) fire extinguisher;
d. At least two (2) operable amber revolving or flashing emergency lights, mounted on the highest part of the vehicle and visible from all sides;
e. One (1) operable air tank, when not equipped with air brakes. Flatbed Wreckers are exempt from this requirement;
f. One (1) heavy-duty street broom and one (1) shovel;
g. Dollies, scotch blocks and snatch block;
h. Gas and oil absorbent material;
i. Reflective vest, shirt or jacket; and
j. Vehicle tow lights.
4. Heavy Duty Wreckers.
a. For those Towing Operators who desire to be on the heavy-duty wrecker list, they shall own or lease a minimum of two (2) towing/recovery trucks and at least one (1) road tractor. One (1) truck shall have a minimum of 60,000 pounds rating and the second truck shall have a minimum 40,000 pounds rating. All units shall have winches rated at a minimum of 20,000 pounds. All units must have a boom that raises and lowers, extends and retracts by hydraulics. All units must have a hydraulic under-lift rated to raise 12,000 pounds at full extension.
Chapter 158 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 158
158-30
b. Towing Operators shall own, lease or have a written agreement with a subcontractor for the following:
(i) Lowboy hydraulic operated trailer capable or transporting a wrecked or disabled road tractor and/or debris;
(ii) Trailer forty-five (45) foot or longer box trailer;
(iii) Dump truck, dump trailer or container;
(iv) Air cushions designed for and capable of up righting a loaded tractor and trailer;
(v) A skid steer loader, forklift or wheel loader capable of moving cargo and/or debris from the highway; and
(vi) Adequate personnel to off-load cargo.
c. All loads must be secured with two-wheeled straps or safety chains.
d. All equipment must be equipped with legally required light and safety equipment.
e. All equipment must be in good working order with all equipment required in this article.
B. Storage and Security of Vehicles
1 All Towing Operators shall have a secured lot for vehicles towed under this article. Vehicles shall be stored at all times in said storage lot, storage facility or building or an adjacent service bay.
2 A Towing Operator shall maintain and own or lease a dedicated storage area able to contain all towed vehicles towed by the operator. Storage area shall be fully enclosed by a commercial grade fence which is at least six (6) feet tall, or enclosed by a permanent structure, have adequate lighting and remain reasonably clear of debris. Towing Operators shall not share storage lots unless the shared storage lot is divided by a six-foot high stationary fence with a separate locked entranced to each storage area.
3 The storage lot shall have a sign posted identifying the firm's name and telephone number. Wrecker service facilities and equipment, including vehicles, office, telephone lines, office equipment and storage facilities may not be shared with another wrecker service. Vehicles towed at the request of Law Enforcement Personnel must be placed in storage owned or leased and operated by the wrecker service on the Towing List.
4 The storage lot shall have a graveled or paved surface.
C. Insurance
Chapter 158 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 158
158-31
1. No Towing Service Agreement shall be signed until the Towing Operator has provided evidence of the following insurance coverage for the duration of the Towing Service Agreement by a company or companies licensed to do business in the commonwealth. Any changes or lapses in insurance coverage shall immediately be reported to the Joint Towing Board.
a. The Towing Operator shall be required to carry garage keeper’s legal liability insurance in the minimum amount of seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) to cover fire, theft, windstorm, vandalism and explosion for each lot. Towing Operators on the heavy-duty wrecker list shall be required to carry garage keeper’s legal liability insurance in the minimum amount of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00).
b. Insurance sufficient to protect itself from any and all claims of loss, damage or bodily injury, resulting from its acts or incurred in the operation of the Towing Operator’s business equipment and vehicles pursuant to the Towing Service Agreement in the amount of seven hundred fifty thousand dollars ($750,000.00) or the amount required by the state (vehicle liability policy).
c. Insurance sufficient to cover claims under the Worker's Compensation Act, if applicable, for all of its employees. If any work is sublet, the subcontractor shall provide similar coverage.
2. The Towing Operator shall indemnify and hold harmless the Sheriff's Office, Police Department, Virginia State Police, Warren County and Town of Front Royal, all other law enforcement agencies assigned to Warren County including their agents, employees and representatives from any and all claims, casualties, damages or injuries arising out of its actions pursuant to the agreement.
158-57 APPLICATION FOR AGREEMENT
A. Any Towing Operator desiring to perform towing work at the request a Law Enforcement Agency shall submit an application for towing service in duplicate to the Joint Towing Board. Prior performance and reputation in the community, as reported through the office of citizen and consumer affairs and criminal history record information as supplied by applicant, will be considered when a Towing Operator applies to perform towing services under the Towing Service Agreement.
B. In order to be qualified for towing under this article, a Towing Operator shall operate the Towing Recovery Business at said location within Warren County for a minimum of six (6) months prior to applying for towing under this article. The six-month waiting period may be waived for applicants who are currently authorized to tow under this article.
C. A Towing Operator may not make any changes that alter the information that was submitted in the application unless first notifying the Joint Towing Board.
Chapter 158 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 158
158-32
D. The Application shall be submitted on forms provided by the Joint Towing Board and includes the following information:
1. The name of the Towing Recovery Business to include the owners, members and/or corporate officers.
2. The home and business addresses and phone numbers of the Towing Recovery Business, owners, members and/or officers.
3. The location, size and security features of the storage lot on which the towed vehicles will be stored. The storage facility shall be described in detail to include the size, the lighting and the separate entrance. The storage facility may be a building or a lot which shall be a minimum of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet for regular Towing Operators or a minimum of three thousand (3,000) square feet for heavy-duty Towing Operators.
4. The location in which the public must go to in order to claim stored vehicles.
5. A statement of availability to provide towing service on a continuous twenty-four-hours-a-day basis each day of the year.
6. A list of the towing equipment, its size and capacity. Towing Operators shall maintain and register all trucks. A copy of property taxes showing taxes paid on trucks and equipment domiciled within the county or town and each vehicle registration must be submitted on an annual basis with application or reapplication.
7. A complete list of insurance policies, carriers and agents which would be in effect upon execution of the Towing Services Agreement. Proof of the policy will be filed with the Joint Towing Board. This information will include amount of coverage limits and include worker's compensation, if applicable.
8. A statement that the Towing Operator accepts reasonable responsibility for any personal property left in towed and stored vehicles, as may be otherwise determined by law, along with a description of the secure place which will be used to store the property left in towed or stored vehicles. A statement that the Towing Operator accepts reasonable responsibility for a towed vehicle from the time hookup starts, until vehicle reaches the intended destination.
9. Towing Operators must list two (2) telephone numbers at which they can be reached on a twenty-four-hour-a-day basis. Specific times and days denoting business hours versus nonbusiness hours must accompany the telephone number. Name of business and telephone number must be posted in a conspicuous place at the place of business.
10. A statement from the zoning office of the local government entity in which the Towing Recovery Business is located that the storage lot listed on the application meets all required zoning requirements.
Chapter 158 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 158
158-33
11. A statement from the Treasurer and/or the town finance office that all financial obligations are paid. All Towing Operators must be current in all financial obligations to the County and/or Town.
12. A copy of declaration of personal property or business personal property on registered equipment must be submitted annually.
13. All applicants shall pay an application fee, as established by the Joint Towing Board, remitted to and collected by the Joint Towing Board.
158-58 INSPECTIONS OF TOWING OPERATOR
A. All of the tow trucks, required equipment and storage facilities shall be inspected and approved by the Joint Towing Board prior to use. In addition, all tow trucks and required equipment shall conform to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1000 et seq. The Joint Towing Board may periodically inspect all wreckers, equipment and storage facilities utilized under this article. There will be an annual inspection of all wreckers, equipment and storage facilities utilized under this article. For heavy-duty wreckers a CVSA sticker will also be required.
B. There shall be an annual inspection fee, as established by the Joint Towing Board, remitted to and collected by the Joint Towing Board.
C. The Joint Towing Board shall give the Towing Operator written notice when the equipment or storage facility is found to be unacceptable.
D. Tow trucks and equipment or storage facilities that fail the inspection shall not be used by a Towing Operator in the performance of its obligations under a Towing Services Agreement until they pass inspection.
E. Failure to comply with any of the conditions stated above will result in suspension of the Towing Operator from the Towing List until the corrections have been made. If the corrections are not made within ten (10) calendar days, the Towing Operator shall be terminated from the Towing List.
F. All applications for new Towing Operators to be included on the Towing List or applications for renewals of Towing Operators shall be submitted to and shall only be received and processed by the Joint Towing Board from May 1 to May 30 of each calendar year. The calendar year for the application of this article shall be July 1 to June 30.
158-59 APPLICATION APPROVAL
A. The Joint Towing Board shall conduct an investigation to determine the accuracy of the information contained in the application and shall inspect the storage lot and equipment to be used.
Chapter 158 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 158
158-34
B. Upon completion of the investigation, the Joint Towing Board shall determine whether the applicant meets the requirements of this article. If the Joint Towing Board finds the applicant qualified, he shall approve and sign the Towing Services Agreement. The applicant's name shall be placed on the Towing List in a rotating order.
C. If the Joint Towing Board finds the applicant unqualified, it shall indicate in writing the reasons and return the application to the applicant.
158-60 DUTIES AND REQUIREMENTS OF TOWING OPERATORS
A. Towing Operators shall, at the request of and as directed by Law Enforcement Personnel, tow vehicles in the County or Town in a manner that is damage-free to the vehicle being towed. Towing Operators shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations, including but not limited to, the securing of all necessary federal, state and local licenses. All Towing Operators shall display a WT-Tag (tow truck for hire) and/or an IRP-Tag (international registration plan).
B. All Towing Operators shall have the Towing Recovery Business’ name, town, state and telephone numbers printed on both sides of the towing vehicle in letters and numerals of such size, shape and color as to be readily legible during daylight hours from a distance of fifty (50) feet while the vehicle is not in motion. No magnetic sign shall be used on vehicles. Decals are permissible. The Towing Operator shall provide a business card to Law Enforcement Personnel before leaving the scene. Each Towing Operator must be registered with the Virginia Department of Motor Vehicles in the name of the Towing Recovery Business and insured by the Towing Recovery Business.
C. Towing Operators shall provide twenty-four-hours-per-day towing service each day of the year.
D. Towing Operators shall have available at all times sufficient and qualified personnel to receive calls and execute the towing.
E. If a Towing Operator determines additional equipment is needed, the Law Enforcement Personnel shall contact a different Towing Operator on the Towing List.
F. Towing Operators shall notify all Law Enforcement Agencies during normal business hours forty-eight (48) hours prior to a change in their phone number. No answering service is allowed.
G. The Towing Operator agrees to arrive on the scene within thirty (30) minutes of receiving a call. If the Towing Operator fails to meet the specified time limit, the Law Enforcement Personnel will notify a second Towing Operator. Once the second Towing Operator has been requested, services from the first Towing Operator are considered canceled and the first Towing Operator is not due any payment. Heavy-duty Towing Operators will have a forty-five (45) minute time limit to arrive on scene.
Chapter 158 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 158
158-35
H. If in the judgment of the Joint Towing Board, excessive delays are caused by circumstances within the Towing Operator’s control, the Joint Towing Board may recommend the Towing Operator be suspended/terminated from the Towing List.
I. Towing Operators shall have only those tow trucks owned or lease purchased by them responding to calls for service.
J. If a tow truck is not available, then the Towing Operator shall immediately indicate to the dispatcher that it cannot respond and the reason why. The dispatcher shall then notify the next Towing Operator on the list.
K. Towing Operators may use crossovers located on the interstates or public highways that are prohibited when directed to do so by Law Enforcement Personnel pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 46.2-920.1.
L. All Towing Operators must possess a valid Virginia driver's license or commercial driver's license, and medical certificate as may be required and be qualified to operate the tow vehicle and its equipment.
M. All Towing Operators shall decline a service call if they consumed alcohol and or used any drug or narcotic, either by a doctor's prescription or of their own free will within eight (8) hours prior to a call for service.
N. Towing Operators shall remove all litter, glass and debris caused by the incident which necessitated towing, including ordinary and reasonable quantities of oil and gas spillage as determined by the Law Enforcement Personnel on the scene. If circumstances warrant additional charges, they will be thoroughly documented and itemized.
O. All Towing Operators shall have the capability to accept cash and credit card as payment for services under the agreement in the field at the time services are rendered.
P. The Towing Operator shall tow vehicles to any destination requested by the vehicle owner or any Law Enforcement Personnel, after financial obligations have been finalized. The Towing Operator shall not tow vehicles outside of the Warren County limits.
Q. Any Towing Operator permanently ceasing to provide towing/recovery services shall, within fifteen (15) days, notify the Joint Towing Board in writing.
158-61 RESPONSIBILITIES AND RECORDS OF TOWING OPERATORS
A. If an owner or lien holder fails to claim any vehicle or if the Towing Operator wants to satisfy any lien which it has on a vehicle, it shall be the Towing Operator’s responsibility to dispose of or sell the vehicle in compliance with the Virginia State Code.
Chapter 158 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 158
158-36
B. The Towing Operator shall be reasonably responsible for vehicles towed and any contents from the time the vehicle is towed until one (1) of the following events occur:
1. The vehicle is delivered to a location specified by the owner or other authorized person;
2. The vehicle and property is released to and accepted by the owner or authorized person in the same condition as originally towed; or
3. The vehicle is otherwise disposed of according to law.
C. Towing Operators shall secure all personal property at the scene of a collision to the extent possible and preserve personal property in a vehicle which is about to be towed.
D. The Towing Recovery Business shall keep records of all vehicles which have been towed pursuant to the Towing Services Agreement. These records shall include, at a minimum, the date and time of tow, the vehicle's license number and state of issue, the vehicle's identification number, the year, make, model and color of the vehicle, the location from which it was towed, the charges for towing and storage, the disposition of vehicle and date of disposition.
1. Such records shall be available for inspection by the Joint Towing Board during the Towing Recovery Business' normal business hours.
2. The Towing Recovery Business shall retain a copy of these records for a period of at least twelve (12) months from the date of the tow.
E. Towing Operators shall promptly arrange for the release of vehicles towed or stored pursuant to this article. There shall be an attendant available from the hours of 8:00 a.m. through 5:00 p.m., except on weekends and state holidays, for the purpose of permitting inspections or releasing stored vehicles. After hours the owner or attendant must be available by telephone. The owner or attendant must be available twenty-four-hours-a-day, each day of the year for the purpose of releasing stored vehicles.
1. Towing Operators, upon receiving a request to release or permitting an inspection of a stored or seized vehicle from the owner, operator or other authorized person, shall release that vehicle to the owner or other authorized person between the hours 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. within a thirty-minute timeframe.
2. Towing Operators, upon receiving a request to release or permit an inspection of a stored vehicle by an owner or authorized person during other than normal business hours, shall allow and otherwise require two (2) hours-notice for the release of such motor vehicle. The foregoing notice provision shall apply likewise for the release of personal property and contents within the vehicle. All fees charged for any off-hour release/inspection shall be no more than one (1) day of storage.
Chapter 158 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 158
158-37
3. Upon request, Towing Operators shall distribute to the owner, operator or authorized agent a copy of the complaint procedures form.
4. Towing Operators shall not release any vehicle designated as "seized" or "seized for forfeiture" by a Law Enforcement Agency until the Towing Operator obtains permission from the requesting agency. The Towing Operator shall bill the requesting agency for the cost of the tow.
F. Towing Operators shall not release any vehicle that has a "hold" on property contained within such vehicle without first obtaining authorization from the requesting Law Enforcement Agency.
G. Whenever the Towing Operator is requested to remove a vehicle and the owner of the vehicle, or their authorized agent or driver, is not at the scene at the time of the tow, Law Enforcement Personnel is requested to complete a tow sheet form that includes the following:
1. Owners name and address, if known;
2. Description of the vehicle and any visible prior damage;
3. Storage facility name and address;
4. Inventory of accessible contents of the vehicle; and
5. One (1) copy shall be given to the Towing Operator, one (1) copy to the owner of the vehicle and one (1) copy retained by the Law Enforcement Agency.
H. All records relating to Towing Operator’s application and insurance shall be made available for inspection by the Joint Towing Board after a Freedom of Information Act request is filed.
158-62 ROTATION SYSTEM
A. The Joint Towing Board shall ensure that Towing Operators are called on a rotating basis according to the Towing List. Being placed on the Towing List does not guarantee a particular number or quantity of calls; does not guarantee an equivalent number of calls to every Towing Operator on the list; nor entitle any Towing Operator on the list to any compensation as a consequence for not being called in accordance with the Towing List or when removed from the Towing List.
B. The owner or operator of a vehicle to be towed shall be asked to specify the Towing Operator of his choice, whether or not authorized by Law Enforcement Personnel, unless the vehicle constitutes a traffic hazard and the requested Towing Operator will have an unacceptable response time. If the owner or operator requests a specific Towing Operator, the Law Enforcement Personnel shall complete an owner request form which shall be signed by the owner or operator of the vehicle.
Chapter 158 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 158
158-38
C. The Law Enforcement Personnel shall not call any Towing Operator who does not have a Towing Services Agreement unless all Towing Operators on the Towing List are unavailable or an Emergency exists. In the event of an emergency or no availability of Towing Operators on the Towing List, Law Enforcement Personnel and the Virginia Department of Motor Vehicles (VDOT) can request Towing Recovery Businesses outside of Warren County.
D. In an emergency, a supervisor of a Law Enforcement Agency may call a Towing Operator out of sequence in order to shorten response time to the scene of the incident. However, any Towing Operators which are randomly used during suspensions of the Towing List must be reported to communications for record purposes.
E. Law Enforcement Personnel at the scene may reject the services of the Towing Operator dispatched when the Towing Operator arrives with inadequate equipment to perform the tow. Unfitness shall include, but not limited to, possession of inadequate equipment to perform the tow, or operated by personnel who, due to drugs, alcohol or other incapacity, are not likely to perform the tow safely. In the event that the Towing Operator is determined to be unfit, Law Enforcement Personnel shall notify communications to dispatch the next Towing Operator on the Towing List and shall file a written report with the Joint Towing Board
F. Law Enforcement Personnel will call another Towing Operator if the first Towing Operator fails to answer the telephone or receives a busy signal after two (2) attempts.
G. If the Towing Operator does not answer the telephone or refuses the call, the Towing Operator loses that turn in rotation and will not be called until the Towing List rotates to their name again. If the Towing Operator responds to a call, it shall be placed at the bottom of the Towing List, unless the Towing Operator through no fault of its own is not used and receives no compensation for the call. In that event, it shall be placed back at the top of the Towing List.
158-63 COMPENSATION
A. All costs incident to towing and storage shall be paid by the owner or other authorized person of the towed and stored vehicle to the Towing Operator. In those cases involving "seized" vehicles, the owner shall reimburse the requesting Law Enforcement Agency for the towing costs.
B. The towing and storage fees charged by the Towing Operator shall be reasonable in light of those charged by other Towing Operators in the county for comparable service. There shall be no additional charges for mileage. No charges imposed for the storage of vehicles for a period of twenty-four (24) hours or less shall exceed charges imposed for one (1) day of storage.
C. An itemized receipt for payment, which sets forth the cost of towing, excessive cleanup, storage, and repairs shall be issued to the owner/operator or other authorized person. Said receipt shall also include a signature line for the owner/operator or other authorized person acknowledging receipt of the vehicle.
Chapter 158 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 158
158-39
D. All Towing Operators shall submit their current pricing to the Joint Towing Board related to towing, recovery, winching, storage charges and administrative charges. No administrative charges shall be incurred for the first twenty-four (24) hours of storage and no administrative fee or charge shall exceed ninety-five dollars ($95.00). Written notice of these fees shall be available at the request of the owner or operator of the vehicle's request.
158-64 SOLICITATION BY TOWING OPERATORS
A. No Towing Operator shall respond to an accident, scene of an emergency or mechanical breakdown for the purpose of towing vehicles unless specifically called there by Law Enforcement Personnel, or the person involved in the accident or emergency. Violation of this section shall result in suspension from the Towing List for thirty (30) days for the first offense, sixty (60) days for the second offense, and termination from the Towing List for a third offense for a period of twelve (12) months.
1. The Law Enforcement Personnel shall direct the Towing Operator to leave even if the Towing Operator would otherwise have been called to the location.
2. The Law Enforcement Personnel may direct the Towing Operator to provide necessary services in such instances when immediate assistance is necessary to protect persons or property.
B. Towing Operators are prohibited from soliciting business at the scene of accidents, emergencies or mechanical breakdowns.
158-65 PROHIBITED PRACTICES
A. A violation of any of the following may subject the Towing Operator to suspension from the Towing List:
1. Deliberate failure of a Towing Operator to respond to calls;
2. Securing a Towing Services Agreement by fraud or concealment of a material fact;
3. Violation of the Towing Services Agreement;
4. Chronic or repeated violations of this article;
5. A single violation of this article including not limited to:
a. Running unauthorized calls;
b. Overcharges;
c. Alcohol or drug use;
Chapter 158 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 158
158-40
d. Tardiness more than five (5) times in a six-month period;
e. Failure to notify the Joint Towing Board with immediate changes regarding insurance, taking on new members, owners, corporate officers or any other changes regarding anything listed in the Application;
f. Fraudulent acts with respect to this article;
g. Failure to comply with the rules and regulations of Code of Virginia § 46.2-2820 et seq.; or
h. Violate any laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia, the County of Warren, or the Town of Front Royal, which are considered a felony or misdemeanor.
158-66 COMPLAINTS
A. Any Towing Operator who believes he has been unfairly treated by Law Enforcement Personnel may file a written complaint with the Joint Towing Board.
B. Any person who believes a violation of this article has occurred may file a complaint against a Towing Operator. Joint Towing Board will provide the complainant with a complaint form to be filled out and returned to the Joint Towing Board. The complaints shall be investigated by the Joint Towing Board.
C. After an investigation of the complaint, the Joint Tow Board shall notify the complainant of the results of the investigation and any action as a result of the complaint.
D. The local office of the Virginia State Police shall use the Towing List on law enforcement requested calls in Warren County. By agreement with the local office of the Virginia State Police, the Joint Towing Board shall investigate towing complaints for both state and county calls. Any imposed disciplinary action shall be binding on all law enforcement initiated calls for towing service.
158-67 SUSPENSION OR TERMINATION OF TOWING OPERATORS
A. Any Law Enforcement Agency, upon investigation of the facts, may recommend that a Towing Operator be heard by the Joint Towing Panel for any violation of the provisions of this article.
B. The Joint Towing Board shall provide the Towing Operator with written notice of said violation. Notification of the date, time and location of a hearing on the violation shall also be provided.
C. The Joint Towing Board has the authority to suspend or terminate Towing Operators through due process.
Chapter 158 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 158
158-41
158-68 APPEALS PROCESS AND HEARING
A. In the event that a representative from a Towing and Recovery Business that sits on the Joint Towing Panel lodges a complaint against another Towing Operator, said representative shall abstain from the hearing.
B. The Law Enforcement Personnel involved in the incident shall be responsible for presenting the allegations against a Towing Operator to the Joint Towing Panel members and may call witnesses and ask questions of any witness.
C. If complainant is not present, the complaint form will be presented to the Joint Towing Panel as complainant's evidence/testimony.
D. The Towing Operator shall be allowed an opportunity to attend the hearing and bring any witnesses that were directly involved in the incident where the accused Towing Operator was charged with a violation of this article. The Towing Operator will be allowed to present evidence/testimony supporting his/her case to the Joint Towing Panel. The Towing Operator may make an opening statement, ask witnesses questions and make a closing statement.
E. No attorneys will be allowed to attend this administrative hearing on behalf of a complainant or defendant.
F. No witnesses, except for those being questioned, will be allowed in the room during the administrative hearing.
G. The Joint Towing Panel, after hearing evidence presented, shall render a decision. If the accused Towing Operator is present, the chairman presiding over the hearing shall immediately verbally notify the accused of the decision. A written notification shall be prepared and sent to the Towing Operator through first class postage with the U.S. Postal Service and a copy of the decision will be sent to each Law Enforcement Agency. If the Towing Operator is not present at the conclusion of the hearing to receive the verbal notification of the panel, the Towing Operator shall waive the right to immediate notification of the decision.
H. The decision of the Joint Towing Panel is final.
158-69 AMENDMENTS TO ORDINANCE
A. The Joint Towing Board will recommend revisions to this ordinance to the Warren County Board of Supervisors and the Front Royal Town Council.
B. All proposed revisions shall be discussed with the Joint Towing Board and their input will be considered in each proposed revision.
Chapter 158 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 158
158-42
C. Revisions shall be in effect from the date on which the amendments to the Town and County Code with identical language are adopted by the Warren County Board of Supervisors and the Front Royal Town Council.
D. Towing Operators on the Towing List shall be given written notification of any amendments ten (10) days prior to the revision being adopted.
(Added Sections 158-54 – 158-69 “Law Enforcement Requested Towing” 11-27-17-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 160 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 160
160-1
Chapter 160
VEHICLES, LICENSING OF
Sections:
160-1 REQUIRED LICENSE FEE
160-2 EXEMPTIONS
160-3 ANNUAL LICENSE FEES; PRORATION
160-4 PAYMENT OF FEE TO MANAGER; PREREQUISITE PAYMENT OF PERSONAL PROPERTY TAXES
160-5 LICENSE YEAR
160-6 ISSUANCE AND ATTACHMENT OF STICKER
160-7 DUPLICATE OR REPLACEMENT LICENSE PLATE OR STICKER; FEE
160-8 TRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE PLATE OR STICKER
160-9 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
160-10 EXEMPTIONS
Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal 3-11-85. (First adopted 7-28-69 as Chapter 17including amendments 2-14-77, 3-27-78, 2-26-79, 1-14-80). Removed 160-9 “Display of Expired License Plate or Sticker Prohibited 4-27-20-Effective Upon Passage ; Amended Entire 160-10 “Prohibitions” 6-27-16-Effective 7-1-16; Removed “Prohibitions” 4-27-20-Effective Upon Passage. Other amendments noted where applicable.
160-1 REQUIRED LICENSE FEE
Every owner of a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer shall pay an annual license fee for the privilege of keeping and operating such vehicle in the Town except as herein provided.
160-2 EXEMPTIONS
A. No license fee shall be required for any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer exempt from state and local licenses or fees under the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia or owned by a nonprofit educational corporation or institution.
B. A license fee shall not be imposed on any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer when the vehicle is owned by a non-resident of the Town and is used primarily to transport the owner to and from his place of business or employment in the Town and not used in any other manner in connection with such employment or business.
C. No license fee shall be required for any one- or two-wheel trailer of a cradle, flatbed or open pickup type which has a body width no greater than the width of the motor vehicle to which it is attached at the time of operation, which is pulled or towed by a passenger car or station wagon or a pickup or panel truck having an actual gross vehicle weight not exceeding five thousand (5,000) pounds and which is used for carrying property not exceeding one thousand (1,000) pounds at any one (1) time.
D. As provided in the Code of Virginia Section 46.1-65, no Town license fee shall be greater than the amount of the license tax imposed by the commonwealth for the same motor vehicle,
Chapter 160 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 160
160-2
trailer or semitrailer. In the event that the Town license fee, as stated herein, is greater than any commonwealth license tax for the same vehicle, then the Town license fee as stated shall be void, and a town license fee equal to the amount of the commonwealth license tax shall be imposed.
(Added 4-24-89-Effective Upon Passage)
E. Volunteer Fire Department and Rescue Squad members. No license fee shall be required for a motor vehicle registered in the Town of Front Royal which is owned and regularly used by an active member of an eligible Volunteer Fire Department or Volunteer Rescue Squad Company to respond to calls to perform other official Fire Department or Rescue Squad duties, provided as follows:
1. Eligible Volunteer Fire Departments and Rescue Squad Companies shall be those which receive annual financial support from the County of Warren, Virginia.
2. Eligible active members of Volunteer Fire Departments and Rescue Squad Companies shall be those meeting the specific eligibility standards promulgated by the Warren County, Virginia Board of Supervisors in accordance with Warren County Code Section 10-40.1. In addition, to be eligible hereunder, said Fire Department and Rescue Squad members must have paid all town taxes then due and owing, both real and personal.
3. Only one (1) motor vehicle per active Volunteer Fire Department or Rescue Squad member shall be exempt from the license fee. If any active Volunteer Fire Department or Rescue Squad member shall be granted a license exemption in accordance with the provisions of Warren County Code Section 10-40.1 for a vehicle registered in Warren County, said member shall not be eligible for a license fee exemption for another vehicle registered in the Town of Front Royal.
4. Application for a fee-exempt motor vehicle license must be made at the Front Royal Town Hall annually between January 15 and February 15 or for new vehicle registration, within thirty (30) days of registration with the Commonwealth of Virginia.
(Added “E” 6-11-90-Effective Upon Passage ; Amended “4” 12-30-96-Effective 1-10-97)
F. Disabled Veterans. No license fee shall be required for a motor vehicle registered in the Town of Front Royal which is owned and regularly used by persons qualified to receive special state license plates as disabled veterans or their un-remarried surviving spouses under Section 46.2-739 of the Code of Virginia.
(Added (F) 2-13-06-Effective Upon Passage)
160-3 ANNUAL LICENSE FEES; PRORATION
A. Annual fees. The annual license fee for motor vehicles, trailers or semitrailers are:
Chapter 160 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 160
160-3
1. Upon each passenger automobile, station wagon, motor home, bus, truck or similar motor vehicle: twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
2. Upon each motorcycle, motor scooter or other similar vehicle: fifteen dollars ($15.00).
3. Upon each trailer, semitrailer or any vehicle without motive power, except mobile homes: fifteen dollars ($15.00). Each such trailer, semitrailer or vehicle without motive power with a gross weight of one thousand five hundred (1,500) pounds or less shall be exempt from these requirements.
4. No fee of any kind shall be charged for any passenger vehicle, pickup or panel truck bearing lawful prisoner of war license plates issued by the Commonwealth of Virginia in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Virginia, Section 46.2-746.
(Added 4-24-89-Effective Upon Passage)
5. Twelve dollars ($12.00) for each motor vehicle bearing Virginia National Guard license plates issued by the Commonwealth of Virginia in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Virginia, Section 46.2-744.
(Added 4-24-89-Effective Upon Passage)
6. In no event shall the fees described in subsections 1-5 be greater than the amount of the license tax imposed by the Commonwealth of Virginia on the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer.
(Added (6) 4-24-89-Effective Upon Passage ; Amended Entire Section 2-25-91-Effective 3-1-91)
(Amended Entire Section 6-10-96-Effective 7-1-96 ; Amended Entire Section 6-28-10-Effective 7-1-10)
B. Proration of fees. All motor vehicles registered as of the effective date of this subsection shall pay a registration licensing fee equal to one-twelfth (1/12) of all fees required by Subsection A of this section, computed to the nearest cent, multiplied by the number of months in the licensing period of such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer.
C. Refunds. In the event that the vehicle license fee is no longer required because of sale, destruction or other circumstances pertaining to the motor vehicle, the owner may provide adequate documentation showing proof of sale, destruction, or other circumstance along with written request for refund to the Town of Front Royal and receive a refund. The refund will be the prorated cost of the sticker, based on the total number of unexpired months remaining divided by the total number of months for which the sticker was valid. The unexpired months shall be computed in whole numbers, and fractions of unexpired months shall not be counted. In order to qualify for a refund, if applicable, the motor vehicle sticker must be removed from display on the windshield and surrendered at the Town Hall. No refunds shall be paid on applications made after May 15 of the license year.
(Added 9-24-90-Effective Upon Passage ; Amended 12-30-96-Effective 7-10-97)
(Amended 4-27-20-Effective Upon Passage ; Removed (D-Refunds)4-27-20-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 160 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 160
160-4
160-4 PAYMENT OF FEE TO MANAGER; PREREQUISITE PAYMENT OF PERSONAL PROPERTY TAXES
A. License fees shall be paid to the Town Manager or his authorized agent upon application on the forms furnished for that purpose.
B. No motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer shall be locally licensed unless and until the applicant shall have produced satisfactory evidence that all personal property taxes upon the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer to be licensed have been paid which have been properly assessed or are assessable against the applicant by the Town.
(Amended 160-4(C) 12-10-90-Effective Upon Passage ; Extension of (C) 1-11-93-Effective Upon Passage)
(Repealed (C “Issuance of a Joint Town/County Decal”) 12-13-93-Effective 3-15-94)
160-5 LICENSE YEAR
The phrase "license year" shall mean the period from June 5th of each year to June 5th of the following year.
(Amended 12-30-96-Effective 7-10-97 ; Amended/Added A & B 11-23-09-Effective 1-1-10)
(Removed (A & B) and Amended 4-27-20-Effective Upon Passage)
160-6 ISSUANCE AND ATTACHMENT OF STICKER
Upon the payment of the prescribed fee, the Town Manager or his authorized agent may upon request, issue to the applicant one (1) sticker which shall be securely fastened to the front windshield of the vehicle for which it was issued in a position to be clearly visible and in a condition to be clearly legible.
(Amended (B) 12-10-90-Effective 1-1-91 ; Extension of (B) 1-11-93-Effective Upon Passage)
(Repealed (B “Issuance of a Joint Town/County Decal”) 12-13-93-Effective 3-15-94)
(Amended 4-27-20-Effective Upon Passage)
160-7 DUPLICATE OR REPLACEMENT LICENSE PLATE OR STICKER; FEE
In the event that any sticker is lost or mutilated or becomes illegible, the person entitled thereto shall make application for and obtain a duplicate or substitute therefore, upon furnishing information which is satisfactory to the Town Manager or his agent and upon payment of a replacement fee of one dollar ($1.) .
(Added 4-24-89-Effective Upon Passage ; Amended (B) 12-10-90-Effective Upon Passage)
(Extension of (B) 1-11-93-Effective Upon Passage)
(Repealed (B “Issuance of a Joint Town/County Decal”) 12-13-93-Effective 3-15-94)
(Removed “license plate” 4-27-20-Effective Upon Passage)
160-8 TRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE PLATE OR STICKER
License plates or stickers shall not be transferable between owners.
Chapter 160 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 160
160-5
160-9 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class 4 misdemeanor. The police officers of the Town are authorized to enforce the prohibitions of this chapter by issuing citations, summonses, parking tickets (Notice of Violation) or uniform traffic summonses.
(Amended 9-11-00-Effective Upon Passage ; Amended Entire Section 6-27-16-Effective 7-1-16)
160-10 EXEMPTIONS
No annual registration fee prescribed in this chapter shall be required for any one (1) motor vehicle owned and used personally by any veteran who has either lost or lost the use of one (1) or both legs or an arm or a hand or who is blind or who is permanently and totally disabled, as certified by the Veterans Administration. Any such vehicle shall display special permit red, white and blue plates of a type approved by the Town Clerk. The Town Clerk shall prescribe application forms for such exemptions, and the application shall be accompanied by a statement that such veteran has been so designated or classified by the Veterans Administration as to meet the requirements of this section and that such disability is service-connected. For the purposes of this section, a person shall be considered blind if he has a permanent impairment of both eyes of the following status: central visual acuity of 20/200 or less in the better eye, with corrective glasses, or central visual activity of more than 20/200 if there is a field defect in which the peripheral field has contracted to such an extent that the widest diameter of visual field subtends an angular distance no greater than twenty degrees (20 °) in the better eye.
(Amended (B) 12-10-90-Effective 1-1-91 ; Extension of (B) 1-11-93-Effective Upon Passage)
(Repealed (B) “Issuance of a Joint Town/County Decal” 12-13-93-Effective 3-15-94)
Chapter 167 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 167
167-1
Chapter 167
WEAPONS
Sections:
167-1 DEFINITIONS
167-2 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS
167-3 DISCHARGE OF PNEUMATIC GUNS
167-4 DISCHARGE OF MISSILE PROJECTING WEAPONS
167-5 THROWING OF STONES
167-6 URBAN ARCHERY
167-7 VIOLATIONS
Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal 3-11-85 (Chapter 32 of the 1965 Code including former 32-1 “Carrying of Concealed Weapons” was amended from “Carrying Pistols, Dirks, etc”5-14-84; former 32-7 “Possession of Weapons on Parks or Other Recreational Areas” was enacted 2-24-75; former 32-2 “Furnishing Pistols, Dirks, etc. to Minors under Eighteen Years of Age” was deleted at time of adoption 3-11-85; 167-3 “Discharging of Firearms and Other Missile-projecting Devices was amended at time of adoption in 1985). 167-1 “Carrying of Concealed Weapons” was repealed 5-14-07; 167-5 “Possession of Weapons in Parks and Recreation Areas” was amended to remove “pistol, rifle, shotgun” 5-14-07; Entire Chapter amended by Ord. 3-12 on 1-23-12. Other amendments noted where applicable.
167-1 DEFINITIONS
ARROW – A shaft-like projectile intended to be shot from a bow.
AMMUNITION – A cartridge, pellet, ball, missile, or projectile adapted for use in a weapon.
BOW – Any longbow, recurve bow, compound bow, or crossbow having a peak draw of 10 pounds or more, intended and capable of shooting an arrow. The “bow” does not include bows that have a peak draw of less than 10 pounds or are intended to be used principally at toys.
FIREARM – Any weapon which will, or is designed to, or may be readily converted to, expel a projectile, or in which ammunition may be used or discharged by explosion; provided, however, that stud nailing guns, rivet guns, and similar construction equipment neither designed nor intended as weapons, shall not be deemed firearms.
PNEUMATIC GUN – Any implement designed as a gun that will expel a BB pellet, or other ammunition by action of pneumatic pressure. This definition shall include a paintball gun that expels by action of pneumatic pressure plastic balls filled with pain for the purpose of marking the point of impact.
RESONABLE CARE – The use of pneumatic guns such that the gun is being discharged so that its BBs, pellets, or other ammunition will be contained on the property by a backstop, earthen embankment or fence. The discharge of BBs, pellets, or other ammunition across or over the bounds or property shall create the rebuttable presumption that the use of the pneumatic gun was not conducted with reasonable care.
Chapter 167 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 167
167-2
TOWN COUNCIL – The Town Council of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia.
167-2 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS
A. No person shall discharge a firearm of any description within the Town, with the exception of the following:
1. Any law enforcement officer in the performance of official duties;
2. Any other person whose said willful act is otherwise justified or excusable at law in the protection of life or property, or is otherwise specifically authorized by law. This shall not apply to control of wildlife by non law enforcement personnel;
(Amended (2) 3-28-16-Effective Upon Passage)
3. Any otherwise lawful discharge while actually engaged in target practice on shooting ranges or other facilities lawfully established and maintained;
4. The use of blank ammunition at athletic events, military funerals, theatrical performances or events of similar character; or,
5. Taking of a deer under a kill permit pursuant to Code of Virginia § 29.1-529.
(Amended (5) 3-28-16-Effective Upon Passage)
167-3 DISCHARGE OF PNEUMATIC GUNS
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any pneumatic gun in the Town that are in the opinion of the Town Council so heavily populated as to make such conduct dangerous to the inhabitants thereof:
1. In or within 300 feet of any dwelling, commercial building, or shelter for animals, with the exception of the following:
a. Any otherwise lawful discharge while actually engaged in target practice on shooting ranges or other facilities lawfully established and maintained;
b. On other property where firearms may be legally discharged; or,
c. On private property with permission of the owner or legal possessor thereof when conducted with reasonable care to prevent a projectile from crossing the bounds of the property.
B. It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 16 to use a pneumatic gun unless such minor is under the supervision of a parent, guardian, or other adult supervisor approved by a
Chapter 167 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 167
167-3
parent or guardian of such minor. Minors above the age of 16 may, with the written consent of a parent or guardian, use a pneumatic gun on private property with the consent of the owner. Any minor, whether permitted by a parent or guardian to use a pneumatic gun or not, shall be responsible for obeying all laws, regulations, and restrictions governing such use.
167-4 DISCHARGE OF MISSILE PROJECTING WEAPONS
A. It shall be unlawful to discharge any non-firearm or non-pneumatic missile projecting gun or weapons to include bows, crossbows, and slingshots within the Town, with the exception of the following:
1. Any law enforcement officer in the performance of official duties;
2. Any other person whose said willful act is otherwise justified or excusable at law in the protection of life or property, or is otherwise is specifically authorized by law;
3. Any otherwise lawful discharge while actually engaged in target practice on shooting ranges or other facilities lawfully established and maintained; and,
4. Lawfully hunting wildlife pursuant to the Urban Archery regulations provided below.
(Amended (4) by adding “wildlife” in place of “deer” 9-23-13-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended (4) 3-28-16-Effective Upon Passage)
5. Target shooting of bows and crossbows is permitted with appropriate backstop on property with written consent of the owner of the property.
(Added (5) 3-28-16-Effective Upon Passage)
167-5 THROWING OF STONES
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw a stone or other missile in the streets or public property with the intent to do harm to people, animals, or property.
167-6 URBAN ARCHERY
Archery hunting is permitted within the Town limits by licensed hunters during an approved Virginia Department of Game and Inland Fisheries (DGIF) Archery Season. In addition to the urban archery season for deer, archery deer hunting is also allowed during the early archery deer season, the general firearms deer season, and the late archery deer season. Hunting for other wildlife is permitted only during the season approved by DGIF. Licensed archery hunters must abide by all applicable sections of the Virginia State Code and Virginia Hunting Regulations (including bag limits and tagging/checking requirements). It shall be unlawful for any person, while archery hunting, to violate any of the following additional Town restrictions:
Chapter 167 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 167
167-4
A. Discharge of an arrow is permitted only in order to hunt wildlife in season or for target practice. No discharge of an arrow shall be made toward any animal other than those in approved hunting season.
B. Any person discharging archery equipment shall, at all times while engaged in such activity, have in their possession written permission from the landowner(s) to discharge such weapon on the private property. Approval from landowner(s) of a total aggregate, contiguous area of one-half (1/2) acres at minimum is required to conduct archery hunting.
C. No person shall discharge archery equipment from, over, or across any street, sidewalk, alley, roadway, or public place within the Town limits or toward any building or dwelling in such a manner that an arrow may strike it.
D. No person shall discharge archery equipment unless from an elevated position of at least ten (10) feet above the surrounding terrain. Any disabled hunter unable to hunt from such platform must comply with all regulations established by the Virginia Department of Game and Inland Fisheries.
E. Except for target shooting, discharge of archery equipment is not permitted within one hundred (100) feet of any dwelling except with written consent of the owner of said structure.
F. Discharge of archery equipment is not permitted within one hundred (100) feet of any school property line. Use of archery equipment on school property for school sanctioned activities shall be excluded from this restriction.
G. Any person discharging archery equipment shall use reasonable care to ensure the arrow does not cross any property line and enter any property on which the hunter does not have permission to hunt. The discharge of an arrow across or over the boundaries of a property for which no permission has been given by the property owner shall create a rebuttable presumption that the use of the archery equipment was not conducted with reasonable care.
H. The hunter is responsible for the disposition of the animal carcass to the local/regional landfill. Carcasses shall be double bagged. Field dressing of the animal shall be by agreement between the landowner and the hunter. No field dressing of the animal shall occur on Town owned property without express written permission from the Town Manager or designee.
I. No person shall hunt within the Town limits by use of dog or dogs.
(Added Entire Section 3-28-16-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 167 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 167
167-5
167-7 VIOLATIONS
A. Violations of this Section involving firearms shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) and twelve (12) months in jail.
(Amended 3-28-16 by changing Class and adding fines-Effective Upon Passage)
B. Violations of this Section involving pneumatic guns, missile projecting weapons, or throwing stones shall constitute a Class 4 misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
C. Violations of the Urban Archery Section shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) and twelve (12) months in jail.
(Added (C) 3-28-16-Effective Upon Passage)
(Ord. No. 3-12 Amended Entire Chapter/Section 1-23-12-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 170 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 170
170-1
Chapter 170
WEEDS AND DEBRIS
Sections:
170-1 DEFNITIONS
170-2 REMOVAL OF HIGH GRASS, WEEDS AND FOREIGN GROWTH
170-3 REMOVAL OF TRASH; TOWN ACTION ON FAILURE OF OWNER TO REMOVE
170-4 NOTICE TO OWNER WHEN UNKNOWN
Adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal 3-11-85 (Chapter 13 of the 1965 Code. Section 13-15, 13-1`6 and 13-18 were repealed 1-8-68). Other amendments noted where applicable.
170-1 DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Section:
DEBRIS - Includes cuttings of weeds, trees or bushes, trash, junk, or any other material which may provide a hiding place for snakes or rats, or anything or any condition which may be a fire hazard, breeding place for mosquitoes or which gives off obnoxious or offensive odors.
FOREIGN GROWTH - Plants other than grass and weeds that the provisions of this Chapter also require property owners to cut, including poison ivy, poison oak, poison sumac, and invasive alien plants that are identified by the Virginia Department of Conservation and Recreation; however, the following are specifically excluded as being classified as foreign growth when they are routinely maintained and kept in reasonably good health: shrubs and flowers that are customarily used for ornamental purposes, common garden vegetables, fruit, trees, and underbrush within a forest or woodland area.
(Amended to “Foreign Growth” 11-27-17-Effective Upon Passage)
170-2 REMOVAL OF HIGH GRASS, WEEDS AND FOREIGN GROWTH
A. The owner of any developed or undeveloped property located within the Town shall, whenever any such growth exceeds a height of ten inches (10”), cut the grass, weeds and foreign growth on such property, excluding areas that are farther than one hundred (100) feet from the principal building on such property, and from any building situated on an adjacent property. Nothing herein shall apply to property zoned for or in active farming operation. Any such owner failing, to cut such grass, weeds and foreign growth, shall be in violation of this Section and shall be subject to a civil penalty of fifty dollars ($50) for the first such violation or violations arising from the same set of operative facts, and a civil penalty of $100 for subsequent violations not arising from the same set of operative facts occurring within 12 months of the first violation.
Chapter 170 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 170
170-2
Each business day during which the same violation is found to have existed shall constitute a separate offense. In no event shall a series of violations arising from the same set of operative facts result in civil penalties exceeding $3,000 in a twelve (12) month period. Alternatively, the Town Manager, should he deem it necessary, may, after ten (10) days’ written notice to the owner of record, with one such notice being sufficient notice for the entire growing season, have such grass weeds or foreign growth cut by the Town’s agents or employees, in which event the costs and expenses thereof shall be chargeable to and paid by the owner of such property, and any such charges may be collected by the Town as taxes are collected. Every charge authorized by this Section with which the owner of such property shall have been assessed and which remains unpaid shall constitute a lien against such property ranking on a parity with liens for unpaid taxes and enforceable in the same manner as provided in Articles 3 (§58.1-3940 et seq.) and 4 (§58.1-3965 et seq.) of Chapter 39 of Title 58.1.
B. Any owner aggrieved by the decision of the Town Manager under paragraph A above may appeal the herein described notice within ten (10) days of the date of its receipt, in which case, all efforts to cause said grass, weeds, or foreign growth to be cut by the Town shall cease until the appeal has been decided by Town Council.
(Ord. No. 10-08 Amended Entire Section 9-22-08-Effective Upon Passage)
(Entire Section Amended 11-27-17-Effective Upon Passage)
170-3 REMOVAL OF TRASH; TOWN ACTION ON FAILURE OF OWNER TO REMOVE
A. The owner of property located within the Town shall, when the Town Manager, acting as agent for the Town Council, determines that trash, garbage, litter, debris and/or other substances exist on the property, which might endanger the health or safety of other residents of the Town, after ten (10) days' notice, remove therefrom any and all such trash, garbage, refuse, litter, debris and other substances in a manner authorized by law. Any such owner failing to comply with the notice shall be subject to a civil penalty of fifty dollars ($50) for the first such violation or violations arising from the same set of operative facts, and a civil penalty of one hundred dollars ($100) for subsequent violations not arising from the same set of operative facts occurring within twelve (12) months of the first violation. Each business day during which the same violation is found to have existed shall constitute a separate offense. In no event shall a series of violations arising from the same set of operative facts result in civil penalties exceeding three thousand dollars ($3,000) in a twelve (12) month period. Alternatively, the Town Manager, should he deem it necessary, may, after ten (10) days’ notice, have such trash, garbage, refuse, litter, debris and other substances, which might endanger the health of other residents of the Town, removed by Town’s agents or employees, in which event the costs and expenses thereof shall be chargeable to and paid by the owner of such property and any such changes may be collected by the Town as taxes are collected. Every charge authorized by this Section with which the owner of such property shall have been assessed and which remains unpaid shall constitute a lien against such property ranking on a parity with liens for unpaid local taxes and enforceable in the same manner as provided in Articles 3 (§58.1-3940 et seq.) and 4 (§58.1-3965 et seq.) of Chapter 39 of Title 58.1.
Chapter 170 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 170
170-3
B. Any owner aggrieved by the decision of the Town Manager, under paragraph A above, may appeal the herein described notice within ten (10) days of the date of its receipt, in which case, all efforts to cause said grass, weeds, or foreign growth to be cut by the Town shall cease until the appeal has been decided by Town Council.
(Entire Section Amended 11-27-17-Effective Upon Passage)
170-4 NOTICE TO OWNER WHEN UNKNOWN
If the owner of the property cannot be found, the notice mentioned in Sections 170-2 and 170-3 may be given to the owner’s agent and tenant or, if none, then such notice may be given by publication of the same once in a newspaper published or circulated in the Town.
(Entire Section Amended 11-27-17-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-1
Chapter 175
ZONING
Sections:
GENERAL PROVISIONS
175-1 LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY; INTENT AND PURPOSE
175-2 WORD USAGE
175-3 DEFINITIONS
ZONING MAP; DISTRICTS; BOUNDARIES
175-4 ADOPTION OF ZONING MAP
175-5 IDENTIFICATION OF OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
175-6 CHANGES ON ZONING MAP
175-7 LOCATION OF OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
175-8 REPLACEMENT OF OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
175-9 ENUMERATION OF DISTRICTS
175-9.1 CLASSIFICATION OF ANNEXED TERRITORY
175-9.2 INTERPRETATION OF BOUNDARIES
175-9.3 EXCLUDED USES
175-9.4 TEMPORARY EMERGENCY USES
175-10 (RESERVED)
175-10.1 (RESERVED)
AGRICULTURE AND OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION DISTRICT (A-1)
175-10.2 STATEMENT OF INTENT
175-10.3 USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT
175-10.4 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL PERMIT.
175-10.5 AREA AND FRONTAGE
175-10.6 SETBACK
175-10.7 YARDS
175-10.8 LOT COVERAGE
175-10.9 HEIGHT
175-10.10 STANDARDS
ESTATE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (RE)
175-10.11 STATEMENT OF INTENT
175-10.12 USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT
175-10.13 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL PERMIT
175-10.14 MODEL HOMES AND SALES OFFICES
175-10.15 AREA AND FRONTAGE
175-10.16 SETBACK
175-10.17 YARDS
175-10.18 LOT COVERAGE
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-2
175-10.19 HEIGHT
175-10.20 CORNER LOTS
SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-S)
175-10.21 STATEMENT OF INTENT
175-10.22 USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT
175-10.23 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL PERMIT
175-10.24 MODEL HOMES AND SALES OFFICES
175-10.25 AREA AND FRONTAGE
175-10.26 SETBACK
175-10.27 YARDS
175-10.28 LOT COVERAGE
175-10.29 HEIGHT
175-10.30 CORNER LOTS
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-1)
175-11 STATEMENT OF INTENT
175-12 USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT
175-12.1 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL PERMIT
175-12.2 MODEL HOMES AND SALES OFFICES
175-13 AREA AND FRONTAGE
175-14 SETBACK
175-15 YARDS
175-16 LOT COVERAGE
175-17 HEIGHT
175-18 CORNER LOTS
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-1A)
175-18.1 STATEMENT OF INTENT
175-18.2 USE REGULATIONS
175-18.3 AREA
175-18.4 HEIGHT
175-18.5 MINIMUM YARD DIMENSIONS
175-18.6 LOT COVERAGE
175-18.7 OFF-STREET PARKING
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-2)
175-19 STATEMENT OF INTENT
175-20 USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT
175-20.1 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL PERMIT
175-20.2 MODEL HOMES AND SALES OFFICES
175-21 AREA
175-22 SETBACK
175-23 FRONTAGE
175-24 YARDS
175-25 LOT COVERAGE
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-3
175-26 HEIGHT
175-27 CORNER LOTS
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-3)
175-28 STATEMENT OF INTENT
175-29 USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT
175-30 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL PERMIT
175-30.1 MODEL HOMES AND SALES OFFICES
175-31 AREA
175-32 SETBACK
175-33 SETBACK WIDTHS
175-34 YARDS
175-35 LOT COVERAGE
175-36 HEIGHT
175-37 CORNER LOTS
PLANNED NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (PND)
175-37.1 STATEMENT OF INTENT
175-37.2 EVALUATION CRITERIA
175-37.3 PERMITTED USES
175-37.4 STANDARDS
175-37.5 REVIEW AND CREATION OF THE PLANNED NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
175-37.6 OPEN SPACE STANDARDS
175-37.7 OFF-STREET PARKING
175-37.8 LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING
175-37.9 DENSITY BONUSES
175-37.10 TRAFFIC IMPROVEMENTS
175-37.11 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
175-37.12 PERIMETER BOUNDARY
175-37.13 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
175-37.14 UTILITIES
175-37.15 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
175-37.16 NEIGHBORHOOD RECREATIONAL USES
175-37.17 COMMERCIAL USES DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
175-37.18 DEVELOPMENT REVIEW
175-37.19 DEFINITIONS
COMMUNITY BUSINESS DISTRICT (C-1)
175-38 STATEMENT OF INTENT
175-39 USE REGULATIONS
175-40 AREA REGULATIONS
175-41 MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS
175-42 MINIMUM SETBACK AND YARD DIMENSIONS
175-43 OPEN SPACE REGULATIONS
175-44 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-4
175-45 (RESERVED)
DOWNTOWN BUSINESS DISTRICT (C-2)
175-46 STATEMENT OF INTENT
175-47 USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT
175-48 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL PERMIT
175-49 AREA REGULATIONS
175-50 OPEN SPACE AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS
175-51 FRONTAGE AND YARDS
175-52 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
175-53 (RESERVED)
HIGHWAY CORRIDOR BUSINESS DISTRICT (C-3)
175-53.1 STATEMENT OF INTENT
175-53.2 USE REGULATIONS
175-53.3 AREA REGULATIONS
175-53.4 MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS
175-53.5 MINIMUM SETBACK AND YARD DIMENSIONS
175-53.6 OPEN SPACE REGULATIONS
175-53.7 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
175-53.8 OFF-STREET PARKING
MIXED-USE CAMPUS DEVELOPMENT (MCD) DISTRICT
175-53.9 STATEMENT OF INTENT
175-53.10 PERMITTED USES
175-53.11 REVIEW AND CREATION
175-53.12 SUBSTANTIAL CONFORMANCE TO CONCEPT PLAN
175-53.13 AREA REGULATIONS
175-53.14 MAXIMUM HEIGHT
175-53.15 MINIMUM SETBACK AND YARD DIMENSIONS
175-53.16 STANDARDS
LIMITED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (I-1)
175-54 STATEMENT OF INTENT
175-55 USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT
175-56 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL PERMIT
175-57 AREA
175-58 SETBACK
175-59 FRONTAGE AND YARDS
175-60 HEIGHT
175-61 LOT COVERAGE
175-62 CORNER LOTS
175-63 PLANS REQUIRED; ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-5
INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT DISTRICT (I-2)
175-64 STATEMENT OF INTENT
175-65 USE REGULATIONS
175-66 AREA REGULATIONS
175-67 MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS
175-68 MINIMUM YARD DIMENSIONS
175-69 LOT COVERAGE
175-70 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
175-71 LOCATIONS FOR DETERMINATION OF PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
175-72 ADMINISTRATION/ENFORCEMENT OF PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
175-73 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
FLOODPLAIN ZONING
175-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS
175-75 DEFINITIONS
175-76 ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS
175-77 OVERLAY CONCEPT
175-78 FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
175-79 DISTRICT PROVISIONS
175-80 GENERAL STANDARDS
175-81 SPECIFIC STANDARDS
175-81.1 STANDARDS FOR APPROXIMATED FLOODPLAIN
175-81.2 STANDARDS FOR THE FLOODWAY DISTRICT
175-81.3 FLOODPLAIN VARIANCES: FACTORS TO BE CONSIDERED
HISTORIC DISTRICT OVERLAY AREAS
175-82 STATEMENT OF INTENT
175-83 DEFINITIONS
175-84 BOARD OF ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW
175-85 CREATION OF HISTORIC DISTRICTS AND LANDMARKS
175-86 CRITERIA FOR SELECTION OF HISTORIC DISTRICTS OR LANDMARKS
175-87 BOUNDARIES OF HISTORIC DISTRICTS OR LANDMARKS
175-88 CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS REQUIRED
175-89 BOARD REVIEW OF MAJOR ACTIONS
175-89.1 ACTIONS REQUIRING ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW
175-90 EXEMPTIONS FROM REVIEW
175-90.1 AUTHORITY TO STOP WORK
175-91 GUIDELINES AND CRITERIA FOR REVIEW
175-92 ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS
175-93 BUILDING DEMOLITION AND RELOCATION
175-94 APPEALS
175-95 MAINTENANCE, PUBLIC SAFETY AND PERMITTED USES
175-96 YARD VARIANCES
175-97 (RESERVED)
175-98 EXEMPTION FOR PUBLIC WORKS
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-6
ENTRANCE CORRIDOR OVERLAY DISTRICT (EC)
175-98.1 STATEMENT OF INTENT
175-98.2 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
175-98.3 DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
175-98.4 REVIEW FOR DESIGN COMPLIANCE
175-98.5 SITE AND DESIGN STANDARDS
175-98.6 ADOPTION OF STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES.
175-98.7 APPEALS
SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS
175-99 WIDENING OF STREETS OR HIGHWAYS
175-100 RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND TRAVEL TRAILERS
175-101 VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS
175-102 FENCES
175-103 ACCESS TO STREETS, SERVICES, FIRE PROTECTION AND PARKING
175-104 OFF-STREET PARKING
175-105 OFF-STREET LOADING
175-106 SIGNS
175-107 NURSING AND CONVALESCENT HOMES, INCLUDING HOMES FOR THE ELDERLY
175-107.1 DAY CARE AND DAY-CARE FACILITIES IN RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS BY SPECIAL PERMIT
175-107.2 BED AND BREAKFAST USES IN RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS BY SPECIAL PERMIT
175-107.3 BED AND BREAKFAST USES IN COMMERCIAL C-1 AND C-2 ZONING DISTRICTS BY SPECIAL USE PERMIT
175-108 PROFESSIONAL OFFICES
175-108.1 HOME OCCUPATIONS
175-109 TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION TRAILERS
175-109.1 TEMPORARY TRAILERS; NONRESIDENTIAL USES
175-109.2 PORTABLE STORAGE CONTAINERS
175-110 AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS
175-110.1 INOPERATIVE MOTOR VEHICLES
175-110.2 PARKING OF TRUCKS AND SEMITRAILERS
175-110.3 MOTOR VEHICLE PAINTING AND BODY WORK
175-110.4 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR WIRELESS TELEPHONE TELECOMMUNICATION TOWERS
175.110.5 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR URBAN AGRICULTURE
175-111 SHOPPING CENTERS
175-112 TOWNHOUSES
175-113 APARTMENTS
175-114 THROUGH 175-122 (RESERVED)
175-123 MANUFACTURED HOMES
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-7
NONCONFORMING USE
175-124 CONTINUATION
175-125 VESTED RIGHTS
175-126 DISCONTINUANCE
175-127 PARKING EXEMPTION FOR THE REFUSE OF EXISTING PROPERTIES
175-128 NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD
175-129 CHANGES OF USE
175-130 EXPANSIONS AND OTHER TYPES OF ALTERATIONS
175-131 REPLACEMENT, REMOVAL, REPAIR AND RECONSTRUCTION
175-132 PERCENT OF DAMAGE
175-133 USES UNDER SPECIAL PERMIT PROVISIONS
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
175-134 ZONING PERMITS
175-134.1 FOUNDATION LOCATION INSPECTIONS
175-135 CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY
175-136 SPECIAL USE PERMITS
175-137 FEES, CHARGES AND EXPENSES
175-138 MEMBERSHIP AND TERMS OF OFFICE OF BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
175-139 POWERS OF BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
175-140 RULES AND REGULATIONS OF THE BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
175-141 APPEALS TO BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
175-142 APPEAL PROCEDURE
175-143 PUBLIC HEARING OF APPLICATION FOR APPEAL
175-144 APPEAL OF DECISION OF BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
175-145 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
175-146 AMENDMENTS
175-147 ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL
175-147.1 ADMINISTRATIVE VARIANCES
175-148 EFFECT ON PERMITS ISSUED PRIOR TO ADOPTION
175-149 CONDITIONAL ZONING PROFFERS IN REZONING APPLICATIONS
175-150 CONDITIONAL ZONING PROFFERS IN REZONING APPLICATIONS; HIGH GROWTH PERIODS
Originally Adopted 4-10-78 and again adopted by the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal 3-11-85. (Chapter 3 of the 1965 Code including the following amendments 10-23-78; 3-12-79; 5-12-80; 5-26-80; 1-4-84; 7-18-84) Added 175-10.1 “Permitted Child Care” 10-23-89; Amended 175-97 “Real Estate Tax Exemption for Rehabilitation” 10-27-97; Amended 175-3 “Definitions” by deleting "street line" 8-14-98; Removed 175-10.1 “Permitted Child Care” 6-23-13; Removed 175-45 “Off Street Parking” 6-22-15. Removed 175-53 “Plans Required” 6-22-15; Moved 175-97 “Real Estate Tax Exemption for Rehabilitation” to (75-75) 3-23-15; Entire Chapter Amendment including Sections 175-114 through 175-122 being repealed 6-22-15. Other amendments noted where applicable.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
175-1 LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY; INTENT AND PURPOSE
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-8
A. By Act of the General Assembly of Virginia as provided in Chapter 22, Article 7, Section 15.2-2280 through 15.2-2316, Code of Virginia, and amendments thereto, the governing body of any county or municipality may, by ordinance, classify the territory under its jurisdiction or any substantial portion thereof into districts of such number, shape and size as it may deem best suited to carry out the purposes of this Article, and in each district it may regulate, restrict, permit, prohibit and determine the following:
(Amended VA Code References 9-25-00-Effective Upon Passage)
1. The use of land, buildings, structures and other premises for agricultural, business, industrial, residential, floodplain and other specific uses.
2. The size, height, area, bulk, location, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, maintenance, razing or removal of structures.
3. The areas and dimensions of land, water and airspace to be occupied by buildings, structures and uses and of courts, yards and other open spaces to be left unoccupied by uses and structures, including variations in the sizes of lots based on whether a public or community water supply or sewer system is available and used.
4. The excavation or mining of soil or other natural resources.
B. It is ordained by the Town Council of Front Royal, Virginia, for the purpose of promoting the health, safety or general welfare of the public and of further accomplishing the objectives of Section 15.2-2283, that the following be adopted as the Zoning Ordinance of Front Royal, Virginia, together with the accompanying map, and shall supersede the Zoning Ordinance of Front Royal, Virginia, dated August 1970. To these ends, this chapter has been designed to:
(Amended VA Code References 9-25-00-Effective Upon Passage)
1. Provide for adequate light, air, convenience of access and safety from fire, flood and other dangers.
2. Reduce or prevent congestion in the public streets.
3. Facilitate the creation of a convenient, attractive and harmonious community.
4. Facilitate the provision of adequate police and fire protection, disaster evacuation, civil defense, transportation, water, sewerage, flood protection, schools, parks, forests, playgrounds, recreational facilities, airports and other public requirements.
5. Protect against destruction of or encroachment upon historic areas.
6. Protect against one (1) or more of the following: overcrowding of land, undue density of population in relation to the community facilities existing or available, obstruction of light and air, danger and congestion in travel and transportation or loss of life, health or property from fire, flood, panic or other dangers.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-9
7. Encourage economic development activities that provide desirable employment and enlarge the tax base.
175-2 WORD USAGE
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; words used in the singular number include the plural number, and words in the plural number include the singular number, unless the obvious construction of the wording indicates otherwise.
B. The word "shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
C. Unless otherwise specified, all distances shall be measured horizontally and at right angles to the line in relation to which the distance is specified.
D. The word "building" includes the word "structure;" the word "lot" includes the words "plot" and "parcel."
E. The word "used" shall be deemed also to include "erected," "reconstructed," "altered," "placed" or "moved."
F. The terms "land use" and "use of land" shall be deemed also to include "building use" and "use of building."
G. The word "state" means the Commonwealth of Virginia.
H. The word "town" means the Town of Front Royal, Virginia.
I. The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as an individual.
175-3 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and terms are herein defined as follows:
ACCESS - A public or private right-of-way providing the ability to enter, approach or pass to and from an area to another area.
ACCESSORY BUILDING/ACCESSORY STRUCTURE - A building or structure that is subordinate to, and located on the same lot as the principal permitted use of the property, of which, the accessory building or accessory structure is used for purposes that are clearly incidental to that of the principal permitted use of the property, and which is not attached by any part of a common wall or roof to the main building, or buildings, if any. An accessory building shall not exceed the height of the main building(s) located on the property; shall not be located within a required yard area that abuts a public road; and shall not be permitted where no main building exists on the property, except in the following: (i) temporary buildings or structures permitted under this
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-10
chapter, (ii) accessory buildings without utilities that are used for storage purposes and do not exceed 256 square feet, and (iii) buildings, such as barns and silos, used for agricultural purposes.
(Amended by adding “Accessory Structure” 7-23-12-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
ACCESSORY USE - A use of a building, lot or portion thereof which is customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal permitted use of the main building or lot. Accessory uses shall include the use of accessory buildings as a separate accessory dwelling unit, provided that the lot is at least 12,000 square feet in size, the accessory building complies with the minimum setback and yard area requirements that are required for main buildings within the applicable zoning district, no more than one accessory dwelling is located on the property, and the accessory dwelling unit does not utilize more than 500 square feet. Urban agriculture is considered an accessory use when the requirements of Section 175-110.5 are complied with.
(Amended by adding “permitted” 7-23-12-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended 6-22-15 and 11-23-15-Effective Upon Passage)
ADMINISTRATOR, THE - The official charged with the administration and enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance.
AGRICULTURE/AGRICULTURAL PURSUITS – The tilling of soil, the raising of crops, horticulture, aquaculture, hydroponics, forestry, gardening, apiculture, livestock and fowl keeping and breeding, farm wineries, roadside stands, tenant houses necessary for the operation of a farm, and the production of natural products with resources primarily derived from the land upon which it is produced. Yard maintenance, landscaping, noncommercial gardening and other customary incidental accessory uses shall not be deemed as "agriculture." Where agricultural uses are permitted under Chapter 175 of the Town Code, the provisions of Section 66-5 pertaining to slaughtering of stock shall not apply, provided that this exemption only applies to small scale slaughtering activities on a farm, and does not apply to slaughterhouses.
(Added 7-23-12-Effective Upon Passage)
AGRICULTURE, URBAN (Urban Agriculture) – An umbrella term that describes a range of food growing practices conducted as an accessory use that may include the raising of crops, horticulture, aquaculture, hydroponics, forestry, gardening, apiculture, and both livestock and fowl keeping, subject to compliance with the regulations of Section 175-110.5.
(Added 11-23-15-Effective Upon Passage)
ALLEY - A public right-of-way which affords only a secondary means of vehicular access to the side or rear of property.
ALL-WEATHER SURFACE - Crushed rock, gravel or similar surface shall constitute an all-weather surface.
AMENDMENT - A change in the Zoning Ordinance and/or Zoning Map granted by the Town Council after review and comment by the Town Planning Commission.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-11
APARTMENT DEVELOPMENT – A property that includes more than one (1) apartment house.
(Added 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
APARTMENT HOUSE - A multifamily structure originally intended, arranged or designed to be occupied by three (3) or more families, each in an individual dwelling unit and living independently of each other. The number of families in permanent residence shall not exceed the number of dwelling units provided. Entranceways through the structure to the units may be either common or separate, and each lot on which the building is located shall be held in single ownership, even though individual units may be sold in accordance with this chapter. Such term shall not include "row house" or "townhouse." Each apartment unit shall occupy space on not more than one (1) story in a structure.
ARCHITECT, REGISTERED - A licensed professional architect registered in the Commonwealth of Virginia by the Department of Professional and Occupational Registration as an architect.
ATTIC - The space between the ceiling beams of the top habitable story and the roof rafters. An "attic" shall be considered a half-story and shall be included in the calculation of building height.
AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARD - See "Junkyard."
AUTOMOBILE PARKING LOT, COMMERCIAL - A lot or portion thereof, other than an automobile sales lot, held out or used for the storage or parking of six (6) or more motor vehicles for a consideration, where service or repair facilities are not permitted. Such parking lot shall not be considered an accessory use; nor shall it be used for the storage of dismantled or wrecked vehicles, parts thereof or junk.
AUTOMOBILE SALES LOT - A lot arranged, designed or used for the storage and display for sale of any new or used motor vehicles capable of independent operation or any type of travel trailer and recreational vehicle, provided that the travel trailer and recreation vehicle is unoccupied, and where repair work is done wholly enclosed within a building.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION - A place of business with pumps and underground storage tanks, having as its purpose the servicing, at retail, of motor vehicles with fuels and lubricants, and including minor repairs and inspections incidental thereto, but not including a general repair shop, paint or body shop, machine shop, vulcanizing shop or any operation requiring the removal or installation of a radiator, engine, cylinder head, crankcase, transmission, differential, fenders, doors, bumpers, grills, glass or other body parts or anybody repairing or painting. All repairs shall be conducted within a fully enclosed building.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD - An area where destroyed, abandoned and obsolete automobiles are disassembled and where parts of said disassembled automobiles are generally sold and where the remaining automobile bodies and their components are temporarily stored until they can be removed or reduced to scrap metal.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-12
BABYSITTING - An activity occurring in any private family home in which nine (9) children or fewer, including children residing on the premises and/or related by blood or marriage to the person who maintains the home, are received for care, protection and guidance during any part of the twenty-four-hour day. A Town business license is required for the care of any children not related by blood or marriage when such service is provided in a private family home during any eleven (11) days or more, either consecutive or nonconsecutive days, in any given month.
(Amended/Replaced Definition of “Babysitting Service” 10-23-89-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended # of children 5-14-90-Effective Upon Passage)
BASEMENT - A story partly underground and having fifty percent (50%) or more of the total exterior wall area exposed. It shall not be occupied for residential purposes until the remainder of the building has been completed. A "basement" shall be counted as a story for the purpose of height requirements.
BAY WINDOW - A convex window frame and pane(s) that projects outward from a house or other structure, which may project not more than three feet (3') into any required yard area.
(Added 7-24-06 - Effective Upon Passage)
BED AND BREAKFAST HOME - A single-family, owner-occupied dwelling with ten (10) or fewer guest rooms in which overnight accommodations and breakfast are provided for transient guests, none of whom remain any more than fourteen (14) consecutive nights. A "bed-and-breakfast home" shall also be known as a "Tourist Home".
(Added 3-12-90-Effective Upon Passage ; Amended #of nights 5-14-90-Effective Upon Passage)
BLOCK - The property bound on all sides by one (1) side of a street or a combination of a street line, railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided land, river, live stream, stream bed or any other barrier to the continuity of development.
BOARDINGHOUSE - See "Lodging House".
(Amended 5-14-90-Effective Upon Passage)
BOARD, THE - The Board of Zoning Appeals of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia.
BREAKPOINT TECHNOLOGY – Means the particular design of a monopole wireless telecommunication tower, certified by an engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of Virginia, that devises a specified point of the structure, referred to as the breakpoint, to have stress concentrated so that the breakpoint is at least five percent (5%) more susceptible to failure than any other point along the structure, so that in the event of a structural failure, the failure will occur at the breakpoint rather than at the base plate, anchor bolts, or any other point on the structure.
(Added 3-24-14-Effective Upon Passage)
BUILDING - A structure having a roof, supported by columns or by walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of any person, animal or chattel.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-13
BUILDING COVERAGE, LOT COVERAGE - All areas on a lot which are under a roof or under projections from buildings.
BUILDING INSPECTOR - An appointed official of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia who is responsible for certifying building inspections.
BUILDING, MAIN - A building in which the principal use of the lot is conducted.
CARETAKER QUARTERS – A dwelling unit located within a building that is used by a business enterprise, and is occupied by the owner or an employee of the business. Only one (1) caretaker quarters shall be permitted per building, and shall not utilize more than twenty percent (20%) of the ground floor area of the building.
(Added 3-12-12-Effective Upon Passage)
CATERING SERVICES – An establishment that prepares meals or food on premise with pickup/delivery for consumption off-site.
(Added 2-28-11-Effective Upon Passage)
CELLAR - A portion of a building having less than fifty percent (50%) of the total exterior wall area exposed. Such a portion of a building shall not be used for habitation. All portions of the total exterior wall area exposed shall be counted for the purpose of height requirements, but shall not be considered a story.
CEMETERY - A place for burial of the human dead.
CHURCH - Buildings or structures primarily intended for organized religious services and associated accessory uses.
(Added 7-23-12-Effective Upon Passage)
CLINIC - An establishment where human patients who are not lodged overnight are admitted for examination or treatment by physicians or dentists.
COMMISSION, THE - See "Planning Commission".
COMMON OPEN SPACE - An open tract or parcel of land owned in undivided interest, not devoted to structures but directly related and adjunct to a development, as herein provided.
COMMUNITY CENTER (public) - A structure designed and constructed for public use which includes a community meeting room, athletic or exercise facilities or similar uses.
(Added 7-28-08-Effective Upon Passage)
CONVALESCENT HOME - See "Nursing Home".
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-14
COVERAGE - See "Building Coverage".
DAYCARE - The provision of care, protection and guidance to a group of children separated from their parents or guardian during a part of the day only.
(Added 10-23-89-Effective Upon Passage ; Amended 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
DENSITY - The number of dwelling units permitted on one (1) acre of land as specified herein.
DEVELOPMENT - The process of erecting or causing to be erected buildings or structures on a lot.
DISTRICT - A portion of the Town of Front Royal within which, on a uniform basis, only certain uses of land and buildings are permitted as set forth in this chapter and within which certain lot areas and other uniform requirements are established.
DOMESTIC PRODUCTS – Processed, cooked, dried or preserved foodstuffs and other agricultural products meant for human consumption, to include, but not limited to, jellies, pickles, herbs, smoked meats, baked goods, candies, canned foods, and other prepared edibles.
(Added 10-10-17-Effective Upon Passage)
DRIVEWAY - A space or area providing access specifically designated and reserved on a lot for the movement of vehicles from one lot to another or from a lot to a public street. "Driveways" for commercial or industrial properties shall be hard surfaced.
DRIVE-IN EATING ESTABLISHMENT - Any place or premises used for sale, dispensing or serving of food, refreshments or beverages in automobiles, including those establishments where customers may serve themselves and may eat or drink the food, refreshments or beverages in motor vehicles on the premises; a refreshment stand; a fast-food or primarily a carry-out establishment.
DUPLEX - A two-family residential structure, with each unit having its own exterior entrance; the residential units may be arranged one above the other, or be semidetached.
DWELLING - A building or portion thereof which is used or intended to be used exclusively for residential purposes and contains one (1) or more dwelling units.
DWELLING, ATTACHED - A dwelling having any portion of each of two (2) walls in common with adjoining dwellings.
DWELLING, DETACHED - A dwelling which is entirely freestanding on a lot.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY - A structure originally arranged or designed to be composed of three (3) or more dwelling units (an apartment house), with the number of families in residence not exceeding the number of dwelling units provided.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-15
DWELLING, SEMIDETACHED - One (1) of two (2) buildings, arranged or designed as dwellings located on abutting walls without openings, and with each building having a separate lot with minimum dimensions required by district regulations.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY - A single residential dwelling unit, other than a mobile home or manufactured home, designed for occupancy by one (1) family, and not located on the same lot as another dwelling unit. (Amended 7-23-12-Effective Upon Passage)
DWELLING, TEMPORARY - A residence designed as a portable dwelling but not necessarily attached to a permanent foundation.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY - A residential building containing not more than two (2) dwelling units, arranged one above the other or side by side, designed for occupancy by not more than two (2) families.
DWELLING UNITS - One (1) room, or rooms connected together, constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy or rental or lease on a weekly, monthly or longer basis and physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units which may be in the same structure and containing independent cooking and sleeping facilities and containing not less than six hundred (600) square feet of residential floor area. Such units shall meet the requirements of the Building Code of the Town of Front Royal.
EASEMENT - A grant by a property owner of the use of his land by another party for a specific purpose. The initial property owner in the agreement may be compensated for the use of his property.
ENGINEER, REGISTERED - A licensed professional engineer registered in the Commonwealth of Virginia by the Department of Professional and Occupational Registration as an engineer.
FALL ZONE – Means an area around the base of a wireless telecommunication tower required to be kept clear of buildings, other than those accessory to the wireless telecommunication tower, for the purpose of containing debris in the event of a tower structural failure. The fall zone is measured by a circular radius around the wireless telecommunication tower that equals the structure’s height.
(Added 3-24-14-Effective Upon Passage)
FAMILY - An individual or group of individuals related by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship. For the purpose of this chapter, the definition of "family" shall include four (4) or fewer unrelated persons living together as a single housekeeping unit.
(Amended 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
FARM PRODUCTS – Ice, wood, charcoal, meats, milk, butter, eggs, poultry, game, vegetables, fruits or other family supplies of a perishable nature or farm products grown or produced by them and not purchased by them for sale. (Added 10-10-17-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-16
FARMERS’ MARKET – A collection of two (2) or more vendors, selling farm or domestic products, garden produce, or nursery products, ornamental or otherwise, which have been grown or produced by the vendor offering the same for sale, in an open-air setting or with temporary or partially enclosed structures.
(Added 10-10-17-Effective Upon Passage)
FAST-FOOD ESTABLISHMENT - See "Drive-in Eating Establishment.”
FENCE - An artificially constructed barrier, made of any material, including but not limited to posts and wire, boards, or masonry intended to prevent escape or intrusion to make a boundary, or serve as screening.
(Amended 2-24-03-Effective Upon Passage)
FLEA MARKET - An assembly of vendors, selling new or used goods in the open air or within temporary structures, which display and sell their wares on the lands of another for a consideration.
(Added 7-23-12-Effective Upon Passage)
FLOODPLAIN - Sections of land, adjacent to bodies of water, which are subject to periodic flooding and inundation as defined or approved by the Department of Housing and Urban Development and/or the Corps of Army Engineers.
FLOOR AREA OF A BUILDING OR BUILDINGS - The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of all buildings on the lot measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls. "Floor area" shall include the area of basements when used for residential, commercial or industrial purposes when such are permitted, but shall not include a basement or portion of a basement used for storage or housing of mechanical or central heating equipment.
FRONTAGE - See "Lot Width."
FUNERAL PARLOR, HOME OR MORTUARY - An establishment used for human funeral services, which shall include facilities on the premises for embalming and may or may not include facilities for the performance of autopsies, other surgical procedures or cremation.
GARAGE, COMMUNAL - A garage used for the storage of vehicles for occupants of lots in the same adjacent block or blocks.
GARAGE, PRIVATE - An accessory building used for the storage of vehicles by the occupants of a lot on which such building is located.
GARAGE, PUBLIC - An accessory building, portion of a principal building or principal buildings used only for the storage of four (4) or more vehicles by others than only those occupants of a lot on which such building is located.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-17
GAS STATION AND GASOLINE SALES – See “Automobile Service Station.”
(Added 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
GOVERNING BODY - The Town Council of Front Royal, Virginia.
GOVERNMENT OFFICES AND BUILDINGS – Offices and structures used primarily for conducting the affairs of government. This definition shall include school maintenance shops and work areas.
(Added 2-28-11-Effective Upon Passage)
HARD SURFACE - Concrete, blacktop and macadam or a similar surface.
HEALTH OFFICIAL (OFFICER) - The Director of the Warren County Department of Health or his designated deputy or a representative of the Virginia Department of Health - Warren County.
HEIGHT OF BUILDING - The vertical distance from the established grade of the center of the front of the building to the highest point of the roof surface of a flat roof, to the deck line for a mansard roof and to the mean height level between the eaves and ridge for hip, gable and gambrel roofs.
HOME OCCUPATION - An occupation conducted entirely within an enclosed dwelling and clearly incidental and secondary to the residential occupancy thereof, carried on by a member or members of the family residing on the premises. All "home occupations" shall meet the standards in Section 175-108.1.
(Amended 10-10-94-Effection Upon Passage)
HOSPITAL - Any institution receiving inpatients and rendering medical, surgical and/or obstetrical care. This shall include general hospitals and institutions in which service is limited to special fields, such as cardiac, eye, ear, nose and throat, pediatric, orthopedic, skin and cancer, mental, tuberculosis, chronic disease and obstetrics. Such terms shall include group homes serving mentally retarded or other developmentally disabled persons.
HOTEL - A building designed or occupied as the more or less temporary abiding place for fourteen (14) or more individuals who are, for compensation, lodged with or without meals, and in which no provision is made for cooking in individual rooms or suites.
JUNKYARD - Any land or building used for the abandonment, storage, keeping, collecting or bailing of paper, rags, scrap metals, other scrap or discarded materials or for the abandonment, demolition, dismantling, storage or salvaging of automobiles or other vehicles not in running condition, machinery or parts thereof. The term "junkyard" shall include the term "automobile graveyard," which shall be any lot or place which is exposed to the weather upon which more than three (3) motor vehicles of any kind, incapable of being operated, are placed.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-18
KENNEL - Any place, private or commercial, equipped and/or used to house, board, breed, handle, train, or otherwise care for five (5) or more dogs six (6) months of age or older.
(Added 4-14-03-Effective Upon Passage)
LAUNDROMAT - A building or part thereof where clothes or other household articles are washed or dry cleaned in self-service machines with a capacity for washing not exceeding twenty-five (25) pounds dry weight and where such washed clothes and articles may also be dried or ironed, and no delivery service is provided in connection therewith.
LAUNDRY - A building, or part thereof, other than a Laundromat, where clothes and other articles are washed, dried, ironed or dry-cleaned.
LODGING HOUSE - A residential building, other than a hotel, motel or bed-and-breakfast home, where lodging is provided for compensation on a regular basis, pursuant to previous arrangements, but which is not open to the public or transient guests. Meals may be provided to the residents in a central location; however, no provisions shall be made for cooking in individual rooms or units. The maximum number of rooms or units shall be controlled by the area requirements of the district in which the use is located, but in no case shall the total number of lodging rooms or units exceed ten (10). A "Lodging House" shall also be known as a "Rooming House" or a "Boarding House."
(Added 5-14-90-Effective Upon Passage)
LOT - A parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory buildings or by a use and accessory uses, together with such open spaces as are required under the provisions of this chapter, having at least the minimum area required by this chapter for a lot in the zone in which such lot is situated and having its principal frontage on a public or private street approved by the Town.
LOT, CORNER - A lot abutting on two (2) or more streets at their intersection.
LOT COVERAGE - The maximum percent of the lot which may be occupied by buildings or structures, including accessory buildings or structures.
LOT DEPTH - The average of the horizontal distances between front and rear lines of a lot measured perpendicular to the street line.
LOT INTERIOR - Any lot other than a corner lot.
LOT OF RECORD - A lot which has been recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court.
LOT, THROUGH (DOUBLE FRONTAGE) - A lot, other than a corner lot, which has a frontage on two (2) streets.
LOT, WIDTH OF - The horizontal distance between the side lines of a lot measured along the building setback line.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-19
MAIN BUILDING – A building that is used in conjunction with the principal permitted use of the property.
(Added 7-23-12-Effective Upon Passage)
MANUFACTURE and/or MANUFACTURING - The processing and/or converting of raw, unfinished materials or products, or either of them, into articles or substances of different character or for use for a different purpose.
MANUFACTURED BUILDING – A building that is manufactured, typically in a factory, and is built in accordance with the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development Code, Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards, or other similar federal standards; and does not meet all local or state building code standards. Modular and pre-fabricated buildings that are manufactured and constructed in accordance with all local and state building code standards shall not be considered manufactured buildings.
(Added 10-10-17-Effective Upon Passage)
MANUFACTURED HOME – A residential dwelling built in a factory in accordance with the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development code and the federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards. Modular and pre-fabricated buildings that are manufactured and constructed in accordance with all local and state building code standards shall not be considered manufactured buildings.
(Added 7-23-12-Effective Upon Passage ; Amended 10-10-17-Effective Upon Passage)
MANUFACTURING, HEAVY – The use of land where significant external effects are created, and pose significant risks due to the involvement of explosives, radioactive materials, poisons, pesticides, herbicides, or other hazardous materials in the manufacturing or other process.
(Added 3-12-12-Effective Upon Passage)
MANUFACTURING, LIGHT – The use of land for processing, manufacturing, compounding, assembly, packaging, treatment or fabrication of materials and products, from processed or previously manufactured materials. Light industry is capable of operation in such a manner as to control the external effects of the manufacturing process, such as smoke, noise, soot, dirt, vibration, odor, etc. Uses may include, but are not limited to, a machine shop, the manufacturing of apparel, electrical appliances, electronic equipment, camera and photographic equipment, ceramic products, cosmetics and toiletries, business machines, paper products (but not the manufacturing of paper from pulpwood), musical instruments, medical appliances, tools or hardware, plastic products (but not the processing of raw materials), pharmaceuticals or optical goods, bicycles, and any other product of a similar nature as determined by the Director.
(Added 3-12-12-Effective Upon Passage)
MANUFACTURING, MEDIUM – The use of land where goods or energy are generally mass produced from raw materials on a large scale through use of an assembly line or similar process,
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-20
usually for sale to wholesalers or other industrial or manufacturing uses. Medium industry produces moderate external effects such as smoke, noise, soot, dirt, vibration, odor, etc.
(Added 3-12-12-Effective Upon Passage)
MINI-STORAGE FACILITY - (also known as mini-warehouse) - a self-service storage building, or group of buildings, consisting of individual, small, self-contained units for the storage of good, materials or supplies.
(Added 1-27-03-Effective Upon Passage)
MOBILE HOME – A residential dwelling built in a factory before the federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards went into effect on June 15, 1976. New or replacement mobile homes are not permitted within the Town.
(Added 7-23-12-Effective Upon Passage ; Amended 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
MODULAR UNIT - A factory-fabricated transportable building designed to be used by itself or to be incorporated with similar units at a building site into a modular structure. The term is intended to apply to major assemblies and does not include prefabricated panels, trusses, plumbing trees and other prefabricated supplements incorporated into a structure at the site. Modular units are a permitted construction type when designed to comply with Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, and shall not be considered manufactured homes.
(Amended 7-23-12-Effective Upon Passage)
MOTEL - An establishment consisting of a group of living or sleeping accommodations with bathroom and closet space designed for use by transient automobile tourists; less than fifty percent (50%) of the living and sleeping accommodations are occupied or designed for occupancy by persons other than transient automobile tourists.
NONCONFORMING ACTIVITY (USE) - The otherwise legal use of a building, structure or tract of land that does not conform to the use regulations of this chapter for the district in which it is located, either at the effective date of this chapter or as a result of subsequent amendments to the chapter.
NONCONFORMING LOT - An otherwise legally platted lot that does not conform to the minimum area or width requirements of this chapter for the district in which it is located at the effective date of this chapter or as a result of subsequent amendments to this chapter.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE - An otherwise legal building or structure that does not conform to the lot area, yard, height, lot coverage or other area regulations of this chapter or is designed or intended for a use that does not conform to the use regulations of this chapter for the district in which it is located, either at the effective date of this chapter or as a result of subsequent amendments to the chapter.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-21
NURSING HOME - Also known as "extended-care home," "rest home" or "convalescent home." A nursing facility is any place containing beds for two (2) or more patients, established to render domiciliary and/or nursing care for chronic or convalescent patients and which is properly licensed by the state.
OFF-STREET PARKING AREA - Space provided for vehicular parking outside a right-of-way.
OPEN SPACE, USABLE LANDSCAPED - That space on the same lot and contiguous to the principal building or buildings (except as herein noted) which is either landscaped with shrubs, planted with grass or developed and maintained for recreation, environmental and /or aesthetic purposes, and excludes that portion of the lot which is utilized for off-street parking purposes.
(Amended by adding “environmental and/or aesthetic” 7-23-12-Effective Upon Passage)
OUTDOOR DISPLAY – The keeping of products, goods, merchandise, and/or materials, excluding signs, outside of an enclosed building for the purpose of making it known that similar items or related services are available for purchase.
(Added 1-28-13-Effective Upon Passage)
OUTDOOR SALES – The retail selling of products, goods, merchandise, and/or materials, outside of an enclosed building.
(Added 1-28-13-Effective Upon Passage)
OUTDOOR STORAGE – The keeping, without retail sale, of products, goods, merchandise, and/or materials outside of an enclosed building.
(Added 1-28-13-Effective Upon Passage)
OVERHANG - Any projection, either roof, bay window or similar cantilevered construction, which extends beyond the foundation of a structure. No such construction shall project into any required yard more than three (3) feet, and no such projection shall have a vertical surface whose area is more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the area obtained by multiplying the mean height of the structure by the length of the structure along the yard which is violated. An "overhang" shall be included in the calculation of lot coverage.
PARKING SPACE - An area of not less than nine (9) feet wide by eighteen (18) feet long for each automobile or motor vehicle, such space being exclusive of necessary drives, aisle, entrances or exits and being fully accessible for the storage and parking of vehicles.
(Amended 2-9-87-Effective Upon Passage)
PEDDLER – A short-term temporary use of property that is permitted on commercially zoned, subject to compliance with the provisions of Chapter 98, Section 61, of the Town Code, or as amended.
(Added 7-23-12-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-22
PHARMACEUTICAL CENTER - An establishment in which only pharmaceutical services are provided. Its purpose shall be limited to providing the public and various health professionals with information and articles intended for use in diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment or prevention of a disease state, including drugs and medical instruments or devices of the type used under the strict supervision of a physician in the treatment of a specific disease entity. No articles shall be displayed for sale. The square footage of the "pharmaceutical center" shall be limited to a maximum of two thousand (2,000) square feet.
PLANNING COMMISSION - The Planning Commission of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia.
PORCH - Any porch, veranda or gallery (as the terms are commonly and customarily defined) or similar projection from the main wall of a structure, constructed upon the ground, and covered by a roof, canopy or awning; provided that the term shall not include any carport or other such improvement designed for and capable of accommodating the parking of a motor vehicle protected from the elements. An unenclosed porch shall mean a porch with no side enclosure, other than the side of the structure to which the porch is attached, with no screens or windows. An unenclosed porch may project into a front or rear yard not to exceed ten feet (10') nor extend any nearer than fifteen (15') from any front or rear property line. The area of a porch shall be included in the calculation of lot coverage. A porch shall not be considered an overhang, nor vice versa.
(Added 7-24-06 - Effective Upon Passage)
PORTABLE STORAGE CONTAINERS – A large portable container, other than trailers and semitrailers, and which are typically referred to as “PODS” or cargo containers that are transported to a desired location for use as storage of products, goods, merchandise, and/or materials. Portable storage containers are subject to the provisions of Section 175-109.2.
(Added 7-25-05-Effective Upon Passage ; Amended 1-28-13-Effective Upon Passage)
PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USE – A specific use, or uses, of a lot that are permitted on a particular lot, based on the regulations of the underlying zoning district, and the main use, or uses, of the property, as distinguished from an accessory use.
(Added 7-23-12-Effective Upon Passage)
PROFESSIONAL OFFICES - A structure designed for use by a person, or persons, in offering a service which requires specialized knowledge gained by intensive academic preparation such as medicine, law, engineering, dentistry, and other like endeavors.
PUBLIC EVENT – Any temporary activity or entertainment festival that accommodates the assembly of groups or individuals on public property after all required authorizations are obtained from the local, state and/or federal government(s).
(Added 1-9-12-Effective Upon Passage)
PUBLIC FACILITY - Any area, building or structure used or controlled for government purposes, that is owned, held, or operated by any department, branch or unit of the federal
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-23
government, the Commonwealth of Virginia or one or more of its local governments, political subdivisions or municipal corporations.
(Added 7-23-12-Effective Upon Passage)
PUBLIC PROPERTY – Property that is owned or operated by a local, state or federal government.
(Added 1-9-12-Effective Upon Passage)
PUBLIC UTILITY - Any person, firm, corporation, municipal department or board duly authorized to furnish and furnishing, under federal, state or municipal regulations, to the public electricity, gas, steam, communications, telegraph, transportation, water or such other services as may be provided. Where public utilities are permitted under this Chapter, poles, lines, water towers, reservoirs, water and sewer treatment facilities, booster and relay stations, distribution transformers, pipes, meters, and other facilities necessary for the provision and maintenance of public utilities shall be permitted.
(Amended 7-23-12-Effective Upon Passage)
RECREATION FACILITY (commercial) - A sports or activity facility which is open to the general public for a fee. These shall include but are not limited to the following: indoor skating rink, bowling alley, arcade, swimming pool, hard and soft courts, health spa, gymnasium, physical fitness center, dance studios or similar uses.
(Added 7-28-08-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended 6-22-15 by adding “dance studios”-Effective Upon Passage)
RECREATION FACILITY (public) – Facilities and uses sponsored by the Warren County Parks and Recreation Department and/or the Warren County School Administration and/or other public entities.
(Added 2-28-11-Effective Upon Passage)
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE - also known as a “MOTOR HOME” and “TRAVEL TRAILER” every vehicular-type unit primarily designed as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use, that either has its own motive power or is mounted in, or is towed by another vehicle. The basic entities are: travel, fifth wheel trailer, camping trailer and motor home. The parking and storing of such vehicles is guided by Section 175-100. Such term refers also to travel trailers.
(Added 7-22-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended 1-28-13 by Adding “Motor Home and Travel Trailer” -Effective Upon Passage)
REPAIR - The replacement of existing work with the same kind of materials for the purpose of its maintenance, but not including additional work that would affect safety or affect exit way facilities or a vital element of an elevator, plumbing, gas piping, wiring, ventilating or heating
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-24
installation or any work that would be in violation of a provision of the Front Royal Building Code or any other law governing building construction.
RESTAURANT - Any building in which, for compensation, food or beverages are dispensed for consumption on the premises, including, among other establishments, cafes, tearooms, confectionery shops and refreshment stands.
REST HOME - See "Nursing Home."
RESTORATION, BEGINNING OF - After a nonconforming use or structure has been totally or partially destroyed, includes the clearing of debris within thirty (30) days of destruction and applying for a permit to rebuild within eighteen (18) months of said destruction.
RETAIL STORES AND SHOP - Buildings for display and sale of merchandise at retail or for the rendering of personal services, but specifically exclusive of coal, wood, oil and lumberyards, and accessory uses.
ROADSIDE STAND – The commercial sale of agricultural products that are grown, raised, and/or crafted on the same premises in conjunction with the use of the property for agriculture, as defined herein.
(Added 7-23-12-Effective Upon Passage)
ROOMING HOUSE - See “Lodging House."
(Amended 5-14-90-Effective Upon Passage)
SCHOOLS - A public school, or a private school certified by the State of Virginia in accordance with the provisions of Virginia Code Section 22.1-319 et seq., or such educational and training institutions as are exempt from state certification under the provisions of Virginia State Code Section 22.1-320, as amended.
(Added 10-23-89-Effective Upon Passage)
SCREENING - Any device, materials, coniferous or deciduous growth, or combination thereof, such as plantings, walls, fences, or earthen berms, of sufficient height and density, as determined by the Zoning Administrator, required to serve as an opaque barrier, to vision, light, or noise between adjoining properties.
(Added 2-24-03-Effective Upon Passage)
SECTIONAL HOME - A dwelling made of two (2) or more modular units transported to the home site, put on a foundation and joined to make a single dwelling. Such units shall meet the requirements of the Building Code of the Town of Front Royal.
SETBACK - The minimum distance by which any building or structure must be separated from the front lot line.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-25
SHOPPING CENTER - Any conglomeration of commercial activities sharing a parcel of land which is held in single ownership and sharing parking facilities.
SIGN - Any display of any letters, words, numerals, figures, devices, emblems, pictures or any parts or combinations thereof by any means whereby the same are made visible for the purpose of making anything known, whether such display be made on, attached to or as a part of a structure, surface or any other thing.
SIGN, AREA OF - The entire area within a circle, triangle, parallelogram or trapezoid enclosing the extreme limits of writing, reproduction, emblem or any figure of similar character, together with any frame or other material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the background against which it is placed, excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which such sign is placed. On double-faced signs, only one (1) display face shall be measured in computing total sign area where sign faces are parallel and are at no point more than two (2) feet from one another.
SIGN, BUSINESS - A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, activity or product sold, conducted or offered upon the premises where such sign is located.
SIGN, HOME OCCUPATION - A sign not exceeding two (2) square feet (on each side) in an area directing attention to a product, commodity or service available on the premises, but which product, commodity or service is clearly a secondary use of the dwelling.
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION - A sign on the premises bearing the name of a subdivision, the name of a group housing project or of a school, college, park, church or other public or quasi-public facility or a professional or firm nameplate, but bearing information pertaining only to the premises on which such sign is located.
SIGN, OUTDOOR ADVERTISING - Any sign of any material and any character whatsoever, (including erection, construction, posting, painting, printing, tacking, nailing, gluing, sticking, carving or other fastening, affixing or making visible in any manner), which is placed for outdoor advertising purposes in any way whatsoever. Such sign is one which is not located on the premises of the activity, product, commodity or service to which it refers. The term "billboard" is covered by this definition.
SIGN, TEMPORARY - A sign applying to a seasonal or other brief activity, such as, but not limited to, summer camps, horse shows, auctions or sale of land.
SPECIAL CHILDCARE SERVICES – One of the following types of daycare: a licensed summer camp under Virginia Code Section 35.1-1, a public school, a private school not operating as a child-care center outside the scope of regular classes as defined in Virginia Code Section 63.1-195, a facility operated by a hospital on the hospital premises providing care to the children of hospital's employees while such employees are engaged in the performance of work for the hospital, a Sunday School, conducted by a church or religious institution, or a day care facility operated by a church or religious institution where children are cared for during short periods of time while the persons responsible for such children are attending religious services, and babysitting. (Added 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-26
SPECIAL USE PERMIT - A permit granted by the Town Council, upon recommendation from the Planning Commission and after public hearing, for a use permitted by the Council to occupy land and/or a building erected thereon for a specific purpose not permitted by right, but permitted in accordance with standards or conditions established in this chapter or by the Planning Commission and/or Town Council in accordance with procedures established by law.
STOOP - A porch without a roof, cover or overhang, which may project into a front or rear yard for a distance not exceeding ten (10) feet and into a side yard for a distance not exceeding five (5) feet.
(Added 7-24-06 - Effective Upon Passage)
STORY - That portion of a building other than a cellar or mezzanine, included between the surface of any floor to the beams of the floor next above it or, if there is not a floor above it, then the space between the floor and the top of the roof beams; a mezzanine shall be deemed a full story when it covers more than thirty-three (33%) of the area of the story beneath the mezzanine or if the vertical distance from the floor next below it to the floor next above it is twenty-four (24) feet or more.
STORY, HALF - A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of roof decking and wall face not more than three (3) feet above the top floor level, and in which space not more than two-thirds (2/3) of the floor area is finished off for use.
STREET; ROAD - A public thoroughfare, except an alley or driveway, which affords vehicular traffic circulation and principal means of access to abutting property.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION - Any change in the supporting members of a building or structure, such as bearing walls, partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any change in the width or number of exits or any substantial change in the roof.
STRUCTURE - Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground.
(Added 6-26-00-Effective Upon Passage)
STRUCTURE, OUTDOOR ADVERTISING - Any structure of any kind or character erected or maintained for outdoor advertising purposes, upon which any outdoor advertising sign may be placed, including also outdoor advertising statuary.
STRUCTURE, PRINCIPAL - A structure in which the principal or primary use of the property is carried out.
(Added 6-26-00-Effective Upon Passage)
SUBDIVISION - The division of a parcel of land into two (2) or more lots or parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development. The term includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context of the Front Royal Subdivision Ordinance, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-27
SURVEYOR, LAND - A licensed professional surveyor registered in the Commonwealth of Virginia by the Department of Professional and Occupational Registration as a surveyor.
TECHNOLOGY BUSINESS - A business consisting of one or more than one in combination of the following:
1. Electronic Information Operations and Providers – Businesses that assist other businesses to better manage their paper documents by putting them in an electronic database that can easily be viewed by a larger group of people.
2. Internet Service Providers – Businesses that provide Internet service to businesses or residents.
3. Software Design and Development – Businesses that design software or businesses that develop the design of specific software.
4. Computer and Peripheral Sales and Assembly – Businesses that assemble computers or sell the hardware associated with computers.
5. Content Developers – Businesses that design and build computer systems.
6. Internet Based Sales and Services – Businesses whose primary trade is based on the Internet, be it sales or service provider.
7. Hardware Design, Manufacture, Assembly, and Development – Businesses that manufacture, assemble, or develop hardware design for computers.
8. Telecommunications Based Video Service Providers – Businesses that use video-conferencing or cable connections for employees to telecommute.
9. Outbound or Inbound Call Centers – Businesses that either market their product through phone calls or businesses that answer consumer questions.
10. Telecommunications Equipment Manufacturing, Assembly, and Service – Businesses that build, put together or service telecommunications equipment.
(Added 6-26-00-Effective Upon Passage)
TEMPORARY TRAILERS – A transportable manufactured building, similar to a manufactured home, but not used for residential purposes.
(Added 1-28-13-Effective Upon Passage)
THEATER, INDOOR - A building designed and/or used primarily for the commercial exhibition of motion pictures to the general public or used for performance of plays, acts and dramas by actors and/or actresses.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-28
TOURIST HOME - See "Bed and Breakfast Home."
(Amended 5-14-90-Effective Upon Passage)
TOWNHOUSE - At least three (3) and not more than eight (8) attached dwelling units forming a continuous structure, each unit being separated by unpierced common or party walls of masonry construction going through the roof of said unit void of fenestration or means of ingress or egress from the basement through the roof with individual exterior entrances at grade and with not more than four (4) abutting "townhouses" or dwelling units having the same front yard setback; the setback differential shall be at least three (3) feet. Each "townhouse" unit shall occupy no fewer than two (2) stories in structure.
TRAILER – Every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying property and passengers wholly on its own structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle.
(Added 1-28-13-Effective Upon Passage)
TRAVEL TRAILER - Any recreational vehicle.
(Amended 7-22-96-Effective Upon Passage)
USE - The purpose or activity for which land or buildings thereon is designed, arranged or intended or for which it is occupied or maintained and shall include any manner of performance of such activity with respect to the performance standards of this chapter.
VARIANCE - A relaxation of the terms of the Zoning Ordinance where such "variance" will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the action of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the ordinance will work undue hardships on the property owner; a "variance" is authorized only for height, area and size of a structure or size of yards and open spaces; establishment or expansion of a use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed by "variance," nor shall a "variance" be granted because of the presence of nonconformities in the zoning division or district or adjoining divisions or districts nor solely for the economic benefit of the person requesting such "variance."
WIRELESS TELEPHONE TELECOMMUNICATION TOWERS - Facilities for the proviso of personal wireless services, as defined by 47 U.S.C Section 332 (Section 704 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996), including those Federal Communications Commission licensed commercial wireless telecommunications services such as cellular, personal communications services (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), and unlicensed wireless services and common carrier wireless exchange access services; also referred to generally as “tower(s)” under Section 175-110.4.
(Added 9-26-05-Effective Upon Passage; Amended Title 3-24-14-Effective Upon Passage)
YARD - An open space of a generally uniform width or depth on the same land with a building or group of buildings, which open space lies between the building or group of buildings and the nearest lot line and is occupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided herein.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-29
YARD, FRONT - A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the adjacent street right-of-way line and the building setback line.
YARD, REAR - A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the rear property line of the lot and a line drawn generally parallel thereto, at such distance as specified in this chapter.
YARD, SIDE - A yard between the side lot line and a line drawn generally parallel thereto, at such distance as may be specified herein for any district, and extending from the front yard line to the rear yard line.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR - See "Administrator."
ZONING MAP - The Official Zoning Map of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia, and all amendments thereto.
ZONING PERMIT - A permit issued by the Zoning Administrator to the applicant before the applicant may proceed with any work affected by any provision of this chapter or begin any uses of land and/or structures as permitted by this chapter.
ZONING MAP; DISTRICTS; BOUNDARIES
175-4 ADOPTION OF ZONING MAP
The Town of Front Royal is hereby divided into zones or districts, as shown on the Official Zoning Map, which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this chapter, together with all future notations, references and amendments.
175-5 IDENTIFICATION OF OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signatures of the Town Council and attested to by the Secretary of the body, together with the date of the adoption of this chapter.
175-6 CHANGES ON ZONING MAP
A. If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the Code of the Commonwealth of Virginia, changes are made in district boundaries or other matters portrayed on the Official Zoning Map, such changes shall be entered on the Official Zoning Map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the Town Council.
B. No changes of any nature shall be made on the Official Zoning Map or matter shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this chapter or any state law, if applicable. All changes shall be noted on the Official Zoning Map by date with a brief description of the nature of the change. Such change shall also be accurately reflected in the minutes of the Town Council meetings at which the change is adopted.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-30
175-7 LOCATION OF OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
The Official Zoning Map shall be located in a public place, as designated by the Council, and shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land and water areas in the Town, regardless of unofficial copies which may have been made or published from time to time.
175-8 REPLACEMENT OF OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
A. In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the Town Council may, by resolution, adopt a new Official Zoning Map, which shall supersede the prior Official Zoning Map. The new Official Zoning Map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior Zoning Map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original Official Zoning Map or any subsequent amendment thereof. The new Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signatures of the Town Council, attested by the Secretary of that body and bearing the following words: "This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted ....... as part of Ordinance No. ......... of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia."
B. Unless the prior Official Zoning Map has been lost or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any parts thereof remaining shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to this adoption or amendments.
175-9 ENUMERATION OF DISTRICTS
A. For the purpose of this Chapter, the incorporated area of Front Royal, Virginia, is hereby divided into the following zoning districts:
Agriculture and Open Space Preservation District A-1
Estate Residential District R-E
Suburban Residential District R-S
Residential District R-1
Residential District R-1A
Residential District R-2
Residential District R-3
Planned Neighborhood Development PND
Mixed-Use Campus Development MCD
Community Business District C-1
Commercial District C-2
Highway Corridor Business District C-3
Limited Industrial I-1
Industrial Employment I-2
(Added “R-1A” 9-25-95-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended C-1 formerly ”Commercial” 10-27-97-Effective Upon Passage)
(Added “C-3” 12-15-97-Effective Upon Passage ; Added “PND” 4-11-05-Effective Upon Passage)
(Added “R-E” and “R-S” 5-9-05-Effective Upon Passage ; Added “MCD” 7-23-12-Eff. Upon Passage)
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-31
B. In addition to the above-stated zoning districts, following additional districts (overlapping the above-stated enumerated zoning districts) have been created for portions of the incorporated area of Front Royal, Virginia, as provided in this Chapter:
Floodplain District
Historic Front Royal District
Entrance Corridor District
(Amended Section 2-25-91-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended “B” by adding “Entrance Corridor District” 7-23-12-Effective Upon Passage)
175-9.1 CLASSIFICATION OF ANNEXED TERRITORY
Any property coming into the territorial jurisdiction of the Town of Front Royal by annexation or otherwise shall be temporarily classified in the “Agriculture and Open Space Preservation District A-1 “which shall apply pending the orderly amendment of the zoning ordinance.
(Added 1-11-99-Effective Upon Passage)
175-9-2 INTERPRETATION OF BOUNDARIES
(Changed numbering to 175-9.2 7-23-12-Effective Upon Passage)
Unless district boundary lines are fixed by dimensions or otherwise clearly shown or described, and where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the aforesaid districts as shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
A. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following or being at right angles to the center lines of streets, highways, alleys, railroad main tracks or existing lot lines, such center lines or lines at right angles to such center lines shall be construed to be such boundaries, as the case may be.
B. Where a district boundary is indicated to follow a river, creek or branch or other body of water, said boundary shall be construed to follow the center line at low water or at the limits of the jurisdiction, and in the event of change in the shoreline, such boundary shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline.
C. If no distance, angle, curvature, description or other means is given to determine a boundary line accurately and the foregoing provisions do not apply, the same shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on said Zoning Map. In case of subsequent dispute, the matter shall be referred to the Board of Zoning Appeals which shall determine the boundary.
175-9.3 EXCLUDED USES
Within each zoning district of this chapter, uses that are not expressly listed as permitted, or permitted with a special use permit, shall be deemed excluded. The use of property by a use that
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-32
is excluded from the underlying zoning district shall be a violation of this chapter, except where such use is established as a legally nonconforming use.
(Added 7-23-12-Effective Upon Passage)
175-9.4 TEMPORARY EMERGENCY USES
Despite the other provisions of this chapter, Town Council may authorize temporary housing and temporary emergency response facilities when necessary to respond to the public needs during a local, state or national disaster caused by either natural or man-made events. If such uses are temporarily established in the future by action of Town Council, the time period they are authorized for shall be specified with the action of approval. (Added 7-23-12-Effective Upon Passage)
175-10 (RESERVED)
175-10.1 (RESERVED)
AGRICULTURE AND OPEN SPACE PRESERVATION DISTRICT (A-1)
(Adopted 2-25-91)
175-10.2 STATEMENT OF INTENT (A-1)
The A-1 District is composed of large contiguous parcels of at least ten (10) acres in size used for agricultural pursuits and other uses involving preservation of open spaces, including parks and forested areas. The standards set forth for this district are designed to promote and protect open spaces and agricultural and forested areas. Development is to be discouraged, and the only structures permitted shall be those which are directly related to agriculture and the open space uses provided herein.
(Amended 7-23-12-Effective Upon Passage)
175-10.3 USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT (A-1)
Subject to the standards and requirements set forth in this Chapter, except as prohibited or restricted by separate restrictions of record that may pertain to property within the A-1 District, the following uses of land and buildings are permitted by-right in the A-1 District.
RESIDENTIAL:
Manufactured home, subject to the standards of Section 175-10.10.C
Single family dwelling, provided that only one single family dwelling may be permitted per parcel.
COMMERCIAL:
INDUSTRIAL:
MISCELLANEOUS:
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-33
Accessory uses, structures and buildings.
Agriculture, excluding tenant housing and all slaughtering activities subject to the standards of Section 175-10.10.A
Cemeteries
Home Occupations
Open space and Conservation Areas
Public Facilities
Public Parks and Playgrounds
Public Utilities
Signs, as set forth in Section 175-106
Special Childcare Services
Such other uses as determined similar to one or more enumerated uses by the Zoning Administrator
(Amended “A” 7-25-05-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended Entire Section/Removed “A-C” 7-23-12-Effective Upon Passage)
(Added “Special Childcare Services & Such Other Uses…” 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
175-10.4 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL USE PERMIT (A-1)
A. The following uses are permitted within the A-1 District only by approval of a special use permit, except as prohibited or restricted by separate restrictions of record that may pertain to property within the A-1 District.
RESIDENTIAL:
Tenant housing for an agricultural use
COMMERCIAL:
Commercial outdoor recreation, including athletic and park facilities, amphitheaters, stadiums, botanical gardens, campgrounds and seasonal recreational facilities, subject to the standards of Section 175-10.10.D
Flea Markets and Farmer’s Market, subject to the standards of Section 175-10.10.B
Hospitals
(Added “Farmers Market” 10-10-17-Effective Upon Passage)
INDUSTRIAL:
ORGANIZATIONAL:
Churches.
Schools.
MISCELLANEOUS:
Wireless telephone communication towers, and similar communication facilities subject to the standards found under Section 175-110.4.
Any use permitted under Section 175-10.3, or specifically listed above under this subsection, that proposes to occupy a building or structure that exceeds the height requirements of Section 175-
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-34
10.9, subject to the requirements of Section 175-136. Additional heights approved by a special use permit shall be required to increase the required setback and yard area requirements by an equivalent distance from each property line.
Such other uses as determined similar to one or more enumerated uses by the Zoning Administrator.
(Amended 7-23-12-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended by adding “Such other uses…” 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
B. In assessing the granting of a special permit, the Town Council shall consider the effect on surrounding properties, hazards which may result if the proposed use is granted, traffic congestion, noise, noxious fumes or odors, effects on the surrounding landscape and the aesthetics of appearance and any and all other matters deemed relevant to the proposed special permit and its effects on the community.
175-10.5 AREA AND FRONTAGE (A-1)
A. The minimum lot area shall be ten (10) acres.
B. The minimum public street frontage shall be one hundred fifty (150) feet. Upon application for a special permit to the Front Royal Town Council, the minimum public street frontage may be waived where the lot in question has acceptable private road access to a public street and the Council finds that such access is adequate for the uses employed upon the property and that no hazard or undue traffic congestion will be caused or created as the result.
175-10.6 SETBACK (A-1)
Structures shall be located one hundred (100) feet or more from any public street right-of-way which is fifty (50) feet or greater in width or one hundred twenty (120) feet or more from the center of any street right-of-way less fifty (50) feet in width. A minimum width at the setback line shall be two hundred (200) feet.
175-10.7 YARDS (A-1)
A. The minimum width of side yards for all structures shall be fifty (50) feet.
B. The minimum width for rear yards for all structures shall be fifty (50) feet.
175-10.8 LOT COVERAGE (A-1)
The maximum total coverage for all structures shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the lot area. The total impervious coverage shall be limited to thirty percent (30%) of the lot area.
175-10.9 HEIGHT (A-1)
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-35
A. Except for uses that are categorized under subsection B, shown below, and uses that obtain approval of an alternative maximum height, as may be authorized in accordance with Section 175-10.4, the maximum height in the A-1 District shall be thirty-five (35) feet.
B. Buildings and structures related to agricultural pursuits, including but not limited to, barns and silos, as well as church spires and cupolas may be erected to a height of sixty (60) feet from grade.
(Amended “A/B” and Removed “C” 7-23-12-Effective Upon Passage)
175-10.10 STANDARDS (A-1)
A. Slaughtering Activities. All slaughtering activities in the A-1 District shall comply with the following standards.
1. Such activity shall not be conducted within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the property boundary.
2. No frequent or repetitive emission of noises or odors of such intensity and character as to interfere with the health, welfare and comfort of the public or neighboring land owners at or beyond the property line shall be permitted.
B. Farmers’ Markets and Flea Markets. Where flea markets are permitted by approval of a special use permit, the following standards shall be complied with, in addition to any conditions placed on the special use permit, and Section 98-46 of the Town Code.
(Amended by Adding “Farmers’ Markets” 10-10-17-Effective Upon Passage)
1. Adequate water and sanitary facilities shall be provided if found necessary based on the size, frequency and duration of the market.
2. A minimum fifty (50) foot setback shall be maintained from all property lines, excluding structures and uses in existence prior to July 1, 2001.
(Amended 10-10-17-Effective Upon Passage)
3. No adverse effect on adjoining properties, including but not limited to excessive or untimely noise or lighting, overflow parking, or visual problems potentially affecting property values or marketability, is found.
4. No manufactured buildings shall be permitted.
5. All tables, facilities and structures shall be maintained in a well-kept and attractive manner.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-36
6. Unless otherwise approved as part of a special use permit, all temporary structures or facilities shall be removed during the days that the market is not in operation.
(Amended 10-10-17-Effective Upon Passage)
7. Operation of a Flea Market shall be confined to Friday, Saturday, Sunday, and Holidays, unless other dates are specifically approved by the Town Council in conjunction with the Special Permit. The hours of operation shall be posted on the property.
(Amended to add “Friday” 10-10-17-Effective Upon Passage)
8. If a Flea Market or Farmers’ Market elects to close during part of the year, or is required to close during part of the year by a condition of a special use permit, all tables and other temporary fixtures shall be removed within two (2) weeks of such closure. Such fixtures may be stored on the site, provided they are located within a completely enclosed building or otherwise screened from public view.
(Amended 10-10-17-Effective Upon Passage)
9. All Flea Markets and Farmers’ Markets shall be swept clean, hosed down and/or picked clean daily. No food products or debris shall be permitted to remain upon the site overnight. All food products sold at the market must be displayed under sanitary conditions and sold in compliance with all requirements of the Virginia Department of Health or Virginia Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services.
10. Any expansion, including, but not limited to, new construction, an increase in the days of operation, or other significant changes to the use of the property, shall only be authorized with a special use permit.
11. Landscaping shall be provided where feasible and desirable for purposes of improvement aesthetics, screening, shade and the natural environment.
12. Fencing may be required for purposes of improvement aesthetics, screening or public safety.
13. The sale of live animals is prohibited.
14. The sale of new merchandise or serving of food, other than farm and domestic products, shall only be authorized if the vendor obtains an itinerant merchant or peddler license, in accordance with the Town Code regulations for such uses.
15. Farmers’ Markets and Flea Markets on public property shall be classified as a public event.
(Added [9 – 15] 10-10-17-Effective Upon Passage)
C. Manufactured Housing. Manufactured housing shall be permitted on individual parcels or lots in the A-1 District, provided the following standards are met:
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-37
1. The manufactured housing unit shall have a minimum width of nineteen (19) or more feet.
2. The manufactured housing unit shall be attached to a permanent foundation in the ground.
3. The manufactured housing unit shall have the appearance and character of conventional, site-built, single-family housing.
4. Such manufactured housing units shall meet all applicable Building Code requirements.
D. Commercial Outdoor Recreation, Hospitals, Schools and Churches. Where commercial outdoor recreation, hospitals, schools and/or churches are permitted by special use permit the following standards shall be complied with, in addition to any conditions placed on the special use permit.
1. A minimum of 50% of the lot area shall be designated as open space.
2. Buildings and structures used in association with outdoor recreation, hospital, school and churches shall be setback from adjoining property lines by a distance of 200 feet, except that the setback specified under Section 175-10.6 shall apply along property lines abutting a public road or the Shenandoah River.
3. Amphitheaters, stadiums and other similar activities that involve the outdoor gathering of large groups of people shall submit a traffic impact study for evaluation by the Town during the special use permit application process if the total number of attendees is anticipated to exceed 2,500 persons. Gatherings of people above 2,500 may only be permitted by the Town on a temporary basis.
4. All outdoor lighting shall be reviewed and approved during the special use permit process. If outdoor lighting is authorized by special use permit, such lighting shall be designed so that light fixtures and the light that they emit minimize light glare to adjoining properties and the night-sky.
5. Campgrounds, and similar facilities, shall comply with all requirements of the Virginia Department of Health, except that in no circumstance shall a campground not be provided with public bathroom facilities with either public utilities or an approved independent well and sanitary sewer system.
6. The hours of operation for outdoor activities shall be defined on any special use permit that may be approved by the Town.
(Amended Entire Section including title to “STANDARDS” 7-23-12-Effective Upon Passage)
ESTATE RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-E)
(Adopted 5-9-05)
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-38
175-10.11 STATEMENT OF INTENT (R-E)
The R-E Estate Residential District is composed of quiet, very low-density residential areas, on estate-sized lots connected to public water and sewer, plus undeveloped areas where similar residential construction appears likely to occur. The standards set forth for this district are designed to stabilize and protect the essential character of the areas so delineated, to answer a need in the Town for executive-styled residential development on public water and sewer on larger lots than are traditional or currently being developed, to promote and encourage a suitable environment for family life where there are children and executive-style families, to provide areas for suitable expansion of the Town as facilities are provided and to prohibit all commercial activities. Development is, therefore, limited to executive-style concentration, and permitted uses are limited to single-unit dwellings, plus selected additional uses, such as public facilities that serve the residents of the district. Mobile homes or rooming houses are prohibited.
175-10.12 USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT (R-E)
Subject to the standards and requirements set forth in this Chapter, except as prohibited or restricted by separate restrictions of record that may pertain to property within the R-E District, the following uses of land and buildings are permitted by-right in the R-E District:
RESIDENTIAL:
Single-family dwellings, detached
COMMERCIAL:
INDUSTRIAL:
ORGANIZATIONAL:
MISCELLANEOUS:
Accessory uses, structures and buildings.
Home occupations.
Open space and conservation areas.
Public facilities.
Public parks and playgrounds.
Public utilities.
Signs, as set forth in Section 175-106.
Special childcare services.
Such other uses as determined similar to one or more enumerated uses by the Zoning Administrator.
(Amended Entire Section 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
175-10.13 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL PERMIT (R-E)
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-39
A. The following uses are permitted within the R-E District only by approval of a special use permit, except as prohibited or restricted by separate restrictions of record that may pertain to property within the R-E District:
RESIDENTIAL:
COMMERCIAL:
Day care, and day-care facilities as set forth in the Town Code Section 175-107.1
INDUSTRIAL:
ORGANIZATIONAL:
MISCELLANEOUS:
Any use permitted under Section 175-10.13, or specifically listed above under this subsection, that proposes to occupy a building or structure that exceeds the height requirements of Section 175-10.19, subject to the requirements of Section 175-136. Additional heights approved by a special use permit shall be required to increase the required setback and yard area requirements by an equivalent distance from each property line.
Such other uses as determined similar to one or more enumerated uses by the Zoning Administrator.
(Amended Entire Section 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
175-10.14 MODEL HOMES AND SALES OFFICES (R-E)
Model homes and sales offices for the marketing of residential dwellings within a specific development in the R-E Estate Residential District shall be permitted in an R-E Estate Residential Zoning District upon approval of a zoning permit by the Zoning Administrator, subject to the following conditions:
A. The Zoning Administrator shall review and approve or deny all requests for permits authorizing model homes and sales offices for the marketing of residential dwellings within a specific development. In assessing a request for a permit, the Zoning Administrator shall consider the necessity for the model home and/or sales office, its location and its effects on the surrounding neighborhood and/or adjoining property and may require terms and conditions on the location, appearance and such other reasonable conditions as the Zoning Administrator shall deem necessary.
B. The model home shall be a custom site-built home similar in type and size to the other homes sold in the development and shall be used as a residential dwelling after expiration of the model home zoning permit.
C. Only one (1) sales office shall be approved for a development, regardless of the number of phases. A sales office must be located in a model home in the event that the development has an approved model home. Such sales offices shall be restricted to the marketing of residential
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-40
dwellings at the specific development in question, and no other business whatsoever shall be conducted on the premises.
D. The request for a model home and/or sales office shall be filed by the developer.
E. Each model home and/or sales office shall have a minimum of four (4) off-street parking spaces in addition to other parking spaces required by this chapter.
F. All model homes and sales offices must be connected to Town water and sewer and must provide rest room facilities for the public.
G. The maximum allowable period for the operation of a model home or sales office shall be one (1) year. Applications for renewal for successive six-month periods may be submitted if additional time is necessary to complete sales within the development. All renewal applications must be filed at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the original model home or sales office permit.
H. The Zoning Administrator, in granting a model home or sales office permit, may require the posting of a bond to insure that the model home and sales office terms and conditions are adhered to and to ensure that the operations cease and the site is left in good order at the expiration of the permit.
175-10.15 AREA AND FRONTAGE (R-E)
Area and frontage regulations shall be as follows:
A. Minimum area per lot: one (1) acre.
B. Minimum width at setback line: one hundred seventy-five (175) feet.
175-10.16 SETBACK (R-E)
Structures shall be located one hundred (100) feet or more from any street right-of-way. A vacant lot may be assumed to be occupied by a building having a minimum setback.
175-10.17 YARDS (R-E)
A. Side: Each side yard shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet.
B. Rear: Each rear yard shall be a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet.
C. Front: The required depth of the front yard shall be as provided in Section 175-10.16.
D. Accessory buildings shall be setback from side and rear property lines by no less than twenty- five (25) feet.
(Added “D” 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
175-10.18 LOT COVERAGE (R-E)
The maximum building coverage shall be twelve percent (12%).
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-41
175-10.19 HEIGHT (R-E)
A. Buildings may be erected up to four (4) stories, but not to exceed fifty-five (55) feet in height.
B. No accessory building shall be more than two (2) stories high. All accessory buildings shall be less than the main building in height.
175-10.20 CORNER LOTS (R-E)
A. Of the two (2) sides of a corner lot, the front shall be deemed to be either of the two (2) sides fronting on streets.
B. The side yard on the side facing the side street shall be one hundred (100) feet or more for both main and accessory buildings.
C. Each corner lot shall have a minimum width at the setback line of two hundred twenty-five (225) feet.
SUBURBAN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-S)
(Adopted 5-9-05)
175-10.21 STATEMENT OF INTENT (R-S)
The R-S Suburban Residential District is composed of quiet, low-density residential areas, on suburban-sized lots, plus undeveloped areas where similar residential construction appears likely to occur. The standards set forth for this district are designed to stabilize and protect the essential character of the areas so delineated, to answer a need in the Town for residential development on larger lots on public water and sewer than are traditional or currently being developed, to promote and encourage a suitable environment for family life where there are children, to provide areas for suitable expansion of the Town as facilities are provided and to prohibit all commercial activities. Development is, therefore, limited to suburban-style concentration, and permitted uses are limited to single-unit dwellings, plus selected additional uses, such as public facilities that serve the residents of the district. Mobile homes or rooming houses are prohibited.
175-10.22 USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT (R-S)
A. Subject to the standards and requirements set forth in this Chapter, except as prohibited or restricted by separate restrictions of record that may pertain to property within the R-S District, the following uses of land and buildings are permitted by-right in the R-S District:
RESIDENTIAL:
Single-family dwellings, detached
COMMERCIAL:
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-42
INDUSTRIAL:
ORGANIZATIONAL:
MISCELLANEOUS:
Accessory uses, structures and buildings
Home occupations
Open space and conservation areas
Public facilities
Public parks and playgrounds
Public utilities
Signs, as set forth in Section 175-106
Special childcare services
Such other uses as determined similar to one or more enumerated uses by the Zoning Administrator
(Amended Entire Section 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
175-10.23 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL PERMIT (R-S)
A. The following uses are permitted within the R-S District only by approval of a special use permit, except as prohibited or restricted by separate restrictions of record that may pertain to property within the R-S District:
RESIDENTIAL:
COMMERCIAL:
Bed and Breakfasts, as set forth in Section 175-107.2
Day care, and day-care facilities as set forth in the Town Code Section 175-107.1
INDUSTRIAL:
ORGANIZATIONS:
Churches
Public Libraries
Schools
MISCELLANEOUS:
Any use permitted under Section 175-10.22, or specifically listed above under this subsection, that proposes to occupy a building or structure that exceeds the height requirements of Section 175-10.29, subject to the requirements of Section 175-136. Additional heights approved by a special use permit shall be required to increase the required setback and yard area requirements by an equivalent distance from each property line.
Such other uses as determined similar to one or more enumerated uses by the Zoning Administrator.
(Amended Entire Section 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-43
175-10.24 MODEL HOMES AND SALES OFFICES (R-S)
Model homes and sales offices for the marketing of residential dwellings within a specific development in the R-S Suburban Residential District shall be permitted in an R-S Suburban Residential Zoning District upon approval of a zoning permit by the Zoning Administrator, subject to the following conditions:
A. The Zoning Administrator shall review and approve or deny all requests for permits authorizing model homes and sales offices for the marketing of residential dwellings within a specific development. In assessing a request for a permit, the Zoning Administrator shall consider the necessity for the model home and/or sales office, its location and its effects on the surrounding neighborhood and/or adjoining property and may require terms and conditions on the location, appearance and such other reasonable conditions as the Zoning Administrator shall deem necessary.
B. The model home shall be a standard site-built home similar in type and appearance to the other homes sold in the development and shall be used as a residential dwelling after expiration of the model home zoning permit.
C. Only one (1) sales office shall be approved for a development, regardless of the number of phases. A sales office must be located in a model home in the event that the development has an approved model home. Such sales offices shall be restricted to the marketing of residential dwellings at the specific development in question, and no other business whatsoever shall be conducted on the premises.
D. The request for a model home and/or sales office shall be filed by the developer.
E. Each model home and/or sales office shall have a minimum of four (4) off-street parking spaces in addition to other parking spaces required by this chapter.
F. All model homes and sales offices must be connected to Town water and sewer and must provide rest room facilities for the public.
G. The maximum allowable period for the operation of a model home or sales office shall be one (1) year. Applications for renewal for successive six-month periods may be submitted if additional time is necessary to complete sales within the development. All renewal applications must be filed at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the original model home or sales office permit.
H. The Zoning Administrator, in granting a model home or sales office permit, may require the posting of a bond to insure that the model home and sales office terms and conditions are adhered to and to ensure that the operations cease and the site is left in good order at the expiration of the permit.
175-10.25 AREA AND FRONTAGE (R-S)
Area and frontage regulations shall be as follows:
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-44
A. Minimum area per lot:one-half (½) acre (twenty-one thousand seven hundred eighty square ft)
B. Minimum width at setback line: one hundred fifty (150) feet.
175-10.26 SETBACK (R-S)
Structures shall be located fifty (50) feet or more from any street right-of-way which is fifty (50) feet or greater in width or seventy-five (75) feet or more from the center of any street right-of-way less than fifty (50) feet in width; however, no building need be set back more than the average of the setback of the immediately adjoining structures on either side. A vacant lot may be assumed to be occupied by a building having a minimum setback.
175-10.27 YARDS (R-S)
A. Side: The minimum total width of the side yards shall be fifty (50) feet, with no one (1) side yard being less than twenty (20) feet.
B. Rear: Each rear yard shall be a minimum of fifty (50) feet.
C. Front: The required depth of the front yard shall be as provided in Section 175-10.16.
D. Accessory buildings shall be setback from side and rear property lines by no less than fifteen (15) feet.
(Added “D” 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
175-10.28 LOT COVERAGE (R-S)
The maximum building coverage shall be twenty-five percent (25%).
175-10.29 HEIGHT (R-S)
A. Buildings may be erected up to three and one-half (3 1/2) stories, but not to exceed forty-five (45) feet in height.
B. A public or semipublic building, such as a school, church or library, may be erected to a height of sixty (60) feet from grade, provided that required front, side and rear yards shall be increased one (1) foot for each foot in height over fifty (50) feet.
C. Church spires, belfries, cupolas, municipal water towers, chimneys, flues, flagpoles, television antennas and radio aerials are exempt. Parapet walls may be up to four (4) feet above the height of the building on which the walls rest.
D. No accessory building which is within twenty (20) feet of any lot line shall be more than one (1) story high. All accessory buildings shall be less than the main building in height.
(Amended “D” by removing “party” before “lot” 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-45
175-10.30 CORNER LOTS (R-S)
A. Of the two (2) or more yards of a corner lot with frontage along multiple streets, the front yard shall be established by the following criteria:
1. For new subdivision applications, the front yard shall be identified by the applicant on the subdivision site plan and approved by the Town on the approved final plat.
2. For new construction on existing corner lots where no front yard is designated on the approved final plat, the property owner shall determine the front yard on the Zoning Permit application and shall be approved by the Town on the approved Zoning Permit.
3. For existing structures, the front yard shall be the yard with frontage that the front façade of the primary building faces.
4. The approved front yard established by this Code Section shall only be changed by review and approval of a revised final plat approved by the Planning Commission. Such future requests shall be approved if the Planning Commission determines that the proposed front yard is consistent with other properties along the same street frontages.
B. The side yard setback on the side facing the side street shall be fifty (50) feet or more for main buildings, and fifty (50) feet or more for accessory buildings.
C. Each corner lot shall have a minimum width at the setback line of two hundred (100) feet.
D. The rear yard setback if facing a street shall be fifty (50) feet or more for both main and accessory buildings.
(Amended “A-C” and Added “D” 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-1)
175-11 STATEMENT OF INTENT (R-1)
The R-1 District is composed of quiet, low-density residential areas, plus undeveloped areas where similar residential construction appears likely to occur. The standards set forth for this district are designed to stabilize and protect the essential character of the areas so delineated, to promote and encourage a suitable environment for family life where there are children, to provide areas for suitable expansion of the Town as facilities are provided and to prohibit all commercial activities. Development is, therefore, limited to relatively low concentration, and permitted uses are limited to single-unit dwellings, plus selected additional uses, such as schools, parks, churches and certain public facilities that serve the residents of the district. Mobile homes or rooming houses are prohibited.
175-12 USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT(R-1)
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-46
A. Subject to the standards and requirements set forth in this Chapter, except as prohibited or restricted by separate restrictions of record that may pertain to property within the R-1 District, the following uses of land and buildings are permitted by-right in the R-1 District:
RESIDENTIAL:
Single-family dwellings, detached
COMMERCIAL:
INDUSTRIAL:
ORGANIZATIONAL:
Churches
Public libraries
Schools
MISCELLANEOUS:
Accessory uses, structures and buildings
Home occupations
Open space and conservation areas
Public facilities
Public parks and playgrounds
Public utilities
Signs, as set forth in Section 175-106
Special childcare services
Such other uses as determined similar to one or more enumerated uses by the Zoning Administrator
(Amended Section 10-10-94, 7-25-05 and 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
175-12.1 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL PERMIT (R-1)
A. The following uses are permitted within the R-1 District only by approval of a special use permit, except as prohibited or restricted by separate restrictions of record that may pertain to property within the R-1 District:
RESIDENTIAL:
COMMERCIAL:
Bed and Breakfasts, as set forth in Section 175-107.2
Day care, and day-care facilities as set forth in the Town Code Section 175-107.1
INDUSTRIAL:
ORGANIZATIONAL:
Community Centers.
Fire and Rescue Squads and Police Stations.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-47
MISCELLANEOUS:
Any use permitted under Section 175-12, or specifically listed above under this subsection, that proposes to occupy a building or structure that exceeds the height requirements of Section 175-17, subject to the requirements of Section 175-136. Additional heights approved by a special use permit shall be required to increase the required setback and yard area requirements by an equivalent distance from each property line.
Such other uses as determined similar to one or more enumerated uses by the Zoning Administrator.
(Added Entire Section 10-23-89 ; Amended 1-10-96, 7-28-08 and 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
175-12.2 MODEL HOMES AND SALES OFFICES (R-1)
Model homes and sales offices for the marketing of residential dwellings within a specific development shall be permitted in an R-1 Residential Zoning District upon approval of a zoning permit by the Zoning Administrator, subject to the following conditions:
A. The Zoning Administrator shall review and approve or deny all requests for permits authorizing model homes and sales offices for the marketing of residential dwellings within a specific development. In assessing a request for a permit, the Zoning Administrator shall consider the necessity for the model home and/or sales office, its location and its effects on the surrounding neighborhood and/or adjoining property and may require terms and conditions on the location, appearance and such other reasonable conditions as the Zoning Administrator shall deem necessary.
B. The model home shall be a standardly constructed home similar in type and appearance to the other homes sold in the development and shall be used as a residential dwelling after expiration of the model home zoning permit.
C. Only one (1) sales office shall be approved for a development, regardless of the number of phases. A sales office must be located in a model home in the event that the development has an approved model home. Otherwise, the sales office shall be located in a residential home located in the development. In assessing a request for a sales office, the Zoning Administrator shall consider the necessity for the sales office, its location and its effect on the surrounding neighborhood and/or adjoining property and may require terms and conditions on the location, appearance and other such reasonable conditions as the Zoning Administrator shall deem necessary. Such sales offices shall be restricted to the marketing of residential dwellings at the specific development in question, and no other business whatsoever shall be conducted on the premises.
D. The request for a model home and/or sales office shall be filed by the developer.
E. Each model home and/or sales office shall have a minimum of four (4) off-street parking spaces in addition to other parking spaces required by this chapter.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-48
F. All model homes and sales offices must be connected to Town water and sewer and must provide rest room facilities for the public.
G. The maximum allowable period for the operation of a model home or sales office shall be one (1) year. Applications for renewal for successive six-month periods may be submitted if additional time is necessary to complete sales within the development. All renewal applications must be filed at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the original model home or sales office permit.
H. The Zoning Administrator, in granting a model home or sales office permit, may require the posting of a bond to insure that the model home and sales office terms and conditions are adhered to and to ensure that the operations cease and the site is left in good order at the expiration of the permit.
I. The Zoning Administrator may establish such additional requirements and conditions as may be in the best interests of the Town of Front Royal.
(Added Section 1-8-90-Effective Upon Passage)
175-13 AREA AND FRONTAGE (R-1)
Area and frontage regulations shall be as follows:
A. On-lot water and sewer:
1. Minimum area per lot: forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
2. Minimum width at setback line: one hundred (100) feet.
B. Public water or public sewer:
1. Minimum area per lot: thirty thousand (30,000) square feet.
2. Minimum width at setback line: eighty (80) feet.
C. Public water and public sewer:
1. Minimum area per lot: ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
2. Minimum width at setback line: seventy-five (75) feet.
175-14 SETBACK (R-1)
Structures shall be located thirty-five (35) feet or more from any street right-of-way which is fifty (50) feet or greater in width or fifty-five (55) feet or more from the center of any street right-of-way less than fifty (50) feet in width; however, no building need be set back more than the average of the setback of the immediately adjoining structures on either side. A vacant lot fifty (50) feet or more in width may be assumed to be occupied by a building having a minimum setback.
175-15 YARDS (R-1)
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-49
A. Side: The minimum total width of the side yards shall be twenty-five (25) feet, with no one (1) side yard being less than ten (10) feet.
B. Rear: Each rear yard shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet.
C. Front: The required depth of the front yard shall be as provided in Section 175-14. On lots of less than two (2) acres in size or where the front yard provided for any single-family dwelling is less than 150 feet, the main or front building facade and entrance shall be oriented toward the front yard of the property, unless an administrative variance is granted pursuant to Section 175-147.1.
(Added “C” 2-2-6-01-Effective Upon Passage)
D. Accessory buildings shall be setback from side and rear property lines by no less than five (5) feet.
(Added “D” 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
175-16 LOT COVERAGE (R-1)
The maximum building coverage shall be thirty percent (30%).
175-17 HEIGHT (R-1)
A. Buildings may be erected up to two and one-half (2 1/2) stories, but not to exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height.
B. A public or semipublic building, such as a school, church or library, may be erected to a height of sixty (60) feet from grade, provided that required front, side and rear yards shall be increased one (1) foot for each foot in height over thirty-five (35) feet.
C. Church spires, belfries, cupolas, municipal water towers, chimneys, flues, flagpoles, television antennas and radio aerials are exempt. Parapet walls may be up to four (4) feet above the height of the building on which the walls rest.
D. No accessory building which is within twenty (20) feet of any party lot line shall be more than one (1) story high. All accessory buildings shall be less than the main building in height.
175-18 CORNER LOTS (R-1)
A. Of the two (2) or more yards of a corner lot with frontage along multiple streets, the front yard shall be established by the following criteria:
1. For new subdivision applications, the front yard shall be identified by the applicant on the subdivision site plan and approved by the Town on the approved final plat.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-50
2. For new construction on existing corner lots where no front yard is designated on the approved final plat, the property owner shall determine the front yard on the Zoning Permit application and shall be approved by the Town on the approved Zoning Permit.
3. For existing structures, the front yard shall be the yard with frontage that the front façade of the primary building faces.
4. The approved front yard established by this Code Section shall only be changed by review and approval of a revised final plat approved by the Planning Commission. Such future requests shall be approved if the Planning Commission determines that the proposed front yard is consistent with other properties along the same street frontages.
(Amended “A” 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
B. The side yard setback on the side facing the side street shall be thirty (30) feet or more for main buildings, and thirty-five (35) feet or more for accessory buildings.
(Amended “B” 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
C. Each corner lot shall have a minimum width at the setback line of one hundred (100) feet.
D. The rear yard setback if facing a street shall be fifty (50) feet or more for both main and accessory buildings.
(Added (D) 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-1A)
(Adopted 4-24-95)
175-18.1 STATEMENT OF INTENT (R-1A)
The R-1A District is designed to accommodate single-family residential development of a medium density on smaller individual lots. The standards for this district are designed to stabilize and protect the character of the designated areas and to protect and encourage a suitable environment for family life. Optional cluster subdivision standards are included with the intent and purpose of providing greater flexibility for larger development projects. To ensure quality development, the added development flexibility is balanced with requirements that require additional open space and recreational amenities. These additional requirements support a development with higher property values; better preservation of the natural environment; and a more active and healthy community.
(Amended 6-13-16 – Effective Upon Passage)
175-18.2 USE REGULATIONS (R-1A)
A. Subject to the standards and requirements set forth in this Chapter, except as prohibited or restricted by separate restrictions of record that may pertain to property within the R-1A District, the following uses of land and buildings are permitted by-right in the R-1A District:
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-51
RESIDENTIAL:
Single-family dwellings, detached
COMMERCIAL:
INDUSTRIAL:
ORGANIZATIONAL:
Churches
Schools
MISCELLANEOUS:
Accessory uses, structures and buildings
Home occupations
Open space and conservation areas.
Public facilities, excluding Fire and Rescue Squads & Police Stations
Public parks and playgrounds
Public utilities
Signs, as set forth in Section 175-106
Special childcare services
Such other uses as determined similar to one or more enumerated uses by the Zoning Administrator
B. The following uses are permitted within the R-1A District only by approval of a special use permit, except as prohibited or restricted by separate restrictions of record that may pertain to property within the R-1A District:
RESIDENTIAL:
COMMERCIAL:
Day care, and day-care facilities as set forth in the Town Code Section 175-107.1.
INDUSTRIAL:
ORGANIZATIONAL:
Fire and Rescue Squad & Police Stations.
Public Libraries.
Community Center.
MISCELLANEOUS:
Any use permitted under Section 175-10.18.2.A, or specifically listed above under this subsection, that proposes to occupy a building or structure that exceeds the height requirements of Section 175-10.18.4, subject to the requirements of Section 175-136. Additional heights approved by a special use permit shall be required to increase the required setback and yard area requirements by
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-52
an equivalent distance from each property line. Such other uses as determined similar to one or more enumerated uses by the Zoning Administrator.
(Amended 7-25-05, 7-28-08 and 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
175-18.3 AREA (R-1A)
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 175-128, all newly established uses, with the exception of single-family dwellings, shall be required to meet the minimum area requirements at the time of establishment of the use.
A. Minimum lot size:
1. Single family dwellings: seven thousand (7,000) square feet.
2. Schools: twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
3. Churches: twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
4. Parks and playgrounds: five thousand (5,000) square feet.
5. Public utilities: no regulation.
6. Other public facility uses: twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
B. Minimum lot width:
1. Single-family dwellings:
a. Corner lots: seventy (70) feet.
b. Interior lots: fifty (50) feet.
2. Parks and playgrounds and public utilities: no regulation.
3. All other uses: one hundred (100) feet.
C. Minimum district size: three (3) acres.
175-18.4 HEIGHT(R-1A)
A. Single-family dwellings: thirty-five (35) feet maximum.
B. Public or semipublic buildings: forty-five (45) feet maximum, provided that the required front, side and rear yards are increased by two (2) feet for each foot in height over thirty-five (35) feet.
C. Exemptions from height requirements:
1. Church spires.
2. Belfries.
3. Cupolas.
4. Municipal water towers.
5. Chimneys.
6. Flues.
7. Flagpoles.
8. Television antennas.
9. Radio aerials.
D. Accessory buildings and structures:
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-53
1. On lots with an area of less than five-tenths (0.5) acre: two-thirds (2/3) height of principal structure.
2. On lots with an area of five-tenths (0.5) acre or more: not to exceed height of principal structure or thirty-five (35) feet, whichever is less.
175-18.5 MINIMUM YARD DIMENSIONS (R-1A)
A. Single-family dwellings:
1. Front setback: twenty-five (25) feet.
2. Side: seven (7) feet.
3. Corner side: twenty-five (25) feet.
4. Rear: twenty-five (25) feet.
B. Other principal structures:
1. Front setback: twenty-five (25) feet.
2. Side: fifteen (15) feet.
3. Rear: thirty (30) feet.
4. Corner side: twenty-five (25) feet.
C. Accessory buildings and structures:
1. Front setback: thirty (30) feet.
2. Side: five (5) feet or fifty percent (50%) of building height, whichever is greater.
3. Rear: five (5) feet or fifty percent (50%) of building height, whichever is greater.
4. Corner side: twenty-five (25) feet.
D. Notwithstanding the provisions above, the front setback on any lot located within a block that is fifty percent (50%) or more developed shall conform with any consistently established setback along the block.
E. The main or front building facade and entrance for any single-family dwelling shall be oriented toward the front yard of the property, unless an administrative variance is granted pursuant to Section 175-147.1.
(Added “E” 2-26-01-Effective Upon Passage)
175-18.6 LOT COVERAGE (R-1A)
A. Maximum building coverage: thirty-five percent (35%)
B. Accessory building coverage: thirty percent (30%) of any required yard
175-18.7 OFF-STREET PARKING (R-1A)
A. Space requirements:
1. Single-family dwellings: two (2) spaces per unit.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-54
2. Churches/assembly area: one (1) space per four (4) fixed seats in the main assembly or one (1) per one hundred (100) net square feet.
3. Schools: one (1) space per employee plus parking space for assembly areas as provided in
Subsection A (2) above.
4. Libraries: one (1) space per one thousand (1,000) gross square feet.
B. Location: Minimum setback for driveways and parking: three (3) feet from side and rear property lines for parking areas consisting of no more than 4,500 square feet in area. All parking areas with more than 4,500 square feet in area shall meet the requirements of Section 148-870.
(Amended 6-13-16 – Effective Upon Passage)
C. Parking spaces where one car is parked behind another car are permitted in this district for individual dwelling units.
175-18.8 OPTIONAL CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS (R-1A)
A. In lieu of the traditional design standards of Sections 175-18.3 through 175-18.7, the following design standards may be used for cluster developments in the R-1A District.
1. Area
a. Minimum lot size: 5,500 square feet
b. Minimum lot width:
(1) Corner lots: sixty (60) feet
(2) Interior lots: fifty (50) feet
c. Minimum district size: twenty (20) acres
2. Height
a. Single-family dwellings: thirty-five (35) feet maximum.
b. Public or semipublic buildings: forty-five (45) feet maximum, provided that the required front, side and rear yards are increased by two (2) feet for each foot in height over thirty-five (35) feet.
c. Exemptions from height requirements:
(1) Church spires.
(2) Belfries.
(3) Cupolas.
(4) Municipal water towers.
(5) Chimneys.
(6) Flues.
(7) Flagpoles.
(8) Television antennas.
(9) Radio aerials.
(10) Accessory buildings and structures: Not to exceed the height of principal structure, or thirty-five (35) feet, whichever is less.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-55
3. Minimum Yard Dimensions.
a. Single-family dwellings, detached:
(1) Front: Fifteen feet (15); provided that required off-street parking is at least eighteen (18) feet in length, and the required setbacks from any building are met as specified below under Section 175-18.8.A.5. An unenclosed porch may encroach within the required front yard an additional five (5) feet.
(2) Side: Seven (7) feet; except that the setback can be reduced to a minimum of five (5) feet when a separation of fourteen feet (14) feet is maintained between the adjacent structure.
(3) Corner side: fifteen (15) feet; provided that any accessory building is not closer than other houses located along the same street.
(4) Rear: Twenty five (25) feet.
ILLUSTRATION 175-18.8.A.3. Illustration of Minimum Yard Dimensions for Cluster Developments.
b. Accessory buildings and structures:
(1) Front: fifteen (15) feet; provided that any accessory building is not closer than other houses located along the same street.
(2) Side: five (5) feet.
(3) Corner side: fifteen (15) feet; provided that any accessory building is not closer than other houses located along the same street.
(4) Rear: five (5) feet.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-56
c. Notwithstanding the provisions above, the front setback on any lot located within a block that is fifty percent (50%) or more developed shall conform with any consistently established setback along the block.
d. The main or front building facade and entrance for any single-family dwelling shall be oriented toward the front yard of the property, unless an administrative variance is granted pursuant to Section 175-147.1, or alternatively, a special use permit, in accordance with Section 175-136, may be issued to allow frontage along open space areas when such request is submitted with a site plan or subdivision plan for review.
4. Lot Coverage.
a. Maximum building coverage: fifty percent (50%).
5. Off-Street Parking.
a. Space Requirements:
(1) Single-family dwellings: two (2) spaces per unit.
(2) Churches/assembly area: one (1) space per four (4) fixed seats in the main assembly or one (1) per one hundred (100) net square feet.
(3) Schools: one (1) space per employee, plus one (1) space per four (4) fixed seats in the main assembly, or alternatively for the latter, one (1) per one hundred (100) net square feet.
(4) Libraries: one (1) space per one thousand (1,000) gross square feet.
b. Minimum setback for driveways and parking: three (3) feet from side and rear property lines for parking areas consisting of no more than 4,500 square feet in area. All parking areas with more than 4,500 square feet in area shall meet the requirements of Section 148-870.
c. As required under Section 148-870.A.10, required off-street parking spaces shall be setback at least five (5) feet from all buildings; excluding the setback between the side orientation of the parking space and a single-family detached dwelling, provided that a garage is provided that is recessed behind the front building façade of such dwelling.
d. Parking spaces where one car is parked behind another car are permitted in this district for individual dwelling units. Furthermore, within cluster subdivisions, regardless of other provisions within Chapter 175 or Chapter 148, up to one (1) space within a garage or carport may be counted as required off-street parking within a cluster development, provided that the minimum parking space dimensions are met.
6. Community Open Space.
a. Minimum Community Open Space Area: A minimum amount of common open space shall be provided at the equivalence that the minimum lot area of all lots is reduced
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-57
below 7,000 square feet. Below is an example of how the required minimum common open space for a cluster subdivision shall be calculated:
Total Number of Building Lots x 7,000 square feet = X
X - Total Area of Building Lots Proposed = Required Open Space
b. No more than 50% of open space may be located within developmentally restricted areas, such as, but not limited to, the floodway.
c. Surface water bodies may be included within common open space areas, but may not be counted towards the required amount of open space.
d. Access to community open space shall be provided by adjoining street frontage. In lieu of adjoining street frontage, a 20-foot wide public access easement may be authorized by the Planning Commission during the site plan or subdivision plan review process. In such consideration, the Planning Commission may require pedestrian improvements to ensure adequate access is provided to the common opens space.
e. Cluster subdivisions shall provide recreational facilities within common open space based on the number of dwelling units. For the purpose of determining minimum requirements, one (1) recreational unit shall be provided for every 50 dwelling units.
(1) The number of recreational unit credits that each type of recreational facility receives shall be based on Table 175-18.8.A.6.e.(1), shown below.
TABLE 175-18.8.A.6.e.(1)
Recreational Unit Type
Recreational Unit Credit
Playground, as described under 175-18.8.A.6.e (2).
1.5
Community Center, including an enclosed building with a meeting hall.
2.5
In-ground Swimming Pool with fencing.
2
Tennis Court Facility with fencing.
1
Pocket Park w/ vegetable gardens.
1
Pocket Park w/ meditation gardens.
1
Partial or full Athletic Fields or courts, such as soccer or baseball fields.
1
6’ wide asphalt Hiking / Biking Trail .
(or other approved material)
> ¼ mile
1
> 1 mile
2
> 3 mile
3
> 4 mile
4
Picnic Shelters with cooking facilities, picnic tables & trash receptacles.
1
Horseshoe pit and/or fire pit with seating area.
1
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-58
Covered structure with seating area
1
Improved/landscaped passive or active nature areas with wildflowers or edible landscaping or ornamental trees or orchards.
1
Neighborhood green/square of ½ acre or more with pathways.
1
Community park of 8 acres or more with pathways.
2
Other types of recreational facilities.
As equivalent to any of the above-listed types, as determined by the Planning Commission.
(2) The first recreational unit type of a cluster subdivision shall consist of a playground, with the amenities described below. Alternative recreational unit types for the first recreational unit may be permitted by the Planning Commission for age-restricted communities.
1. A playground shall consist of a composite play system, or systems, with eight (8) play features and a sitting bench.
TABLE 175-18.8.A.6.e.(2)i.
Example Playground Recreational Unit Type
Quantity
Equipment
Minimum 2
2 to 5 year-old play features
Minimum 1
Slides
Minimum 1
Climbing features
Minimum 1
Overhead features
Minimum 1
Tunnels
Minimum 1
Play panels
Minimum 1
Swings (8 feet high, 2 seats)
Minimum 1
Sitting bench
2. Playgrounds shall be constructed to specifications equivalent to those issued by the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission in the document Public Playground Safety Handbook (2010), or as may be amended in the future.
(3) Each home shall be within one-quarter (1/4) of a mile from at least one qualifying recreational unit facility.
(4) Recreational facilities shall be constructed in sequence with the phasing of development for the cluster subdivision.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-59
(5) Recreational facilities shall conform to the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, including Handicap Accessibility (ADA) Standards.
(6) Buildings or structures used for community recreational purposes may be located within transitional yards, as required below, but shall conform with the minimum setback requirements for principle structures.
(7) Common open space, including all recreational units, shall be maintained in good condition by the developer until such time that it is dedicated to a Homeowner’s Association or accepted as a public park by Warren County or the Town of Front Royal.
7. Transitional Yard. A minimum transitional yard area is required between any principal building and the following:
a. Any planned limited access roadway (i.e. no curb cuts for individual driveways): Minimum 25 feet
b. Any adjoining development that is not part of the R-1A cluster subdivision, unless such adjoining property shares the same ownership as the R1-A cluster subdivision: Minimum 50 feet.
(Added Entire Section 6-13-16 – Effective Upon Passage)
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-2)
175-19 STATEMENT OF INTENT (R-2)
The R-2 District is composed of medium-density concentrations of residential uses and open areas where similar development appears likely to occur. The standards for this district are designed to stabilize and protect the essential character of the area so designated and to protect and encourage, insofar as compatible with the intensity of land use, a suitable environment for family life. Development is, therefore, limited to low- to medium-density concentrations, and permitted uses are limited to single-family- and two-family-type dwellings plus selected additional uses, such as schools, parks, churches and certain public facilities that serve the residents of the district. Home occupations, as defined by this chapter, are permitted. Mobile homes are prohibited.
175-20 USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT (R-2)
Subject to the standards and requirements set forth in this Chapter, except as prohibited or restricted by separate restrictions of record that may pertain to property within the R-2 District, the following uses of land and buildings are permitted by-right in the R-2 District:
RESIDENTIAL:
Duplexes
Single-family dwellings, detached
Two-family dwellings
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-60
COMMERCIAL:
INDUSTRIAL:
ORGANIZATIONAL:
Churches
Schools
MISCELLANEOUS:
Accessory uses, structures and buildings.
Home occupations.
Open space and conservation areas.
Public facilities.
Public parks and playgrounds.
Public utilities.
Signs, as set forth in Section 175-106.
Special childcare services.
Such other uses as determined similar to one or more enumerated uses by the Zoning Administrator.
(Amended 7-25-05 and 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
175-20.1 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL PERMIT (R-2)
The following uses are permitted within the R-2 District only by approval of a special use permit, except as prohibited or restricted by separate restrictions of record that may pertain to property within the R-2 District:
RESIDENTIAL:
COMMERCIAL:
Bed and Breakfast Uses set forth in Town Code Section 175-107.2
Day care, and day-care facilities as set forth in the Town Code Section 175-107.1
Nursing homes, as set forth in Section 175-107
INDUSTRIAL:
ORGANIZATIONAL:
Fire and Rescue Squad & Police Stations
Public Libraries
Community Center (public)
MISCELLANEOUS:
Any use permitted under Section 175-20, or specifically listed above under this subsection, that proposes to occupy a building or structure that exceeds the height requirements of Section 175-26, subject to the requirements of Section 175-136. Additional heights approved by a special use
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-61
permit shall be required to increase the required setback and yard area requirements by an equivalent distance from each property line.
Such other uses as determined similar to one or more enumerated uses by the Zoning Administrator.
(Added Entire Section 10-23-89 ; Amended 1-10-96, 7-28-08 and 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
175-20.2 MODEL HOMES AND SALES OFFICES (R-2)
Model homes and sales offices for the marketing of residential dwellings within a specific development shall be permitted in an R-2 Residential Zoning District upon approval of a zoning permit by the Zoning Administrator, subject to the provisions and conditions set forth in Town Code 175-12.2. (Added 1-8-90-Effective Upon Passage)
175-21 AREA (R-2)
The minimum lot area in R-2 Residential Districts shall be as follows:
A. The minimum lot size for a duplex structure is eight thousand (8,000) square feet. A duplex lot may be further subdivided into separate parcels for each dwelling unit of the duplex, provided that the resulting lot size for each duplex dwelling unit is a minimum of four thousand (4,000) square feet.
B. The minimum lot size for all other uses is eight thousand (8,000) square feet.
(Amended Section 2-13-89-Effective Upon Passage)
175-22 SETBACK (R-2)
Structures shall be located thirty (30) feet or more from any street right-of-way which is fifty (50) feet or greater in width or fifty-five (55) feet or more from the center of any street right-of-way less than fifty (50) feet in width; however, no building need be set back more than the average of the setbacks of the immediately adjoining structures on either side. A vacant lot fifty (50) feet or more in width may be assumed to be occupied by a building having a minimum setback.
175-23 FRONTAGE (R-2)
The minimum lot width at the setback line shall be seventy (70) feet.
175-24 YARDS (R-2)
A. Side: Each side yard shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet.
B. Rear: Each rear yard shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-62
C. Front: The required depth of the front yard shall be as provided in Section 175-22. The main or front building facade and entrance for any residential structure shall be oriented toward the front yard of the property, unless an administrative variance is granted pursuant to Section 175-147.1.
(Added “C” 2-26-01-Effective Upon Passage)
D. Accessory buildings shall be setback from side and rear property lines by no less than five (5) feet. No accessory building is permitted within a required front yard.
(Added “D” 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
175-25 LOT COVERAGE (R-2)
The maximum building coverage shall be thirty-five percent (35%).
175-26 HEIGHT (R-2)
A. Buildings may be erected up to two and one-half (2 1/2) stories, but not to exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height.
B. A public or semipublic building, such as a school, church or library, may be erected to a height of sixty (60) feet from grade, provided that required front, side and rear yards shall be increased one (1) foot for each foot in height over thirty-five (35) feet.
C. Church spires, belfries, cupolas, municipal water towers, chimneys, flues, flagpoles, television antennas and radio aerials are exempt. Parapet walls may be up to four (4) feet above the height of the building on which the walls rest.
D. Accessory buildings over one (1) story in height shall be at least ten (10) feet from any lot line. All accessory buildings shall be less than the main building in height.
175-27 CORNER LOTS (R-2)
A. Of the two (2) or more yards of a corner lot with frontage along multiple streets, the front yard shall be established by the following criteria:
1. For new subdivision applications, the front yard shall be identified by the applicant on the subdivision site plan and approved by the Town on the approved final plat.
2. For new construction on existing corner lots where no front yard is designated on the approved final plat, the property owner shall determine the front yard on the Zoning Permit application and shall be approved by the Town on the approved Zoning Permit.
3. For existing structures, the front yard shall be the yard with frontage that the front façade of the primary building faces.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-63
4. The approved front yard established by this Code Section shall only be changed by review and approval of a revised final plat approved by the Planning Commission. Such future requests shall be approved if the Planning Commission determines that the proposed front yard is consistent with other properties along the same street frontages.
(Amended “A” 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
B. The side yard setback on the side facing a side street shall be twenty-five (25) feet or more for main buildings, and thirty (30) feet or more for accessory buildings.
(Amended “B” 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
C. Each corner lot shall have a minimum width at the setback line of ninety (100) feet.
D. The rear yard setback if facing a street shall be fifty (50) feet or more for both main and accessory buildings. (Added “D” 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-3)
175-28 STATEMENT OF INTENT (R-3)
The R-3 Residential District is composed of medium-to-high density concentrations of residential uses. The standards for this district are designed to stabilize and protect the essential character of the area so designated and to promote and encourage, insofar as compatible with the intensity of land use, a suitable environment for families desiring the amenities of apartment living and the convenience of being closest to shopping, employment centers and other community facilities. Development is, therefore, limited to medium- to high-density concentration, and permitted uses are limited to single-family, two-family and multifamily dwellings, plus selected additional uses, such as schools, parks, churches and certain public facilities. Home occupations, as defined by this chapter, are permitted. Mobile homes are prohibited.
175-29 USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT (R-3)
A. Subject to the standards and requirements set forth in this Chapter, except as prohibited or restricted by separate restrictions of record that may pertain to property within the R-3 District, the following uses of land and buildings are permitted by-right in the R-3 District:
RESIDENTIAL:
Duplexes.
Single-family dwellings, detached
Townhouses developed on sites of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet up to one (1) acre as set forth in Section 175-112.
Two-family dwellings.
COMMERCIAL:
Hospitals and other semipublic facilities of an institutional nature.
Pharmaceutical centers as set forth in Section 175-108.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-64
Professional offices as set forth in Section 175-108.
Nursing homes, as set forth in Section 175-107.
INDUSTRIAL:
ORGANIZATIONS:
Churches
Schools
MISCELLANEOUS:
Accessory uses, structures and buildings.
Home occupations.
Open space and conservation areas.
Public facilities.
Public parks and playgrounds.
Public utilities.
Signs, as set forth in Section 175-106.
Special childcare services.
Such other uses as determined similar to one or more enumerated uses by the Zoning Administrator.
(Amended 3-12-90, 5-14-90, 7-25-05 and 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
175-30 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL PERMIT (R-3)
The following uses are permitted within the R-3 District only by approval of a special use permit, except as prohibited or restricted by separate restrictions of record that may pertain to property within the R-3 District:
RESIDENTIAL:
Apartments as set forth in Section 175-113.
Townhouses on sites over one (1) acre, as set forth in Section 175-112.
COMMERCIAL:
Bed and Breakfast Uses set forth in Town Code Section 175-107.2.
Community Centers (public).
Conversion of a structure originally designed and intended for occupancy as a single-family dwelling into a structure with more than one (1) dwelling.
Day care, and day-care facilities as set forth in the Town Code Section 175-107.1.
Nursing homes, as set forth in Section 175-107.
INDUSTRIAL:
ORGANIZATIONAL:
Art galleries and museums.
Fire and Rescue Squad & Police Stations
Public Libraries
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-65
Community Center (public)
MISCELLANEOUS:
Any use permitted under Section 175-29, or specifically listed above under this subsection, that proposes to occupy a building or structure that exceeds the height requirements of Section 175-36, subject to the requirements of Section 175-136. Additional heights approved by a special use permit shall be required to increase the required setback and yard area requirements by an equivalent distance from each property line.
Lodging houses, rooming houses and boarding houses.
Such other uses as determined similar to one or more enumerated uses by the Zoning Administrator.
(Amended 10-23-89. 7-28-08. 7-23-12 and 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
175-30.1 MODEL HOMES AND SALES OFFICES (R-3)
Model homes and sales offices for the marketing of residential dwellings within a specific development shall be permitted in an R-3 Residential Zoning District upon approval of a zoning permit by the Zoning Administrator, subject to the provisions and conditions set forth in Town Code Section 175-12.2.
(Added Section 1-8-90-Effective Upon Passage)
175-31 AREA (R-3)
The minimum lot area in R-3 Residential Districts shall be as follows:
A. The minimum lot size for a duplex structure is seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet. A duplex lot may be further subdivided into separate parcels for each dwelling unit of the duplex, provided that the resulting lot size for each duplex dwelling unit is a minimum of three thousand seven hundred fifty (3,750) square feet.
B. The minimum lot size for townhouses shall be as stated in the Town Code Section 175-112.
C. The minimum lot size for apartments shall be as stated in the Town Code Section 175-113.
D. The minimum lot size for all other uses is six thousand (6,000) square feet. An additional one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet shall be required for each additional dwelling unit above one (1) for all residential uses other than townhouses, apartments and duplexes.
(Amended 2-9-87 and 2-13-89 -Effective Upon Passage)
175-32 SETBACK (R-3)
Structures shall be located thirty (30) feet or more from any street right-of-way which is fifty (50) feet or greater in width or fifty-five (55) feet or more from the center of any street right-of-way
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-66
less than fifty (50) feet in width; however, no building need be set back more than the average of the setbacks of the immediately adjoining structures on either side. A vacant lot fifty (50) feet or more in width may be assumed to be occupied by a building having a minimum setback.
175-33 SETBACK WIDTHS (R-3)
A. The minimum lot width at the setback line shall be sixty (60) feet.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A, the minimum lot width at the setback line shall be consistent with the established lot width at the setback line for abutting lots fronting the same road or street on either side of the lot to be subdivided, provided as follows:
1. Subsection B shall only apply in cases of new subdivision or resubdivision involving the creation of four (4) or fewer new lots.
2. Subsection B shall only apply in cases where the aforesaid abutting lots were established and in existence prior to April 10, 1978.
3. Under no circumstances shall the minimum lot width at the setback line for newly created lots be less than fifty (50) feet, regardless of the setback width of the abutting lots.
4. All corner lots shall be governed by the provisions of Section 175-37c.
5. Where abutting lots have differing widths at their setback lines, the minimum setback width for newly created lots shall be consistent with the larger of the two abutting lots, or sixty (60) feet, whichever is lesser.
6. An "abutting lot" is defined as a lot sharing a common side yard boundary with the lot to be subdivided and fronting the same street as the lot to be subdivided.
(Amended Section 11-13-89-Effective Upon Passage)
175-34 YARDS (R-3)
A. Side: Each side yard shall be a minimum of seven (7) feet.
B. Rear: Each rear yard shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet.
C. Front: The required depth of the front yard shall be as provided in Section 175-32. The main or front building facade and entrance for any single-unit residential structure, including duplexes and townhouses, shall be oriented toward the front yard of the property, unless an administrative variance is granted pursuant to Section 175-147.1.
(Added “C” 2-26-01-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-67
D. Accessory buildings shall be setback from side and rear property lines by no less than five (5) feet. No accessory building is permitted within a required front yard.
(Added “D” 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
175-35 LOT COVERAGE (R-3)
The maximum building coverage shall be forty percent (40%) unless as otherwise herein provided.
175-36 HEIGHT (R-3)
A. Structures may be erected up to thirty-five (35) feet in height, except that:
1. The height limit for structures may be increased up to sixty (60) feet and up to five (5) stories, provided that required front, side and rear yards shall be increased one (1) foot for each foot of building height over thirty-five (35) feet.
2. Church spires, belfries, cupolas, monuments, municipal water towers, chimneys, flues, flagpoles, television antennas and radio aerials are exempt. Parapet walls may be up to four (4) feet above the height of the building on which the walls rest.
B. Accessory buildings over one (1) story in height shall be at least ten (10) feet from any lot line. All accessory buildings shall be less than the main building in height.
(Added “B” 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
175-37 CORNER LOTS (R-3)
A. Of the two (2) or more yards of a corner lot with frontage along multiple streets, the front yard shall be established by the following criteria:
1. For new subdivision applications, the front yard shall be identified by the applicant on the subdivision site plan and approved by the Town on the approved final plat.
2. For new construction on existing corner lots where no front yard is designated on the approved final plat, the property owner shall determine the front yard on the Zoning Permit application and shall be approved by the Town on the approved Zoning Permit.
3. For existing structures, the front yard shall be the yard with frontage that the front façade of the primary building faces.
4. The approved front yard established by this Code Section shall only be changed by review and approval of a revised final plat approved by the Planning Commission. Such future requests shall be approved if the Planning Commission determines that the proposed front yard is consistent with other properties along the same street frontages.
(Amended “A” 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-68
B. The side yard setback on the side facing a side street shall be twenty (20) feet or more for main buildings, and thirty (30) feet or more for accessory buildings.
(Amended “B” 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
C. Each corner lot shall have a minimum width at the setback line of one hundred (100) feet.
D. The rear yard setback if facing a street shall be fifty (50) feet or more for both main and accessory buildings.
(Added “D” 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
PLANNED NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (PND)
(Adopted 4-11-05)
175-37.1 STATEMENT OF INTENT (PND)
Pursuant to Sections 15.2-2201 and 15.2-2286 of the Code of Virginia, the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal establishes the Planned Neighborhood Development (PND) zoning ordinance to allow planned neighborhood development on large tracts of land characterized by unified site design for a variety of housing types and densities, clustering of buildings, common open space, and a mix of building types and land uses in which project planning (as permitted herein) and density calculation are performed for the entire development rather than on an individual basis. The purposes of the ordinance are to provide an alternative form of development that:
A. Eliminates standard dimensional requirements while reserving sufficient natural open space for common use, conservation or recreational purposes, and providing adequate buffering between structures and adjacent properties;
B. Enhances the physical appearance of the Town by preserving the Town's natural assets and distinctive character;
C. Promotes more efficient use of land and provision of public facilities, utilities, streets, and services;
D. Provides the opportunity for innovative combinations of integrated housing, recreation, neighborhood-oriented commercial, professional uses, and increased public amenities within a single development;
E. Conserves natural and environmental resources and the integrity of natural systems;
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-69
F. Encourages innovative residential development so that housing demands are met by a greater variety of types, designs, and layouts of residential structures;
G. Encourages creative and site-sensitive developments by allowing increased overall density in exchange for planned neighborhood development pursuant to this chapter.
H. Promotes the design of a walkable environment for pedestrians within the neighborhood which provides a circulation system for various transportation modes.
I. Satisfies the general purposes of zoning regulations to promote health, safety, morals and general welfare of the community.
175-37.2 EVALUATION CRITERIA (PND)
Application for rezoning to a Planned Neighborhood Development District shall specifically demonstrate achievement of the following objectives. Each proposed Planned Neighborhood Development will be evaluated on the extent to which these objectives are achieved:
A. Provides a variety of housing types and designs at a range of densities and costs in an orderly relationship to one another.
B. Employs architectural, landscape and/or other design features to provide compatibility between different uses.
C. Includes a network of circulation systems for various transportation modes that connect to the surrounding area.
D. Conserves a minimum of 25% open space, incorporating a system of parks, open spaces, recreational facilities, and public amenities within the development which enhance the total plan of development.
E. Efficiently utilizes land to protect and preserve natural features such as trees, streams, and topographic features.
F. Provides a mechanism to relate the type, design and layout of proposed development to the specific characteristics of the particular parcel.
G. Exhibits consistency with the Town’s Comprehensive Plan and provides overall benefits to the Town.
H. Demonstrates adequate capacity of public facilities and utilities to serve the development.
I. Minimizes traffic impacts upon the surrounding traffic network.
175-37.3 PERMITTED USES (PND)
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-70
A. All planned neighborhood developments shall permit the following residential and accessory uses:
1. Detached single-family dwellings;
2. Two-family dwellings;
3. Multi-family dwellings;
4. Townhouses with a maximum of eight units per structure;
5. Accessory buildings or uses as defined in Town Code Section 175-3;
6. Recreation or park facilities;
7. Retirement living facilities (handicapped accessible)
8. Municipal buildings or uses;
9. Public utilities: poles, lines, booster and relay stations, distribution transformers, pipes, meters and other facilities necessary for the provision and maintenance of public utilities, including water and sewerage systems. Such utilities shall be buried or otherwise screened in accordance with design standards of the development;
10. Home Occupations as set forth in Section 175-108;
11. Public libraries;
12. Schools; and
13. Churches.
14. Special childcare services.
15. Open space and conservation areas.
16. Such other uses as determined similar to one or more enumerated uses by the Zoning Administrator.
(Added “14-16” 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
B. Planned neighborhood developments shall permit the following community and institutional uses under the terms set forth in Section 175-37.9, Density Bonus:
1. Day care centers; and
2. Community Halls
C. Planned neighborhood developments comprising 50 acres or more may contain the uses permitted in subsections A and B as well as the following commercial uses:
1. Neighborhood–oriented commercial businesses;
2. Personal services;
3. Business or professional offices; and
4. Neighborhood restaurants; and
5. Banks, branch banks and financial institutions.
D. Planned neighborhood developments may include the following uses provided such uses are either specifically approved as part of the original development plan or approved by special use permit in accordance with Section 175-136 if proposed subsequent to approval of the Master Land Use Plan.
1. Bed and Breakfast home
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-71
2. Assisted Living Facility or other nursing home as permitted in the R-3 District.
3. Automotive fuel facilities in conjunction with neighborhood retail stores, provided adequate demonstration is made that the facility can be supported by the neighborhood in which it is located without attracting additional traffic into the neighborhood. Such facilities shall not include the storage or sale of automobiles, automotive mechanical or body repair work, painting, welding or other activities not normally associated with the dispensing of gasoline.
4. Art galleries and museums.
(Added “4” 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
E. Except as otherwise specified for PND’s, proposed uses within a PND shall be subject to the provisions set forth for such use in the Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 175 of the Town Code).
F. Prohibited Uses
Junkyards, off-site signage, used automobiles and truck/trailer sales, manufactured and mobile homes, outdoor storage yards, and industrial uses are prohibited in a Planned Neighborhood Development.
(Amended “F” by adding “manufactured” 7-23-12-Effective Upon Passage)
175-37.4 STANDARDS (PND)
A. Planned neighborhood developments shall contain not less than 20 contiguous acres.
B. The project area must be held in single ownership or all property owners within the proposed district must participate in the application.
C. Planned neighborhood developments shall be served by municipal water and sewer service and municipal electric service if located within the Town’s electric service area.
D. Allowable base residential density. Overall residential density shall not exceed the overall allowable residential density of the parcel or parcels involved prior to the re-zoning, dedicated to uses other than the commercial uses set forth in Sections 175-37.3 B and C. This base residential density may be increased at the Town Council’s discretion up to a maximum of 6.0 dwelling units per acre.
E. Conservation lands. Lands with the following characteristics shall not be developed and shall not be platted as part of a residential, community, institutional or commercial lot within a planned neighborhood development: land within the 100-year flood plain; land with a natural slope in excess of 40 percent, and as determined by standard slope computation methods. These lands shall be designated on the plat for conservation purposes. Conservation lands may be used in computing the allowable base residential density. Nontidal wetlands may be platted, but shall be protected by preservation easements.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-72
F. Management and ownership of common open space and facilities. All common spaces, properties, and facilities not deeded to the Town or other public entity shall be preserved for their intended purpose as specified on the approved plan. The developer shall provide for the establishment of a property owner’s association conforming to the Virginia Property Owners’ Association Act, Code of Virginia (1950) as amended, to ensure the maintenance of all common areas.
175-37.5 REVIEW AND CREATION OF THE PLANNED NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (PND)
Whenever a tract of land meets the minimum requirements for classification as a PND district as stipulated herein, the owner may file an application with the Director of Planning, requesting rezoning to this classification. A preliminary conference with staff prior to such filing is required.
A. Concept Plan:
1. Procedure: The owner may present and file with the Director of Planning a Concept Plan for the project, along with the fee established in the schedule of fees, showing the rough layout of major roads within the project, and such areas within the project as may be planned for particular uses or mixtures of uses, as outlined below. Upon receipt, the Director of Planning shall forward the Concept Plan to the Planning Commission for review and comment. The Planning Commission may recommend to the Town Council approval, denial or modifications to the Concept Plan.
Upon review and recommendation by the Planning Commission the Director of Planning shall forward the Concept Plan to the Town Council for review and comment. The Town Council may approve, deny or approve conditionally with stated modifications. Approval of a Concept Plan is only an expression of apparent favor to be used in preparation of the PND Master Land Use Plan and does not authorize construction of improvements.
2. Submittal Requirements: The Concept Plan shall be prepared by a Virginia registered architect, landscape architect, land surveyor or engineer with seal and signature affixed to the plan. The plan shall be approximately to scale and clearly show the following:
(Amended “2” by adding “land surveyor” 9-26-05-Effective Upon Passage)
a. Location map showing existing zoning and ownership of property and adjacent land;
b. Identification of principal natural features and/or unique site design features;
c. Relationship of the proposal with surrounding utilities and public facilities to serve the tract at the ultimate proposed densities;
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-73
d. The location and size of the components of the PND, including the general layout of the road system within the project, location of use areas within the project planned for particular uses or mixtures of uses and their acreage, residential densities, and the interior open space system and preservation areas;
e. Written description of the use areas;
f. A statement demonstrating consistency with the Town of Front Royal Comprehensive Plan, suitability of the tract for the type and intensity of the activities proposed, the anticipated availability of adequate road networks, and the objectives stated in Section 175-37.1.
B. Master Land Use Plan: Within six months of the Town Council’s approval or approval conditioned upon modifications of the Concept Plan, the developer/owner may prepare and file an application for an amendment to the official zoning map to a Planned Neighborhood Development (PND) District, as set forth in this chapter, together with the established in the schedule of fees for rezoning and an engineered Master Land Use Plan for development presenting a unified and organized arrangement of buildings, service areas, parking, landscaped areas, recreation areas, open space and community facilities. All information submitted for consideration as a Master Land Use Plan shall be of sufficient clarity and scale to accurately identify the location, nature, and character of the proposed district. At a minimum the information contained on a Master Land Use Plan shall include:
1. A map of the boundaries of the proposed development site, showing bearings, dimensions at a scale not greater than one (1) inch to six hundred (600) feet;
2. A statement of existing property owner(s) and the proposed developer;
3. Names and addresses of adjacent property owners;
4. A vicinity map drawn at a scale of between one (1) inch equals two hundred 2,000 feet and showing the relation of the property.
5. Topographic map with contour lines at vertical intervals of not greater than five (5) feet at a minimum scale of one inch to 200 feet;
6. A site analysis map of existing conditions, including but not limited to the location and delineation of sensitive environmental features, any 100-year floodplain, watercourse, non-tidal wetlands, areas greater than 15-percent slope, and significant geologic formations or man-made features, existing structures and public facilities, historic landmarks, existing zoning on-site and surrounding areas;
7. The overall scheme of development including general layout of proposed land uses at a scale of one (1) inch equals two hundred (200) feet;
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-74
8. The location and acreage of recreation areas, open space and conservation areas, parks within the development;
9. The location, acreage and type of nonresidential areas and uses, and community/ public uses.
10. For each residential area shown, the total number of units in each by type and density;
11. An access and circulation plan showing the general location of all existing and proposed streets and easements of right-of-way, bridges, culverts, railroads, and utility transmission lines;
12. A traffic analysis and description of the base existing conditions and traffic volumes for the connecting external road network serving the site, projected average daily traffic for all new streets within the subdivision based on the proposed land uses and the traffic growth on adjacent highways, trip generation rates for peak hours by development and phase, and internal/external trip distribution and intersection and capacity analysis, identifying off-site access and traffic control improvements generated by the traffic demands of the proposed project at full development;
13. The proposed general location of all building areas and other improvements, except single-family and two-family dwellings and accessory buildings;
14. Notations showing the total gross development acreage, the net development acreage, acreage devoted to each land use category, the number of dwelling units and overall development density of the project;
15. General intent and schematic plans for water, sanitary sewer, storm water management, electrical services, and other utilities;
16. An approximate development schedule/phasing plan;
17. A general description of proposed agreements, provisions, or covenants that govern the use, maintenance, and continued protection of property to be held in common ownership.
18. Municipal boundaries through the property.
19. A narrative statement demonstrating consistency with the Town of Front Royal Comprehensive Plan, suitability of the tract for the type and intensity of the activities proposed, and the planning purposes to be achieved by the proposed PND as stated in Section 175-37.1, the design theme and major elements, principal site features, and environmental components integrated into the plan.
20. An impact assessment on the environment and on community facilities, services and taxes.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-75
21. Demographic profile of proposed development (population, housing, school children and employment).
22. Other relevant data which may be used to evaluate the project.
23. A set of design guidelines describing the design principles for the site arrangement, standards for development including proposed yards, building heights, building architecture, open space characteristics, landscaping, hardscape, and buffering, and streetscapes related to scale, proportions, and massing at the edge of the district.
The design guidelines will establish the appearance standards to be used as the basis for the appearance review occurring concurrent with the site development review. The purpose of the appearance standards shall be:
a. To encourage development that enhances the character of the Town;
b. To enhance and protect property values by encouraging excellent design;
c. To encourage architectural freedom, imagination and variety, and to encourage creative design solutions that will enhance the Town's visual appearance.
d. To promote harmonious unified development within a planned neighborhood.
C. Demonstration of Purposes: The purposes shall be demonstrated in each of the components as follows:
1. Relationship of Building Site:
a. The proposed non-residential development shall be designed and sited to accomplish a desirable view as observed from adjacent streets.
b. Parking areas shall be enhanced with decorative elements, building wall extensions, plantings, berms, or other appropriate means to screen parking areas from view from the streets and adjacent properties.
2. Relationship to Adjoining Areas:
a. Adjacent buildings of different architectural styles shall be made compatible by use of screens, sight breaks, materials and other methods.
b. Landscaping shall provide a transition to adjoining property and screening between residential and commercial uses, and for off-street commercial parking and loading areas from public view.
c. Texture, building lines and mass shall be harmonious with adjoining property. Monotonous texture, lines and mass shall be avoided.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-76
3. Building Design and Landscaping: The applicant shall provide a narrative for all building types describing compliance with the following, including dimensional and qualitative specifications.
a. Quality of design and landscaping, and compatibility with surrounding uses for proposed nonresidential development. Architectural style is not restricted.
b. Materials and finishes of good, sound architectural quality that are harmonious with adjoining buildings.
c. Suitable materials for the type and design of the building. Materials that are architecturally harmonious shall be used for all exterior building walls and other exterior building components.
d. Building components, such as windows, doors, eaves, and parapets with appropriate proportion and relationships to one another.
e. Use of harmonious colors and compatible accents.
f. Mechanical equipment or other utility hardware on roof, ground, or buildings screened from view with materials harmonious with the building.
g. Non-Monotonous design with visual interest provided by variation in detail, form, and siting.
h. Exterior lighting used as part of the architectural concept. Fixtures, standards, and all exposed accessories harmonious with the building design.
i. Landscaping treatment creating unity of design, enhance architectural features, strengthen vistas, and provide shade.
j. Plant materials selected for interest in its structure, texture, and color and for its ultimate growth using indigenous plants and those that are hardy, harmonious to the design and of good appearance.
k. Protection of plant materials by appropriate curbs, tree guards, or other devices in locations which are susceptible to injury by pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
4. Signs:
a. Signs shall conform to the provisions of Section 175-106 for residential districts and this section, except that signs erected on poles shall not be permitted.
b. Every sign shall be of appropriate scale and proportion in relation to the surrounding buildings.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-77
c. Every sign shall be designed as an integral architectural element of the building and site to which it relates.
d. The colors, materials, and lighting of every sign shall be harmonious with the building and site to which it relates.
e. The number of graphic elements on a sign shall be held to the minimum needed to convey the sign's principal message and shall be in proportion to the area of the sign.
f. Each sign shall be compatible with signs on adjoining plots or buildings.
g. Logos shall conform to the criteria for all other signs.
h. A coordinated, unified sign plan shall be utilized for direction and information within the PND.
5. Miscellaneous Structures: Miscellaneous structures and hardware shall be part of the architectural concept of the project. Materials, scale and colors shall be compatible with the building and surrounding uses.
D. The Planning Commission shall proceed in general as for any other rezoning application as required in the ordinance, and recommend to the Town Council to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the application.
E. The Town Council shall proceed in general as for any other rezoning application as required in the ordinance. Subsequent to the public hearing and a recommendation from the Planning Commission, the Town Council shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the application for a Master Land Use Plan.
F. Upon approval of a Master Land Use Plan for development the official zoning map shall be amended to indicate the property as “PND - Planned Neighborhood Development”. Once the Town Council has approved the Master Land Use Plan, all accepted proffers shall constitute conditions, enforceable by the Zoning Administrator.
175-37.6 OPEN SPACE STANDARDS (PND)
A. Planned neighborhood developments shall reserve a minimum of 25 percent of the acreage of the parcel as dedicated natural open space.
B. Up to 25 percent of this requirement may be satisfied with land covered by water or by stormwater detention or retention basins (dry ponds shall not be permitted as open space), if the Town Council determines that such a water body or basin is suitable for the purposes set forth in Section 175-37.1. The dedicated open space shall not be included in subdivision lots. Dedicated open space shall include the land necessary to provide access to the open space.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-78
C. Land characterized as conservation lands in Section 175-37.4.E. of this ordinance may be used to fulfill the minimum open space requirement up to a maximum of 50 percent of the total dedicated natural open space within a planned neighborhood development.
D. Dedicated open space shall have shape, dimension, character, location, and topography to accomplish the open space purposes specified in Section 175-37.1 and to ensure appropriate public access.
E. Dedicated open space land shall be shown on the planned neighborhood development Concept Plan and Master Land Use Plan and shall be labeled to specify that the land has been dedicated to open space purposes. The plans and final plat shall specify that the open space land shall not be further subdivided or developed and is permanently reserved for natural open space purposes.
F. The open space shall be conveyed by the applicant as a condition of plat approval and may be conveyed by any of the following means as determined by the Town Council:
1. Deeded in perpetuity to the Town of Front Royal or other governmental agency for the purposes herein.
2. Reserved for common use or ownership of all property owners within the development by covenants in the deeds approved by the Town Attorney. A copy of the proposed deed covenants shall be submitted with the application.
3. Deeded in perpetuity to a private, non-profit, tax-exempt organization legally constituted for conservation purposes under terms and conditions that ensure the perpetual protection and management of the property for conservation purposes. A copy of the proposed deeds and relevant corporate documents of the land trust shall be submitted with the application.
4. Deeded to a property owner's association within the development upon terms and conditions approved by the Town Attorney that will ensure the continued use and management of the land for the intended purposes. The formation and incorporation by the applicant of one or more appropriate property owners' associations shall be required prior to plat approval. A copy of the proposed property owner's deed and the by-laws and other relevant documents of the property owner's association shall be submitted with the application. The following shall be required if open space is to be dedicated to a property owner's association:
a. Covenants providing for mandatory membership in the association and setting forth the owner's rights, interests, and privileges in the association and the common land, must be included in the deed for each lot or unit;
b. The property owners' association shall have the responsibility of maintaining the open space and operating and maintaining recreational facilities;
c. The association shall have the authority to levy charges against all property owners to defray the expenses connected with the maintenance of open space and recreational facilities; and
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-79
d. The applicant shall maintain control of dedicated open space and be responsible for its maintenance until 75% of occupancy permits for residential units have been issued and development is sufficient to support the association.
G. The owner/developer shall convey or restrict the open space land by a deed instrument reviewed and approved by the Front Royal Town Attorney to ensure that the land will be held and managed in perpetuity for open space purposes and shall not be further developed.
H. If the planned neighborhood development is developed in phases, the provision of dedicated natural open space shall be phased with the construction of dwelling units and other improvements to ensure that a proportionate share of the total dedicated open space is preserved with each phase.
I. Streets and other impervious surfaces shall be excluded from the calculation of the minimum dedicated open space requirement; however, lands occupied by bike paths, landscaped grounds, or similar common recreational development (excluding tennis courts, golf courses, and buildings) may be counted as dedicated open space, provided that impervious surfaces constitute no more than 5 percent of the total required open space.
J. Open space shall be permanently dedicated for one of more of the following uses: natural resource conservation, recreational facilities, wetland and water course preservation, selective forestry, wildlife habitat, undeveloped parklands or scenic preservation.
175-37.7 OFF-STREET PARKING (PND)
A. The number, design, location and construction of parking lots, bays, spaces and drives shall conform to the applicable requirements of Sections 175-104 and 175-105 Zoning Ordinance and Section 148-48 of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. Parking for commercial land uses shall also comply with Section 175-45 of the Front Royal Town Code.
1. Parking areas shall be planted with trees a minimum of two inches in caliper measured six inches above ground level, so that there is at least one tree per ten parking spaces within the parking lot. Such trees must be protected by curbing or other means against damage by vehicles. A minimum planting area, equivalent to 162 square feet per tree, shall be provided.
2. Parking areas shall have a landscaped island at each end of each row of vehicle spaces. No more than 15 spaces shall be laid out without an intermediate landscape island. Such planting islands shall be not less than nine feet wide in the direction parallel to the row and not less than 18 feet long in the direction perpendicular to the row. Each such island shall have a suitable poured-in-place concrete curb, or approved equal, and shall be planted with grass or ground cover. All hydrants shall be located in such islands.
175-37.8 LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING (PND)
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-80
A. Screening of Uses: Commercial, institutional, and community uses shall be screened from residential uses within and abutting the planned neighborhood development by a buffer yard 20 feet in width containing a minimum of three canopy trees, six understory trees, and nine shrubs per 100 feet of length (or an amount creating an equivalent effect and approved with the landscape plan) along the perimeter of the lot line abutting a residential use.
B. Screening along Public Roadways: Uses within a planned neighborhood development which abut an arterial street as defined in Section 148-26(C)(3) shall be screened by a buffer yard of 20 feet in width containing a minimum of three canopy trees, six understory trees and nine shrubs per 100 feet of frontage (or an amount creating an equivalent effect and approved with the landscape plan). Canopy trees shall be deciduous shade trees planted with a minimum of two and one-half inches in caliper at six inches above the ground with a mature height of at least 35 feet. Understory trees shall be deciduous shade or fruit trees planted at minimum one and ½ inch in caliper at six inches above the ground with a mature height of at least 12 feet.
C. Existing Vegetation: Notwithstanding any other provisions of this ordinance, existing vegetation shall be retained and maintained to the extent feasible in order to permit existing vegetation to fulfill or contribute to buffer and screening requirements. In lieu of strict compliance with the above buffer yard requirements, a developer may submit a detailed landscaping plan that will afford a degree of buffering and screening comparable to that provided by these regulations in making use of existing and new vegetation. For developments utilizing more than 10 percent existing vegetation as a density bonus credit, a Certified Arborist shall provide a detailed description of the existing vegetation with notation of specimen trees, to certify compliance. The Arborist report shall be accompanied by the proposed measures for ensuring preservation during and after construction in accordance with the preservation criteria stated in the Town of Front Royal Landscape Preservation and Planting Guide.
D. Screening of Refuse Collection Facilities: Uses, except single-family homes within a planned neighborhood development shall provide secure, safe, and sanitary facilities for the storage and pickup of refuse. Such facilities shall be convenient to collection and shall be appropriate to the type and size of use being served. All refuse storage facilities shall be screened on three sides by a solid wooden fence or masonry wall and a tight evergreen hedge. The fourth side shall be angled to minimize the view of the refuse collection facility or shall be screened by an opaque gate made of durable materials. The screening shall be of sufficient height and design to effectively screen the facility from the view from nearby residential uses, streets, adjacent properties, and recreational facilities.
175-37.9 DENSITY BONUSES (PND)
Residential density bonuses up to a density of 6.0 dwelling units per acre dedicated to uses other than the commercial uses set forth in Sections 175-37.3(B) and (C) may be approved and granted at the discretion of the Town Council upon a finding that a proposed density bonus promotes the purposes of the Planned Neighborhood Development and provides additional public benefit. Each of the following amenities and any other amenities or proffered conditions will be evaluated by the Town Council and used in negotiations with the applicant:
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-81
A residential density up to 6.0 dwelling units per acre acceptable to both the applicant and the Town Council.
A. Dedicated Open Space: In exchange for increasing the dedicated natural open space beyond the required 25 percent, the project may qualify for a density bonus, provided the natural open space is increased by a minimum of 5 percent of the developable acreage. A bonus shall not be permitted for preservation areas or without sufficient justification of demonstrated benefit to the Town. Priority shall be given to protecting existing stands of mature trees.
B. Bikeways/Greenways: A system of bike paths and pedestrian greenways may qualify for a density bonus. In order to qualify, the bike paths or greenways shall form an integrated system of access within the development to principal off-site destinations, and be integrated with other planned or existing systems (i.e., Happy Creek Trail, Conservancy Park Trail, etc.).
C. Walk-Up Housing: A dwelling unit located above the ground floor of a structure that contains a non-residential use on the ground floor may be applied toward the allowable base density as one-half of a dwelling unit.
D. Community and Institutional Uses:
Day Care Center: In a PND with 75 or more residential units, a parcel may be designated, dedicated and developed for use as a day care center. This lot shall have a minimum of 100 square feet per residential unit within the PND, and be developed in accordance with the requirements of Town Code Section 175-107.1.
Community Hall: In a PND with 100 or more residential lots or units, a community hall may be constructed, with an enclosed area of no less than 25 square feet for each residential unit or lot.
E. Developed Recreational Facilities: Such facilities may include, but shall not be limited to, tot lots and pocket parks, ball fields, courts or other athletic facilities, swimming pools, public pedestrian plazas or arcades with benches, water fountains and reflecting pools, terraces, sculptures, public art, involving unique design features and amenities. To be considered for a density bonus, such recreational facilities shall be developed at a minimum ratio of three acres per 100 units, in addition to the minimum requirement in Section 15.
F. Enhanced streetscapes: Streets s developed with widened sidewalk area, substantial landscaping above the required minimum, approved traffic calming measures, pedestrian-oriented features, and bicycle parking facilities may be considered for a density bonus.
G. Other: Additional density bonuses may be granted based upon such other innovative factors as may be proposed by the applicant and accepted by the Town Council in its sole discretion.
175-37.10 TRAFFIC IMPROVEMENTS (PND)
Where a proposed planned neighborhood development borders on an existing street whose right-of-way, traffic carrying capacity, or sight lines are inadequate to safely and efficiently accommodate the traffic generated by the proposed development, the Town Council shall require
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-82
the applicant to dedicate land for needed realignment or widening, and to undertake or fund the needed street improvements.
175-37.11 DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS (PND)
A. Building Separation: No structure under 30 feet in height shall be located within 15 feet of any other structure. Buildings higher than 30 feet shall be separated by a distance equivalent to 50 percent of the height of the tallest building.
B. Height Limits: The height limits within a planned neighborhood development shall be the same as the height limits set forth in Section 175-36 for structures in the R-3 residential district.
C. Except as otherwise specifically required by Sections 175-37.01 through 175-37.19, modifications to the following design standards may be authorized by the Town as part of the rezoning or conditional rezoning application process, provided they are specifically approved, with the modified design standards taking precedence over the design standards of Chapter 148 and Chapter 175 of the Town Code.
1. Lot Area
2. Lot Width
3. Setbacks and Yard Area
4. Building Height
5. Building Separation
(Added “C” 12-12-11-Effective Upon Passage)
175-37.12 PERIMETER BOUNDARY (PND)
A. No portion of a building, structure, or parking area, shall be located within 55 feet of abutting property that is not part of the proposed planned neighborhood, unless the zoning of the adjacent property permits uses similar to the proposed Planned Neighborhood District use to be located abutting the common boundary. Where proposed PND uses are similar to uses permitted on the adjacent property, the minimum separation shall be that same as required for the zoning district on the adjacent property.
B. No portion of a non-residential use, multi-family residential use, community use, institutional use or active recreational use shall be located within 100 feet of abutting property that is not part of the proposed planned neighborhood, unless the abutting property is developed as a Planned Neighborhood District, whereas the separation shall be equal to the existing yard requirement on the abutting Planned Neighborhood District property.
C. The minimum front yard requirement of the R-l zoning district shall apply for a minimum of 200 feet from the border of a planned neighborhood development and adjoining property that share frontage on the same side of a street.
175-37.13 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS (PND)
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-83
Multi-family housing. Such housing shall be either townhouses, multiplexes or Retirement Living Facilities.
A. Townhouses: The maximum number of dwelling units permitted within a townhouse structure shall be eight. Townhouse structures shall be developed in compliance with the following requirements:
1. There shall be a minimum of two and one-half parking spaces for each townhouse unit. The shared use of such overflow parking with other uses and activities is encouraged.
2. Walkways of four feet in width, constructed of concrete, stone, brick or similar masonry material, (not including asphalt), shall be installed from parking areas to townhouse units served by such parking areas.
3. The facades of townhouse units shall have variation in materials, setbacks, and design so that abutting units will not have the same or essentially the same architectural treatment of facades and rooflines.
B. Multiplex Structures: The maximum number of dwelling units permitted within a multiplex structure shall be thirty (30). Multiplex structures shall be developed in compliance with the following requirements:
(Amended # of Units to 30 12-12-11-Effective Upon Passage)
1. There shall be a minimum of two and one-half parking spaces for each unit. The shared use of such overflow parking with other uses and activities is encouraged.
2. Walkways of four feet in width, constructed of concrete, stone brick or similar masonry material, (not including asphalt), shall be installed from parking areas to multiplex units served by such parking areas.
3. The minimum size of each individual unit shall be no less than 600 net square feet.
C. Retirement Living Facilities: The structures shall be developed in compliance with the following requirements:
1. The facilities shall be developed as either condominium or cooperative units.
2. There shall be no less than two parking spaces for each unit. The shared use of such overflow parking with other uses and activities is encouraged.
3. Walkways of four feet in width, constructed of concrete, stone, brick or similar masonry material (not including asphalt), shall be installed from parking areas to the retirement units served by such parking areas.
D. Accessory buildings shall be limited to one enclosed storage building not exceeding seven feet in height nor exceeding ten feet in length by ten feet in width.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-84
175-37.14 UTILITIES (PND)
Utilities, such as electric transmission cable television lines, and telephone lines, serving the planned neighborhood subdivision shall be installed underground.
175-37.15 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES (PND)
Accessory structures shall not be located within any front yard or within five feet of any other structure and shall comply with the requirements of Town Code Section 175-26D.
175-37.16 NEIGHBORHOOD RECREATIONAL USES (PND)
A minimum of 335 square feet for each residential unit shall be dedicated and developed for neighborhood recreational use to serve the recreational demands generated by the planned neighborhood development. Recreational facilities shall be specifically included in the development schedule and be constructed and fully improved by the developer at an equivalent or greater rate than the construction of residential structures.
175-37.17 COMMERCIAL USES DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS (PND)
A. The total acreage of commercial users in Planned Neighborhood Development Districts shall comply with the following requirements.
Acreage of PND
Total Acreage of Commercial Uses
20 Acres – 50 Acres
No Minimum 5% Maximum
51 Acres – 100 Acres
5% Minimum 10% Maximum
101 Acres – Plus
5% Minimum 15% Maximum
The developer/owner shall provide specific justification of commercial areas proposed in excess of 5% of the total acreage, identifying specific impacts of the commercial development and demonstrating adequate mitigation of such impacts.
(Amended “A” and Added Table 12-12-11-Effective Upon Passage)
B. Commercial uses shall be designed with the intention of serving the immediate needs and convenience of residents within and immediately surrounding the Planned Neighborhood Development.
C. Commercial uses shall not receive a certificate of occupancy until building permits have been issued for fifty percent of the residential units within the Planned Neighborhood Development.
D. Commercial structures shall comply with the height requirements in Code Section 175-50.
E. Commercial uses shall comply with the Performance Standards stated in Code Sect. 175-52.
F. Parking for commercial uses shall be in accordance with Town Code Section 175-104.
175-37.18 DEVELOPMENT REVIEW (PND)
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-85
Within one year of approval of a Master Land Use Plan for development of a Planned Neighborhood, prior to the approval of building permits, the applicant shall prepare and submit for review and approval an engineered Development Plan, along with the fee as established in the approved schedule of fees. The applicant may petition the Town Council for an extension of time for submission of a development plan, provided such extension is requested at least 20 days prior to the expiration of the one-year period. The Town Council may grant an extension upon demonstration of good cause for up to one year.
A. Development Plan: A Development Plan shall be submitted for all proposed commercial, residential, community facility, institutional, or multi-family residential development within a Planned Neighborhood Development. The Development Plan shall be drawn to scale and shall be accompanied by a narrative, as appropriate. The Development Plan shall comply with the provisions of Sections 175-111 through 175 – 122 and Section 148-20 of the Code of Front Royal, Virginia, unless otherwise provided for herein, and the following:
1. All information required for the master plan submission.
2. A development schedule. If phasing is proposed, indication of the proposed phasing schedule, along with a plan indicating phased sections.
3. A landscape plan prepared by a certified landscape architect or land surveyor shall be submitted with each site development plan application. The development plan shall identify proposed trees, shrubs, ground cover, natural features such as rock outcroppings, other landscaping elements and planting details. When existing natural growth is proposed to remain, the applicant shall include in the plans a description of the landscaping to be retained, a statement from a certified arborist that the material is desirable and healthy, and the proposed methods to protect the retained trees and growth during and after construction.
(Amended “3” by adding “land surveyor” 9-26-05-Effective Upon Passage)
4. Proposed number of dwelling units by residential types, and the area of non-residential buildings by use type (retail, office, service, etc.).
5. Calculation of the percentage of land area covered by the various land uses, including landscaped areas.
6. Proposed circulation plan showing patterns of vehicular, pedestrian, or other traffic, parking areas (including the number of parking spaces).
7. Notes identifying any deviations from the approved master plan.
(Amended by removing “8” 12-12-11-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-86
B. Development Plan Revisions, Modifications: After approval, all subsequent plans, plats, and permits for the PND shall be in substantial compliance with the approved PND Master Land Use Plan. Minor adjustment to the Master Land Use Plan may be approved administratively provided there is no increase in the overall density or number of housing units in the development and no reduction in useable open space. Revisions or modifications which substantially change the development, design, density, concept, uses, or magnitude shall cause the revised plan to be referred back through the review process as if it were an original submission.
Revisions to the Site Development Plan may be proposed by the applicant prior to the Town Council’s review. The Town Council at its discretion may consider the application with minor revisions as proposed or may return the plan to the Planning Commission for further review.
C. Amendments to Planned Development Districts: Land area may be added to an established PND if it adjoins and is demonstrated to become an integral part of the approved development. The procedures for any addition of land shall be the same as for an original application and all requirements shall apply.
D. Final Plats: Final Plats shall be submitted concurrently with the Site Development Plan. Except as provided herein, Planned Neighborhood Development plats shall comply with the Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 175 and the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, Chapter 148 of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia, except that reasonable waivers and variances as described in Chapter 148 may be granted by the Town Council in order to facilitate creative design consistent with good community planning standards.
(Amended “D” 12-12-11-Effective Upon Passage)
E. Recordation of Documents: Any applicable covenants, governance documents and easements shall be recorded in the Warren County Circuit Court Clerk’s office within six (6) months of approval of the Final Plat.
F. Appearance Review: Appearance Review by the Planning Commission shall be required for all proposed commercial, community, institutional, or multi-family residential development within a planned neighborhood development to ensure conformity with the appearance standards established by the approved design guidelines for the Planned Neighborhood Development. Such review shall occur in conjunction with the Site Development Review. Compliance with the requirements for Appearance Review shall be in addition to all other requirements.
175-37.19 DEFINITIONS (PND)
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY - A residential facility for two or more persons that provides nursing assistance and/or support services for residency of elderly and /or disabled persons, where residents share common meals.
COMMUNITY HALL - A community hall is a structure designed and constructed for civic uses and shall include a community meeting room, a library annex, space dedicated to historical or cultural displays or uses, athletic or exercise facilities, or uses found to be similar in intent and function with this section.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-87
MULTIPLEX STRUCTURE – This term shall mean a residential dwelling unit designed with not more than thirty (30) separate dwelling units for a maximum occupancy by thirty (30) families living independently of each other
(Added 9-26-05-Effective Upon Passage ; Amended 12-12-11-Effective Upon Passage)
NEIGHBORHOOD RECREATION USE - This term shall include basketball courts, tennis courts, playgrounds, tot lots, picnic areas, and the like.
NEIGHBORHOOD RESTAURANTS - A restaurant of not more than 20 seats, nor five employees, open for business not later than 10 p.m.
NEIGHBORHOOD-ORIENTED COMMERCIAL - This term shall include neighborhood-oriented retail businesses with not more than 15,000 square feet of gross floor area. The term shall include convenience stores, bookstores, dry cleaners, ice cream stores, barber and beauty shops, wearing apparel stores, bakeries, drugstores, gift shops, hardware stores, or other use found to be similar to one or more uses listed herein, but shall not include automobiles sales operations.
(Amended # of Square Feet and Removed “banks”-12-12-11-Effective Upon Passage)
NONTIDAL WETLANDS - Those wetlands other than tidal wetlands that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency or duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, as defined by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to Section 404 of the Clean Water Act as amended.
OPEN SPACE - Common space generally intended for passive recreation and not improved with a building, structure, vehicular travel lane, driveway, street, sidewalk, or parking area. Open space may include pedestrian ways, bike paths, trails interconnecting open space areas; undisturbed natural areas, woodlands, preservation areas; community facilities; landscaped grounds, buffers; playgrounds and tot lots; swimming and boating areas.
Open space shall not include yards within individual residential lots, yards less than (30) feet wide between buildings, lands occupied by tennis courts, golf courses, and buildings.
PLANNED NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENT - Planned neighborhood development (PND) is used in two contexts. Depending upon the context, planned neighborhood development refers to the development authorized by the ordinance or a project which is proposed for consideration under this ordinance. This term shall have the same meaning as mixed-use development and planned unit development as defined in the Code of Virginia (1989 Session Virginia Acts of Assembly - Chapter 384).
RETIREMENT LIVING FACILITIES - In accordance with Virginia Code Section 36-96.7, residential structures within a planned neighborhood development that are intended to be absent of school age children and which ensures, through covenants, management regulations or other similar legal instruments, enforceable by a homeowners’ association or other similar private entity, that at least one of the residents of at least 80% of the units is 55 years of age or older. Such facilities may include extended care or nursing home facilities as defined in Section 175-3 of the Town Code.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-88
COMMUNITY BUSINESS DISTRICT (C-1)
(Amended 10-27-97 formerly known as Commercial District C-1)
175-38 STATEMENT OF INTENT (C-1)
The Community Business C-I District is intended to accommodate general business areas, highway-oriented commercial uses, and selected retailing operations. The Community Business C- I District recognizes the demand for a variety of land uses near or adjacent to the major traffic arteries in Town.
175-39 USE REGULATIONS (C-1)
A. Subject to the standards and requirements set forth in this Chapter, except as prohibited or restricted by separate restrictions of record that may pertain to property within the C-1 District, the following uses of land and buildings are permitted by-right in the C-1 District:
RESIDENTIAL:
Up to three (3) dwelling units of any type, but not on the ground floor
Caretaker quarters
COMMERCIAL:
Appliance stores and repair services
Assembly Halls
Automobile and truck sales lots and leasing agencies, in accordance with 175-44.E.
Automobile service stations, in accordance with 175-110.
Bakeries, when products are sold as retail on the premises.
Banks, branch banks, and financial institutions.
Barber and beauty shops
Car washing
Catering Services
Contractor’s offices, display rooms and storage
Commuter parking facilities.
Department Stores
Drugstores
Florist shops/floral designers
Funeral homes
Furniture stores
Grocery stores
Hardware stores
Laundries, Laundromats and dry cleaners
Lumber and building supply, with storage under cover
Machinery sales and service
Motels, hotels, and tourist homes.
Newspaper and other printing establishments
Personal Services
Retail Stores, as defined in Section 175-39.C.
Pharmaceutical Center
Professional and Business Offices
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-89
Radio and television broadcasting stations, studios or offices.
Recreational Facility, Commercial
Restaurants, including drive-in restaurants
Special childcare services.
Technology business, as defined in Section 175-3, provided that such use does not involve broadcast or communications towers or manufacturing operations.
Theatres, Indoor
Veterinary hospitals
Wearing-apparel stores
INDUSTRIAL:
ORGANIZATIONAL:
Art galleries and museums.
Churches.
Public libraries.
MISCELLANEOUS:
Accessory uses, structures and buildings.
Home occupations.
Open Space
Public facilities.
Public parks and playgrounds.
Public utilities.
Signs, as set forth in Section 175-106.
Special childcare services.
Such other uses as determined similar to one or more enumerated uses by the Zoning Administrator.
(Amended “A” 5-14-90-Effective Upon Passage)
B. The following uses are permitted within the C-1 District only by approval of a special use permit, except as prohibited or restricted by separate restrictions of record that may pertain to property within the C-1 District:
RESIDENTIAL:
Apartments or dwelling units, with four (4) or more units or where located on the ground floor, subject to the provisions of Section 175-113.
COMMERCIAL:
Automobile garages, excluding where repairs work is only an accessory use, subject to the requirements of Section 175-110.3 where motor vehicle painting or body work services are provided.
Automobile Parking Lots, commercial.
Bed & Breakfasts, as set forth in Section 107.3.
Day Care Facilities and schools, subject to the provisions of Section 175 -107.1F, and any necessary improvements or changes to address the considerations of that section.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-90
Farmers' markets, and flea markets, in accordance with 175-44.F.
Kennels
Shopping centers as set forth in Section 175-111.
INDUSTRIAL:
Distribution facilities, subject to the standards and criteria for industrial uses provided in Section 175-70.
Wholesale establishments with storage and processing, subject to the standards and criteria for industrial uses provided in Section 175-70.
ORGANIZATIONAL:
Schools
MISCELLANEOUS:
Any use permitted under Section 175-39, or specifically listed above under this subsection, that proposes to occupy a building or structure that exceeds the height requirements of Section 175-41, subject to the requirements of Section 175-136. Additional heights approved by a special use permit shall be required to increase the required setback and yard area requirements by an equivalent distance from each property line.
Conservation areas.
Communication towers, in accordance with Section 175-110.4
Conversion of a structure originally designed and intended for occupancy as a single-family dwelling into a structure with more than one (1) dwelling.
Boarding Houses, Clubs & Lodging Houses
Mini-warehouses, subject to the standards of Section 107-44.G.
Nursing homes, as set forth in Section 175-107.
Parking Structures.
Structures with a height between 45 feet and 70 feet, and any residential structure not in conformance with the height limitation of Section 175-41.
Structures with a gross floor area of 50,000 square feet or more.
Townhouse-style commercial development, where the intent is to divide the property into individual lots.
(Amended “B” 9-26-05-Effective Upon Passage)
C. For the purpose of this section, "retail stores" are defined as buildings for the display and sale of merchandise at retail or for the rendering of personal services, but specifically exclusive of coal, wood and oil and lumberyards, accessory uses, adult bookstores (stores engaged in the sale of magazines and other publications of sexually-oriented nature), massage parlors and stores engaged in the sale of sexual aids, devices and merchandise.
(Amended 7-25-05, 7-28-08 and 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-91
175-40 AREA REGULATIONS (C-1)
A. Minimum Lot Size:
1. Residential uses with four (4) or more units = 6,000 s.f first unit; 1,500 s.f each additional unit.
2. All other uses: 7,500 s.f.
B. Minimum Unit Size: The minimum average unit size (floor area) per dwelling unit, where fewer than four (4) units are provided shall be three hundred (300) square feet. No dwelling unit shall have less than two hundred fifty (250) square feet of living area. This living area shall not include bathroom, closet and storage space.
C. Minimum District Size: Five (5) acres.
D. Minimum Lot Width:
1. Interior Lot: Seventy-five (75) feet.
2. Corner Lot: Ninety (90) feet. (Amended Entire Section 10-23-89-Effective Upon Passage)
175-41 MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS (C-1)
A. Residential Buildings: 35 feet, except as otherwise provided in this section.
B. Other Principal Buildings: 45 feet except as provided in Section 175-39B.
C. Residential structures may have a maximum overall height of 45 feet, provided that the slope of the roof exceeds 35 percent and the required yards are increased by one (1) foot for each foot in height over 35 feet.
D. Exemptions from height requirements:
1. Church spires.
2. Belfries.
3. Cupolas.
4. Municipal water towers.
5. Chimneys.
6. Flues.
7. Flagpoles.
8. Television antennas.
9. Radio aerials.
10. Parapet walls up to four (4) feet above the height of the building on which the wall rests.
E. Accessory buildings and structures: 35 feet; however, in no case, shall the height of an accessory structure exceed the height of the principal structure.
(Removed “F” “Where the Town Approves a Structure Exceeding 45 Feet in Height” 6-22-15-Eff. Upon Pass)
175-42 MINIMUM SETBACK AND YARD DIMENSIONS (C-1)
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-92
A. Principal Structures, when abutting properties are in a commercial or industrial district.
1. Front setback:
a. Where no parking is provided between the structure and the street: five (5) feet. Provided, however, that no drive aisle shall be located within five (5) feet of any structure having a setback less than fifteen (15) feet.
b. Where parking is provided between the structure and the street: fifty (5 0) feet.
2. Side: 10 feet on one (1) side only.
3. Rear: 15 feet.
4. Corner side: 15 feet.
B. Accessory Structures:
1. Front setback: 25 feet, except that accessory structures shall not be located closer to the street than the principal structure.
2. Side: 5 feet or 50% of building height, whichever is greater.
3. Rear: 5 feet or 50% of building height, whichever is greater.
4. Corner side: 20 feet, except that accessory structures shall not be located closer to the street than the principal structure.
C. Transitional yards, when located adjoining a residential district.
1. Side yard: 15 feet.
2. Rear yard: 20 feet.
3. No structures, storage, use or parking shall be located in a transitional yard.
4. Transitional yards shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions of Section 148-44.
D. Where parking is provided in a perpendicular manner between the principal structure and the street a minimum parking setback of ten (10) feet and a minimum building setback of fifty (50) feet shall be provided. The parking setback shall be landscaped in accordance with Section 148-48(E)(2).
E. The Town Council may waive the setback, yard and lot size requirements for townhouse style commercial project, approved by special permit, where such waiver is needed to produce a functional and desirable site layout; provided, however, that no adverse impact to adjoining property results from the waiver.
(Amended Section 10-10-94-Effective Upon Passage)
175-43 OPEN SPACE REGULATIONS (C-1)
A. Maximum building coverage for apartment structures exceeding four (4) units: Fifty percent (50%).
B. Maximum building coverage for all other structures: Seventy - five percent (75%).
C. Maximum impervious surface coverage: Ninety percent (90%), including off-street parking.
175-44 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS (C-1)
A. Screening:
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-93
1. Except where otherwise specifically approved in the Town Code, permitted uses shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building.
(Amended “1” 1-28-13-Effective Upon Passage)
2. Outdoor storage, outdoor display or outdoor sale of goods shall only be permitted when each of the following standards are met.
a. Outdoor storage, outdoor display, or outdoor sale of goods shall be used in direct association with the primary use or uses of the property.
b. Outdoor storage, outdoor display and/or outdoor sales shall be screened to obstruct view from any adjacent public street. A screen may consist of a building, solid masonry wall, uniformly painted solid board fence or landscaping. The height of the screening shall be 6’ feet unless an alternative height is approved by the Planning Commission during the review of a site plan.
(Added “2a-b” 1-28-13-Effective Upon Passage)
3. The following types of outdoor display and/or outdoor sales shall be exempt from the requirements of Section 175-44.A.2.b.
a. Motor vehicles.
b. Power operated machines designed for outdoor labor, such as farming, construction or lawn maintenance, as well as large equipment, products, and materials designed to be kept outdoors.
c. Plants and other landscaping products typically sold with plants.
d. Temporary or seasonal activities, such as but not limited to, peddlers, yard sales, and itinerant merchants that have obtained approval from the Town.
e. Pre-manufactured buildings.
f. Vending machines.
g. General products, goods, merchandise, and/or materials, provided that (i) no more than 200 square feet of area is used, and (ii) outdoor display and/or sales are restricted from the evening and night hours from 8PM to 5AM, except that general products, goods, merchandise, and/or materials may be kept outdoors if located under a roofed structure.
h. Flea markets, subject to any conditions issued with special use permit, performance standards of the underlying zoning district, and requirements of Section 98-46 of the Town Code.
(Added “3a-h”1-28-13-Effective Upon Passage)
4. Commercial development shall be permanently screened from adjoining and contiguous residential district by a wall, fence, evergreen hedge, and/or other suitable enclosure with
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-94
a minimum height of six (6) feet. Any area between such enclosure and the property line shall be landscaped to form a permanent screening area. The requirement for a screening area may be waived if equivalent screening is provided by existing parks, recreational areas, or by topographic or other natural conditions.
(Amended Height 1-28-13-Effective Upon Passage)
5. The provision of subsection 4 shall not apply when the (architectural) front of any commercial building faces the street across from a residential district or when strict application of the requirement relative to screening can be demonstrated as not serving the purpose for which it is intended.
(Amended subsection # 1-28-13-Effective Upon Passage)
B. Lighting: Lighting facilities shall be arranged in a manner that will protect the public roadway and neighboring properties from direct glare, intrusion or hazardous interference. Parking lot and building lighting shall be directed so that the lighting does not extend beyond the property boundary. Lighting facilities shall be required along private and public streets and within parking areas, installed at the developer's expense.
C. Miscellaneous:
1. No flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be stored in bulk above ground; provided, however, that tanks or drums of fuel directly connecting to energy devices, heating devices or appliances located on the same lot as the tanks or drums of fuel are excluded from this provision.
2. All fuel and raw materials stored outdoors shall be enclosed by a fence adequate to conceal the facilities from any adjacent properties or roadways.
(Amended by removing “and products” 1-28-13-Effective Upon Passage)
3. No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or manner that it may be transferred off the lot by natural causes or forces.
4. All refuse containers shall be adequately sized to handle the needs of the facility or development and all material or wastes which might cause fumes or dust, constitute a fire hazard,, or may be edible or otherwise attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored only in completely closed containers.
5. All outdoor refuse storage areas shall be located in a paved area and hidden from general public view, either from within or outside the lot, by means of fences or walls, and landscape planting. A solid wood or masonry fence at least six (6) feet in height shall be provided on three (3) sides, with a solid opaque gate on the fourth side. Landscaping shall be incorporated to improve the visual appearance.
D. Landscaping: All sites and parking areas shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions of Sections 148-46, 148-47 and 148-48.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-95
E. Automobile and Truck Sales Lots and Leasing Agencies: Vehicle repair shall only be permitted as an accessory use to automobile and truck sales lots and leasing agencies, except where a special use permit is issued for automobile repair. All incidental repair of vehicles shall be conducted within a building enclosed on all sides.
(Added “E” 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
F. Farmer’s Markets & Flea Markets: Where farmer’s markets are permitted under the provisions of this Chapter, the following standards shall be required:
1. Adequate water and sanitary facilities shall be provided if found necessary based on the size, frequency and duration of the market.
2. A minimum twenty-five (25) foot setback shall be maintained from all property lines, excluding structures and uses in existence prior to July 1, 2001.
(Amended 10-10-17-Effective Upon Passage)
3. No adverse effect on adjoining properties, including but not limited to excessive or untimely noise or lighting, overflow parking, or visual problems potentially affecting property values or marketability, is found.
4. All tables, facilities and structures shall be maintained in a well-kept and attractive manner.
5. No manufactured buildings shall be permitted.
(Amended 10-10-17-Effective Upon Passage)
6. Unless otherwise approved as part of a special use permit, all temporary structures or facilities shall be removed during the days that the market is not in operation.
(Amended 10-10-17-Effective Upon Passage)
7. Operation of a Flea Market shall be confined to Friday, Saturday, Sunday, and Holidays, unless other dates are specifically approved by the Town Council in conjunction with the Special Permit. The hours of operation shall be posted on the property.
(Amended to add “Friday” 10-10-17-Effective Upon Passage)
8. If a Flea Market or Farmers’ Market elects to close during part of the year, or is required to close during part of the year by a condition of a special use permit, all tables and other temporary fixtures shall be removed within two (2) weeks of such closure. Such fixtures may be stored on the site, provided they are located within a completely enclosed building or otherwise screed from public view, in accordance with Section 175-44(A).
(Added “F” 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage ; Amended 10-10-17-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-96
9. All Flea Markets and Farmers’ Markets shall be swept clean, hosed down and/or picked clean daily. No food products or debris shall be permitted to remain upon the site overnight. All food products sold at the market must be displayed under sanitary conditions and sold in compliance with all requirements of the Virginia Department of Health or Virginia Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services.
10. Any expansion, including, but not limited to, new construction, an increase in the days of operation, or other significant changes to the use of the property, shall only be authorized with a special use permit.
11. Landscaping shall be provided where feasible and desirable for purposes of improvement aesthetics, screening, shade and the natural environment.
12. Fencing may be required for purposes of improvement aesthetics, screening or public safety.
13. The sale of live animals is prohibited.
14. The sale of new merchandise or serving of food, other than farm and domestic products, shall only be authorized if the vendor obtains an itinerant merchant or peddler license, in accordance with the Town Code regulations for such uses.
15. Farmers’ Markets and Flea Markets on public property shall be classified as a public event.
(Added [9 – 15] 10-10-17-Effective Upon Passage)
G. Mini-warehouses: Where mini-warehouses are permitted, the following standards shall be required:
1. No exterior storage shall be permitted.
2. No business activities other than rental of storage units and office use shall be conducted on the premises or within the building, except as specifically approved with the special permit approval. The servicing or repair of motor vehicles, trucks, mobile homes, boats, trailers, lawn mowers, or other similar equipment shall not be conducted on the premises. The operation of a mini-warehouse shall in no way be deemed to include a transfer and storage business where the use of vehicles is part of such business.
3. When a mini-warehouse is built adjacent to or within 100 feet of a lot in a residential district without an intervening street, a solid wall or fence at least six (6) feet in height with a finished side facing the residential lot shall be erected between the mini-warehouse and the residential lot. However, the wall or fence shall not be required to extend into the front yard required on the lot on which it is located.
4. The minimum landscaped open space for a mini-warehouse building shall not be less than .20 times the gross acreage of the lot. Such landscaped open space shall not be open to vehicular traffic, and shall be used to buffer and shield adjacent uses from the mini-
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-97
warehouse operation. The required amount of open space may be reduced with the special permit approval for the reuse of an existing building/developed property.
5. The maximum height of the storage section of a mini-warehouse building shall be twenty-five (25) feet.
6. The maximum total storage area in a mini-warehouse building shall be seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet.
7. The maximum size of an individual storage unit shall be five hundred (500) square feet.
8. Buildings used in association with mini-warehousing shall be setback at least 150 feet from the public road.
(Added “G” 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
175-45 (RESERVED)
DOWNTOWN BUSINESS DISTRICT (C-2)
(Amended 2-22-99 formerly known as Commercial District C-2)
175-46 STATEMENT OF INTENT (C-2)
The Downtown Business District C-2 is intended to encompass the major downtown retailing center and to provide for the orderly expansion of the central business district. The Downtown Business District C-2 should provide a framework for a strong nucleus of the business community, where all the amenities and services of downtown can be provided. In addition, certain high-density residential uses whose proximity to the downtown area would tend to strengthen the retail core shall be permitted. Mobile homes for all purposes are prohibited.
175-47 USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT (C-2)
A. Subject to the standards and requirements set forth in this Chapter, except as prohibited or restricted by separate restrictions of record that may pertain to property within the C-2 District, the following uses of land and buildings are permitted by-right in the C-2 District:
RESIDENTIAL:
Conversion of existing residential and/or commercial structures into buildings with a greater number of dwelling units.
Single-family and two-family dwellings.
COMMERCIAL:
Assembly Halls
Bakeries, when products are sold as retail on the premises.
Banks, branch banks, and financial institutions.
Barber and beauty shops
Bed & Breakfasts
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-98
Catering Services
B. Minimum Unit Size: The minimum average unit size (floor area) in any structure containing dwellings shall be three (300) hundred square feet. No dwelling unit shall have less than two hundred and fifty (250) square feet of floor area. This floor area shall not include bathroom, closet and storage space.

Department Stores, 15,000 square feet or less
Drugstores
Florist shops/floral designers
Funeral homes
Furniture stores
Grocery stores, 15,000 square feet or less
Hardware stores
Laundries, Laundromats, and dry cleaners
Motels, hotels, and tourist homes.
Newspaper and other printing establishments
Personal Services
Pet Shops, without boarding kennel.
Retail Stores, as defined in Section 175-47.B.
Professional and Business Offices
Radio and television broadcasting stations, studios or offices.
Recreational Facility, Commercial
Restaurants, excluding drive-in restaurants
Technology business, as defined in Section 175-3, provided that such use does not involve broadcast or communications towers or manufacturing operations.
Theatres, Indoor
Wearing-apparel stores
INDUSTRIAL:
ORGANIZATIONAL:
Art galleries and museums.
Churches, excluding churches with ground level frontage on E. Main Street.
Public libraries.
MISCELLANEOUS:
Accessory uses, structures and buildings.
Clubs
Home occupations.
Open space.
Public event, see Chapter 72 for additional permitting requirements for entertainment festivals.
Public facilities.
Public parks and playgrounds.
Public utilities.
Signs, as set forth in Section 175-106.
Special childcare services.
Such other uses as determined similar to one or more enumerated uses by the Zoning Administrator.
(Amended “A” 5-14-90, 6-26-00 and 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-99
B. For the purpose of this section, "retail stores" are defined as buildings for the display and sale of merchandise at retail or for the rendering of personal services, but specifically exclusive of coal, wood and oil and lumberyards, accessory uses, adult bookstores (stores engaged in the sale of magazines and other publications of a sexually-oriented nature), and stores engaged in the sale of sexual aids, devices and merchandise.
(Amended Section 7-25-05-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended by removing “C – Accessory Uses” 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
175-48 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL PERMIT (C-2)
A. The following uses are permitted within the C-2 District only by approval of a special use permit, except as prohibited or restricted by separate restrictions of record that may pertain to property within the C-2 District:
RESIDENTIAL:
Apartments located in buildings constructed after January 1, 1999, in accordance with the area requirements in Section 175-49. 
COMMERCIAL:
Automobile garages, excluding where repairs work is only an accessory use, subject to the requirements of Section 175-110.3 where motor vehicle painting or body work services are provided.
Automobile service stations, in accordance with 175-110.
Automobile and truck sales lots and leasing agencies, in accordance with 175-52.D.
Bed & Breakfasts, as set forth in Section 175-107.3.
Day Care Facilities, subject to the provisions of Section 175-107.1F, and any necessary improvements or changes to address the considerations of that section.
Farmers' markets, in accordance with 175-52.E.
INDUSTRIAL:
ORGANIZATIONAL:
Schools
MISCELLANEOUS:
Conservation areas.
Lodging houses and boarding houses
(Amended Entire Section 10-23-89, 7-23-12 and 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
175-49 AREA REGULATIONS (C-2)
A. Minimum Lot Size: There are no area requirements except in the case of new apartment structures, whereby the minimum lot size must be three thousand (3,000) square feet, plus an additional one thousand (1,000) square feet of lot area for each individual dwelling unit above one (1). 
Maximum density: 1,000 square feet per dwelling unit
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175

175-50 OPEN SPACE AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS 
A. Maximum Building Coverage for new residential structures: 75%
B. Maximum Building Coverage for all other structures: 90%
C. Buildings may be erected up to forty-five (45) feet in height from grade as a matter of right. Buildings may be erected at heights between forty-five feet (45') and sixty feet (60') by Special Use Permit, with reasonable conditions necessitated by the historic and unique nature of the Downtown Business District, issued by Town Council after recommendation of the Planning Commission.
(Amended “C” 9-11-06-Effective Upon Passage)
D. Church spires, belfries, cupolas, monuments, cooling towers, elevator shafts, chimneys, flues and flagpoles are exempt. Parapet walls may be up to four (4) feet above the height of the building on which the walls rests.
(Amended “D” 9-11-06-Effective Upon Passage)
175-51 FRONTAGE AND YARDS (C-2)
There are no frontage or yard requirements, except as follows:
A. Transitional yards, when located adjoining a residential district to the side or rear, shall be twenty (20) feet.
B. Established Front Setback: Where a front setback has been established along one side of a subdivided block or street, all new construction shall conform to this established front setback, except where such variation is approved by the Board of Architectural Review with a Certificate of Appropriateness.
175-52 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS (C-2)
A. Screening:
1. Permitted uses shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building or within an area enclosed on all sides by a solid masonry wall, a uniformly painted solid board fence
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-101
or a dense evergreen hedge at least six (6) feet in height. Public utilities and signs requiring natural air consideration, unobstructed view or other technical consideration necessary for property operation may be exempt from this provision. This exception does not include storing of any materials.
2. Commercial development shall be permanently screened from any adjoining and contiguous residential district by a wall, fence, evergreen hedge, and/or other suitable enclosure with a minimum height of five (5) feet. Any area between such enclosure and the property line shall be landscaped to form a permanent screening area. The requirement for a screening area may be waived if equivalent screening is provided by existing parks, recreational area, or by topographic or other natural conditions.
3. The provision of subsection 2 shall not apply when the (architectural) front of any commercial building faces the street across from a residential district or when strict application of the requirement relative to screening can be demonstrated as not serving the purpose for which it is intended.
(Amended “A” 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
B. Lighting: Lighting facilities shall be arranged in a manner that will protect the public roadway and neighboring properties from direct glare, intrusion or hazardous interference. Parking lot and building lighting shall be down-directed so that the lighting does not extend beyond the property boundary. Where needed, lighting facilities shall be required along private and public streets and within parking areas, installed at the developer's expense.
C. Outdoor Storage/Waste Disposal:
1. No flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be stored in bulk above ground; provided, however, that tanks or drums of fuel directly connecting to energy devices, heating devices or appliances located on the same lot as the tanks or drums of fuel are excluded from this provision.
2. All fuel, raw materials and products stored outdoors shall be enclosed by a fence adequate to conceal the facilities from any adjacent properties or roadways.
3. No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or manner that it may be transferred off the lot by natural causes or forces.
4. All refuse containers shall be adequately sized to handle the needs of the facility or development and all material or wastes which might cause fumes or dust, constitute a fire hazard, or may be edible or otherwise attractive to rodents or insects shall be shored only in completely closed containers.
5. All outdoor refuse storage areas shall be located in a paved area and hidden from general public view, fences or walls, and landscape planting. A solid wood or masonry fence at least six (6) feet in height shall be provided on three (3) sides, with a solid opaque gate on the fourth side. Landscaping shall be incorporated to improve the visual appearance.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-102
(Amended “C” 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
D. Automobile and Truck Sales Lots and Leasing Agencies: Vehicle repair shall only be permitted as an accessory use to automobile and truck sales lots and leasing agencies, except where a special use permit is issued for automobile repair. All incidental repair of vehicles shall be conducted within a building enclosed on all sides.
E. Farmer’s Markets: Where farmer’s markets are permitted in the C-2 District, the following standards shall be required in addition to the requirements of Chapter 78 and any other conditions imposed by special use permit.
1. Adequate water and sanitary facilities shall be provided if found necessary based on the size, frequency and duration of the market.
2. A minimum twenty-five (25) foot setback shall be maintained from all property lines.
3. No adverse effect on adjoining properties is found.
4. All tables, facilities and structures shall be maintained in a well-kept and attractive manner.
5. Any building used for the storage or sale of goods and materials shall be constructed on a permanent foundation and meet appropriate building code regulations. No trailers, manufactured homes, or mobile home units shall be permitted.
6. All temporary structures or facilities, including but not limited to canopy frames, table extensions and display shelving, shall be removed during the hours that the market is not in operation
(Added “D-E” 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
175-53 (RESERVED)
HIGHWAY CORRIDOR BUSINESS DISTRICT (C-3)
(Adopted 12-15-97)
175-53.1 STATEMENT OF INTENT (C-3)
The Highway Corridor Business C-3 District is intended to selected commercial uses, and retailing and service operations, located along the major transportation corridors into the Town. The Highway Corridor Business C-3 District recognizes the demand for a variety of land uses along the major entrances into Town and strives to ensure that such development is compatible in use, appearance and functional operation with the Town's economic development policies and action strategies.
175-53.2 USE REGULATIONS (C-3)
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-103
A. Subject to the standards and requirements set forth in this Chapter, except as prohibited or restricted by separate restrictions of record that may pertain to property within the C-3 District, the following uses of land and buildings are permitted by-right in the C-3 District:
RESIDENTIAL:
Caretaker quarters.
COMMERCIAL:
Appliance stores and repair services
Assembly Halls
Automobile and truck sales lots and leasing agencies, in accordance with 175-44.E.
Automobile service stations, in accordance with 175-110.
Bakeries, when products are sold as retail on the premises.
Banks, branch banks, and financial institutions.
Barber and beauty shops
Billiard parlors and poolrooms.
Bowling alleys.
Commuter parking facilities.
Department Stores
Drugstores
Florist shops/floral designers
Funeral homes
Furniture stores
Grocery stores
Hardware stores
Lumber and building supply, with storage under cover
Machinery sales and service
Motels, hotels, and tourist homes.
Personal Services
Retail Stores, as defined in Section 175-53.2D.
Pharmaceutical Center
Professional and Business Offices
Radio and television broadcasting stations, studios or offices.
Recreational Facility, Commercial
Restaurants, including drive-in restaurants
Technology business, as defined in Section 175-3, provided that such use does not involve broadcast or communications towers or manufacturing operations.
Theatres, Indoor
Veterinary hospitals
Wearing-apparel stores
INDUSTRIAL:
ORGANIZATIONAL:
Art galleries and museums.
Churches
Boarding Houses, Clubs & Lodging Houses.
Public libraries.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-104
MISCELLANEOUS:
Accessory uses, structures and buildings.
Home occupations.
Open Space
Public facilities.
Public parks and playgrounds.
Public utilities.
Signs, as set forth in Section 175-106.
Special childcare services.
Such other uses as determined similar to one or more enumerated uses by the Zoning Administrator.
(Amended “A” 7-28-08 and 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
B. The following uses are permitted within the C-3 District only by approval of a special use permit, except as prohibited or restricted by separate restrictions of record that may pertain to property within the C-3 District:
RESIDENTIAL:
COMMERCIAL:
Automobile Parking Lots, Commercial.
Shopping centers as set forth in Section 175-111.
INDUSTRIAL:
Wholesale establishments with storage and processing, subject to the standards and criteria for industrial uses provided in Section 175-70.
Distribution facilities, subject to the standards and criteria for industrial uses provided in Section 175-70.
ORGANIZATIONAL:
MISCELLANEOUS:
Communications Towers and cable television facilities, with wireless telephone (cell phone) communications tower subject to the supplemental provisions prescribed in Section 175-110.4.
Conservation Areas.
Parking Structures.
Structures with a gross floor area of 50,000 square feet or more.
Structures with a height between 45 feet and 70 feet.
(Amended “B” 9-26-05 and 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
C. For the purpose of this section, "retail stores" are defined as buildings for the display and sale of merchandise at retail or for the rendering of personal services, but specifically exclusive of coal, wood and oil and lumberyards, accessory uses, adult bookstores (stores engaged in the sale of magazines and other publications of sexually-oriented nature), massage parlors and stores engaged in the sale of sexual aids, devices and merchandise.
(Amended “C” 7-25-05-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-105
175-53.3 AREA REGULATIONS (C-3)
A. Minimum Lot Size: One (1) acre.
B. Minimum District Size: Five (5) acres.
C. Minimum Lot Width: One Hundred (100) feet.
175-53.4 MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS (C-3)
A. Principal Buildings: - 45 feet, except as provided in Section 175-53.2B.
B. Exemptions from height requirements
1. Church spires.
2. Belfries.
3. Cupolas.
4. Municipal water towers.
5. Chimneys.
6. Flues.
7. Flagpoles.
8. Television antennas.
9. Radio aerials.
10. Parapet walls up to four (4) feet above the height of the building on which the wall rests.
C. Accessory buildings and structures: 35 feet; however, in no case, shall the height of an accessory structure exceed the height of the principal structure.
D. Where the Town approves a structure exceeding 45 feet in height, the maximum height shall be seventy (70) feet and up to six (6) stories. All required yards shall be increased by two (2) feet for each foot over forty-five (45) feet.
175-53.5 MINIMUM SETBACK AND YARD DIMENSIONS (C-3)
A. Principal Structures, when abutting properties are in a commercial or industrial district
1. Front Setback: Fifty (50) feet.
2. Side: Fifteen (15) feet.
3. Rear: Fifteen (15) feet.
4. Corner Side: Thirty-Five (35) feet.
B. Accessory Structures:
1. Front Setback: 50 feet, except that accessory structures shall not be located closer to the street than the principal structure.
2. Side: 10 feet or 50% of building height, whichever is greater.
3. Rear: 10 feet or 50% of building height, whichever is greater.
4. Corner Side: 30 feet, except that accessory structures shall not be located closer to the street than the principal structure.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-106
C. Transitional yards, when located adjoining a residential district.
1. Side Yard: 20 feet.
2. Rear Yard: 25 feet.
3. No structures, storage, use or parking shall be located in a transitional yard.
4. Transitional yards shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions of Section 148-44B.
175-53.6 OPEN SPACE REGULATIONS (C-3)
A. Maximum building coverage: Seventy-five percent (75%)
B. Maximum impervious surface coverage: Ninety percent (90%), including off-street parking.
175-53.7 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS (C-3)
A. Screening:
1. Except where otherwise specifically approved in the Town Code, permitted uses shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building.
(Amended 1-28-13-Effective Upon Passage)
2. Outdoor storage, outdoor display or outdoor sale of goods shall only be permitted when
each of the following standards are met.
a. Outdoor storage, outdoor display, or outdoor sale of goods shall be used in direct association with the primary use or uses of the property.
b. Outdoor storage, outdoor display and/or outdoor sales shall be screened to obstruct view from any adjacent public street. A screen may consist of a building, solid masonry wall, uniformly painted solid board fence or landscaping. The height of the screening shall be 6’ feet unless an alternative height is approved by the Planning Commission during the review of a site plan.
(Added “2a-b” 1-28-13-Effective Upon Passage)
3. The following types of outdoor display and/or outdoor sales shall be exempt from the
requirements of Section 175-53.7.A.2.b.
a. Motor Vehicles.
b. Power operated machines designed for outdoor labor, such as farming, construction or lawn maintenance, as well as large equipment, products, and materials designed to be kept outdoors.
c. Plants and other landscaping products typically sold with plants.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-107
d. Temporary or seasonal activities, such as but not limited to, peddlers and itinerant merchants that have obtained approval from the Town.
e. Pre-manufactured buildings.
f. Vending machines.
g. General products, goods, merchandise, and/or materials, provided that (i) no more than 200 square feet of area is used, and (ii) outdoor display and/or sales are restricted from the evening and night hours from 8PM to 5AM, except that general products, goods, merchandise, and/or materials may be kept outdoors if located under a roofed structure.
(Added “3a-h” 1-28-13-Effective Upon Passage ; Removed “h” 10-10-17-Effective Upon Passage)
4. Commercial development shall be permanently screened from adjoining and contiguous residential district by a wall, fence, evergreen hedge, and/or other suitable enclosure with a minimum height of six (6) feet. Any area between such enclosure and the property line shall be landscaped to form a permanent screening area. The requirement for a screening area may be waived if equivalent screening is provided by existing parks, recreational areas, or by topographic or other natural conditions.
(Amended Height 1-28-13-Effective Upon Passage)
5. The provision of subsection 4 shall not apply when the (architectural) front of any commercial building faces the street across from a residential district or when strict application of the requirement relative to screening can be demonstrated as not serving the purpose for which it is intended.
B. Lighting: Lighting facilities shall be arranged in a manner that will protect the public roadway and neighboring properties from direct glare, intrusion or hazardous interference. Parking lot and building lighting shall be down-directed so that the lighting does not extend beyond the property boundary. All gasoline canopy lighting shall be down-directed and shielded to direct the lighting to the area under the canopy only. Lighting facilities shall be required along private and public streets and within parking areas, installed at the developer's expense.
C. Miscellaneous:
(Amended Title formerly “Outdoor Storage/Waste Disposal” 1-28-13-Effective Upon Passage)
1. No flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be stored in bulk above ground; provided, however, that tanks or drums of fuel directly connecting to energy devices, heating devices or appliances located on the same lot as the tanks or drums of fuel are excluded from this provision.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-108
2. All fuel and raw materials stored outdoors shall be enclosed by a fence adequate to conceal the facilities from any adjacent properties or roadways.
(Amended by removing “and products” 1-28-13-Effective Upon Passage)
3. No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or manner that it may be transferred off the lot by natural causes or forces.
4. All refuse containers shall be adequately sized to handle the needs of the facility or development and all material or wastes which might cause fumes or dust, constitute a fire hazard, or may be edible or otherwise attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored only in completely closed containers.
5. All outdoor refuse storage areas shall be located in a paved area and hidden from general public view, either from within or outside the lot, by means of fences or walls, and landscape planting. A solid wood or masonry fence at least six (6) feet in height shall be provided on three (3) sides, with a solid opaque gate on the fourth side. Landscaping shall be incorporated to improve the visual appearance.
D. Landscaping:
1. All new developments shall provide for the planting, replacement and/or maintenance of trees on the site to the extent that, at maturity of twenty (20) years, minimum tree cover shall be at least ten (10) percent of the site area. Such sites shall be planted in accordance with the provisions of Section 148-46.
2. All sites and parking areas shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions of Sections 148-46, 148-47 and 148-48.
E. Building location and treatment:
1. Integrated development. All buildings within a property shall be developed as a cohesive entity, ensuring that building placement, architectural treatment, vehicular and pedestrian circulation and other development elements work together functionally and aesthetically. Architectural treatment shall be designed so that all building facades of the same building (whether front, side or rear) that are visible from the public right-of-way shall consist of similar architectural treatment in terms of materials, quality, appearance and detail.
2. Building bulk and mass. All buildings and parking areas should be designed with treatments to break up the mass and bulk. The treatment of buildings shall include vertical architectural treatment at least every fifty (50) feet to break down the scale of the building into smaller components. Any facade with a blank wall must be screened in a manner approved by the Zoning Administrator. Architectural details shall continue on all facades visible from the public right-of-way.
3. Materials. Building materials for structures and retaining walls should be typical of those prevalent in Front Royal and Warren County, including stucco, brick, wood siding and standing seam metal roofs. Inappropriate materials include reflective glass, and plastic and
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-109
fiberglass replications of natural materials. No facade visible from adjoining property or the corridor highway shall be constructed of unadorned cinder block, concrete, corrugated metal or sheet metal.
4. Color. The permanent color of building materials (to be left unpainted) should resemble primarily earthen tones.
175-53.8 OFF-STREET PARKING (C-3)
A. Space Requirements, except where specifically exempted under Section 175-104.
1. Retail and personal service uses: 1 space per 200 gross square feet.
2. Restaurants:
a. Sit-Down: 1 space per 4 seats.
b. Carry-Out: 1 space per 50 net square feet of customer service area.
c. Drive-Through: 3 spaces plus stacking lanes for six (6) vehicles.
3. Offices, except medical offices: 1 space per 300 gross square feet.
4. Medical offices: 1 space per 200 gross square feet.
5. Furniture/appliance/lumber and building supply: 1 space per 400 gross square feet.
6. Hotels/Motels: 1 space per room and 1 additional space for every 10 rooms.
7. Theaters and Assembly Halls: 1 space per 4 fixed seats in the main assembly area, or 1 space per 100 net square feet.
8. Shopping centers: as provided in Town Code Section 175-111.
9. Indoor court game facilities: 1 space for every two (2) players as designed.
10. Indoor recreation facilities: 1 space per 200 net square feet of improved area.
11. Other uses not specifically enumerated, see Section 175-104.
B. Minimum setback for driveways and parking:
1. All parking areas adjoin commercial properties: Five (5) feet from side and rear property
lines.
2. Front Setback: Ten (10) feet from public right-of-way, except where driveway entrance is located.
3. Parking areas adjoining residential district: Twenty-five (25) feet from side and rear property lines.
4. Parking areas shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions of 148-48.
C. Construction:
1. All driveway entrances shall be constructed to meet the requirements of the Virginia Department of Transportation for commercial entrances.
2. All parking areas and access aisles shall be paved.
MIXED-USE CAMPUS DEVELOPMENT (MCD) DISTRICT
(Adopted 3-12-12)
175-53.9 STATEMENT OF INTENT
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-110
The purpose for establishing the MCD District is to implement the policies of the Comprehensive Plan that support the redevelopment or development of large tracts of land for principally non-residential purposes. In addition, the MCD District is intended to encourage greater creativity through regulations that are more flexible than the traditional zoning districts of this Chapter. The regulations of the MCD District are designed to permit development that includes a mixture of commercial, industrial and organizational land uses within a planned campus environment. The regulations herein will protect the health and safety of Town citizens while promoting the public’s general welfare through the establishment of new economic development opportunities for the promotion of jobs, tax revenue, and a vibrant community.
175-53.10 PERMITTED USES
A. By-Right. Subject to the standards and requirements set forth in this Chapter, except as prohibited or restricted by separate restrictions of record that may pertain to property within the MCD District, the following uses of land and buildings are permitted by-right in the MCD District:
RESIDENTIAL:
Caretaker quarters
Nursing Homes
COMMERCIAL:
Appliance stores and repair services
Assembly Halls
Automobile and truck sales lots and leasing agencies
Bakeries
Barber and beauty shops
Car washing
Catering Services
Department Stores
Drugstores
Florist shops/floral designers
Funeral Homes
Furniture stores
Grocery stores
Hardware stores
Hospitals
Laundries, Laundromats and dry cleaners
Lumber and building supply, with storage under cover
Machinery sales and services
Newspaper and other printing establishments
Personal Services
Retail Stores
Pharmaceutical Center
Professional and Business Offices
(Amended to remove “public” offices 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
Recreational Facility, Commercial
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-111
Recreational Facility, Public
Restaurant, except drive-in
Shopping Center
Technology Businesses
Theatres, Indoor
Veterinary hospitals
Wearing-apparel stores
Wireless Telecommunication Facilities
INDUSTRIAL:
Contractor’s offices, display rooms and storage
Light Manufacturing
ORGANIZATIONAL:
College or university, without living quarters
Community Center
Government Offices and Buildings
Schools, adult instructional facilities only
Churches
Parks and Playgrounds
Public utilities
Public events.
Public garage
Public transportation terminals
Public facilities
Commuter Parking Facilities
Fire and rescue squad stations
Libraries
Radio and television broadcasting stations, studios or offices
Art galleries and museums
MISCELLANEOUS:
Accessory uses, structures and buildings
Communal Garage
Home occupations
Open Space and Conservation Areas
Parking lot
Private Garage
Signs
Special childcare services.
(Added “Signs & Special Childcare Services” 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
B. Special Use Permit. The following uses are permitted within the MCD District only by approval of a special use permit or where specifically designated on an approved Concept Plan, except as prohibited or restricted by separate restrictions of record that may pertain to property within the MCD District:
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-112
RESIDENTIAL:
Multi-family
Single-family attached or detached
COMMERCIAL:
Automobile Repair
Day Care and Day Care Facilities
Motels, hotels, lodging and tourist homes
Gasoline Sales
Restaurant, Drive-In
INDUSTRIAL:
Distribution facilities
Medium Industrial
Mini-Storage Facility
Wholesale and warehouse establishments
ORGANIZATIONAL:
College or university, with living quarters
Schools, other than adult instructional facilities
MISCELLANEOUS:
175-53.11 REVIEW AND CREATION
A. The MCD District may only be established for properties that consist of at least 50 contiguous acres of land area.
B. In addition to the requirements of this Chapter, the following additional information shall be submitted with an application to rezone, or conditional rezone, property to the MCD District.
1. Concept Plan. A Concept Plan shall be submitted with an application for rezoning or conditional rezoning. The Concept Plan shall illustrate how the property is intended to be developed, and how the proposed development will conform to Town ordinances, including any associated proffers, and the Comprehensive Plan. When illustrating the intended development, the Concept Plan shall include the location of existing structures, and the existing and/or proposed location of the following.
a. Roads
b. Sidewalks and trails
c. Recreational facilities and parks
d. Open Space
e. Stormwater infrastructure
f. Topography
g. Floodplains
h. Wetlands
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-113
i. Sinkholes, caves or caverns
j. Hazardous areas
k. Tree canopy
l. Archeological sites and historic structures
m. Endangered species
n. Land uses and building areas
o. Adjacent properties
p. Public and private utilities & easements
q. Other information related to the proposed development that is necessary to assess the impacts and scope of the project.
2. Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA). A detailed TIA shall be prepared and submitted with an application to rezone, or conditionally rezone, to the MCD District. The TIA shall show the expected average daily traffic movements over any and all existing and planned streets within the proposed planned development, including motor vehicle traffic generated by the uses within the planned development. The traffic impact analysis shall include vehicle traffic generated by the lots within the planned development and expected to be generated in the future from the development of any and all adjacent properties to which and from which additional street connections are reasonably projected to be made and to which and from which additional traffic is reasonably expected to be generated. The study shall also include an analysis of the impact of the projected traffic on the adjacent local, collector and arterial road network, an assessment of the capacity of nearby intersections and appropriate solutions for improvements to the network (based on identified traffic problems) in accordance with Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) standards for acceptable street and intersection service levels.
3. Phase 1 Environmental Analysis. At a minimum, a Phase 1 Environmental Site Assessment shall be submitted with a rezoning application to the MCD District. The Phase I Environmental Site Assessment shall be based on the anticipated use of the property proposed for development, and shall be prepared by generally accepted national standards for such assessments, such as those developed by the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM). A Phase II Environmental Site Assessment may be required at the time of rezoning application, or site plan application, based on the findings of the Phase 1 Environmental Site Assessment. A Phase II Environmental Site Assessment shall be prepared in accordance with the regulations of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the ASTM. In circumstances where more detailed studies have been completed and provided to the Town, those studies shall be accepted in lieu of an Environmental Site Assessment.
4. Impact Statement. The applicant shall provide an Impact Statement that provides a narrative of the existing and proposed land use of the property and describe how it conforms to the Comprehensive Plan. The Impact Statement shall also identify how the project will impact the following, and how those impacts are proposed to be mitigated.
a. Fiscal Impacts, capital and operating.
b. Impacts to the Quality of Life of citizens.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-114
c. Impacts to Property Values.
d. Impacts to the Environment.
e. Impacts to Archeological and Historic Resources.
175-53.12 SUBSTANTIAL CONFORMANCE TO CONCEPT PLAN
The submission of a concept plan with a rezoning application, including all conditions and elements proposed on the plan, shall be considered as proffers for the conditional rezoning of the property. Upon approval of the requested conditional rezoning, and acceptance of all conditions, including the concept plan and all other proffers that may be offered, all future land use activities shall be in substantial conformance with the concept plan. All future site development plan applications and subdivision plat applications shall be in substantial conformance with the concept plan. Minor deviations of the concept plan that do not significantly alter the overall land use layout, or conflict with specific conditions on the plan, or other proffers, may be considered in substantial conformance. Major deviations to the concept plan shall undergo the review process standard for proffer revisions.
175-53.13 AREA REGULATIONS
Lot Size & Width. New lots created on property within the MCD District shall not have a minimum lot size or width, except for corner lots, which shall have a minimum lot width at the setback line of one hundred (100) feet.
175-53.14 MAXIMUM HEIGHT
A. The maximum structural height of buildings used for colleges, universities or hospitals shall be 5 stories, up to a maximum of 70 feet.
B. The maximum structure height of buildings used for parking garages, hotels, or technology businesses shall be 4 stories, up to a maximum of 56 feet.
C. Except as authorized under subsection 175.53.12A and 175.53.12B, the maximum building height shall be 3 stories, up to a maximum of 42 feet.
D. A clear zone void of structures, signage, vegetation, and berms shall be established in areas determined by the Director to ensure appropriate emergency access for all permitted land uses. Where a clear zone is required, an easement shall be obtained to establish required clear zone areas.
175-53.15 MINIMUM SETBACK AND YARD DIMENSIONS
A. The following setback and yard dimension requirements shall apply to lots within the MCD District.
1. Yards abutting existing public streets: Thirty (30) feet.
2. Yards abutting new public or private streets: Twenty (20) feet.
3. Yards abutting alleys or internal travel lanes: Fifteen (15) feet.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-115
4. Side yard: Zero (0) feet
5. Rear yard: Zero (0) feet
6. Residential uses that may be approved by special use permit shall provide a minimum rear yard of at least twenty-five (25) feet.
175-53.16 STANDARDS
In addition to the other requirements of the Town Code, developments within the MCD District shall comply with the following standards.
A. Open Space Standards
1. At least thirty percent (30%) of the acreage of the property shall be dedicated open space with public access.
2. Up to 25 percent (25%) of the open space required by subsection 175-53.13B.1. may be satisfied with land covered by water.
3. Required open space, including ingress/egress to the required open space, shall not be located within individual building lots.
4. Required open space shall not be further subdivided, and any future development of open space shall only be for the purpose of enhancing the use that it is dedicated for.
5. Open space shall be permanently dedicated for one of more of the following uses: natural resource conservation, or recreational facilities, wetland and water course preservation, selective forestry, wildlife habitat, undeveloped parklands or scenic preservation.
6. The open space shall be conveyed by the applicant as a condition of plat approval and may be conveyed by any of the following means as determined by the Town Council:
a. Deeded in perpetuity to the Town of Front Royal or other governmental agency for the purposes herein.
b. Reserved for common use or ownership of all property owners within the development by covenants in the deeds approved by the Town Attorney. A copy of the proposed deed covenants shall be submitted with the application.
c. Deeded in perpetuity to a private, non-profit, tax-exempt organization legally constituted for conservation purposes under terms and conditions that ensure the perpetual protection and management of the property for conservation purposes. A copy of the proposed deeds and relevant corporate documents of the land trust shall be submitted with the application.
d. Deeded to a property owner's association within the development upon terms and conditions approved by the Town Attorney that will ensure the continued use and management of the land for the intended purposes. The formation and incorporation by
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-116
the applicant of one or more appropriate property owners' associations shall be required prior to plat approval. A copy of the proposed property owner's deed and the by-laws and other relevant documents of the property owner's association shall be submitted with the application. The following shall be required if open space is to be dedicated to a property owner's association:
[1] Covenants providing for mandatory membership in the association and setting forth the owner's rights, interests, and privileges in the association and the common land, must be included in the deed for each lot or unit;
[2] The property owners' association shall have the responsibility of maintaining the open space and operating and maintaining recreational facilities;
[3] The association shall have the authority to levy charges against all property owners to defray the expenses connected with the maintenance of open space and recreational facilities; and
[4] The applicant shall maintain control of dedicated open space and be responsible for its maintenance until 75% of occupancy permits for residential units have been issued and development is sufficient to support the association.
7. If development occurs in phases, the provision of dedicated natural open space may also be phased with the construction of improvements.
8. Pre-development streets and other impervious surfaces shall be excluded from the calculation of the minimum dedicated open space requirement.
B. Lighting Standards.
1. All outdoor lighting shall be designed to the standards of the International Dark-Sky Association (IDA), or an equivalent set of standards that effectively reduce light pollution.
2. Lighting shall be provided within all parking lots.
C. Underground Utility Standards. All new utilities shall be located underground. The Planning Commission may authorize the use of overhead lines where underground lines would adversely impact wetlands or other physical features of the land, or where the use of overhead lines is temporary.
D. Buffer Standards. Landscaped buffers shall be provided for uses within the MCD District as follows:
1. A fifty-foot (50’) buffer shall be provided between adjoining properties of a different zoning category and nonindustrial uses within the MCD District.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-117
2. A one-hundred-foot (100’) buffer shall be provided between industrial and nonindustrial uses within the MCD District.
3. A two-hundred-foot (200’) buffer shall be provided between adjoining properties of a different zoning category and industrial uses within the MCD District.
4. Buildings or structures shall be restricted within buffer areas, excluding small buildings or structures necessary to provide public utilities. Fifty percent (50%) of buffer areas may be used for active uses other than buildings and structures.
E. Screening Standards. Screening shall be provided for uses within the MCD District as follows:
1. Service bays shall be screened or oriented so they are not visible from public streets.
2. Outdoor display or storage of goods or merchandize shall be restricted, unless screened from view. The Planning Commission may authorize specific locations for outdoor display or seasonal outdoor storage as part of the site plan review process. To minimize negative aesthetical impacts of any authorized outdoor display or seasonal outdoor storage that is not fully screened, the Planning Commission may require additional landscaping or other site improvements.
3. Dumpster pad sites and mechanical equipment systems shall be screened so they are not visible from public streets. Such screening shall consist of an evergreen screen, wood fencing, or masonry wall that is consistent with the architectural design of the principle building on the lot.
4. An ornamental fence, masonry or stone wall, and/or landscaping screen shall be provided around the perimeter of a development within the MCD District and adjoining properties of a different zoning category. General details of such screening shall be designated on the Concept Plan.
F. Miscellaneous Standards
1. The gross land area of land devoted to commercial retail shall not exceed forty (40) percent of the gross land area of the development.
2. The gross land area of land devoted to residential uses shall not exceed forty (40) percent of the gross land area of the development.
3. Pedestrian sidewalks, trails, and crosswalks shall be designed to connect clusters of buildings to common areas and retail areas.
4. Common areas shall be provided throughout the project. Common areas shall include amenities such as, but not limited to, pedestrian and bicycle trails, bicycle parking racks, pavilions, gardens, benches, picnic tables, and fountains.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-118
5. Incidental automobile repairs shall be permitted as an accessory use for automobile and truck sales lots and leasing agencies only if the use is located within a fully enclosed building.
LIMITED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (I-1)
175-54 STATEMENT OF INTENT (I-1)
The primary purpose of the I-1 District is to permit certain industries in town which do not in any way detract from residential desirability of nearby areas and to permit industries to locate near a labor supply. Mobile homes for residential purposes are prohibited but may be used for certain other uses as stated below.
175-55 USES PERMITTED BY RIGHT (I-1)
Subject to the standards and requirements set forth in this Chapter, except as prohibited or restricted by separate restrictions of record that may pertain to property within the I-1 District, the following uses of land and buildings are permitted by-right in the I-1 District:
RESIDENTIAL:
Caretaker quarters.
COMMERCIAL:
Automobile and truck sales lots and leasing agencies, in accordance with 175-44.E.
Automobile garage (auto repair)
Automobile service stations (gas stations)
Coal and wood yards, lumberyards and feed/seed stores.
Commuter parking facilities
Contractor’s offices, display rooms and storage.
Furniture stores
Lumber and building supply.
Veterinary hospitals
INDUSTRIAL:
Distribution facilities
Light Manufacturing.
Woodworking and upholstery shop.
Wholesale
ORGANIZATIONAL:
Laboratory, pharmaceutical and/or medical.
MISCELLANEOUS:
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-119
Accessory uses, structures and buildings.
Home occupations.
Open Space
Public facilities.
Public parks and playgrounds.
Public utilities.
Signs, as set forth in Section 175-106.
Special childcare services.
Such other uses as determined similar to one or more enumerated uses by the Zoning Administrator.
(Amended 4-14-03, 7-25-05 and 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
175-56 USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL PERMIT (I-1)
A. The following uses are permitted within the I-1 District only by approval of a special use permit, except as prohibited or restricted by separate restrictions of record that may pertain to property within the I-1 District:
RESIDENTIAL:
COMMERCIAL:
Assembly Halls.
Business Offices.
Clubs.
Barber and beauty shops.
Kennels.
Professional Offices.
Recreation facility, commercial.
Restaurant, including drive-in restaurants.
Retail Stores.
Technology Business
INDUSTRIAL:
Medium Industrial.
ORGANIZATIONAL:
MISCELLANEOUS:
Any use permitted under Section 175-55, or specifically listed above under this subsection, that proposes to occupy a building or structure that exceeds the height requirements of Section 175-60, subject to the requirements of Section 175-136. Additional heights approved by a special use permit shall be required to increase the required setback and yard area requirements by an equivalent distance from each property line.
Communications Towers and cable television facilities, with wireless telephone (cell phone) communications tower subject to the supplemental provisions prescribed in Section 175-110.4.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-120
Conservation Areas
Mini-warehouses
Parking Structures
(Amended 8-12-91, 1-27-03, 4-14-03, 9-26-05, 7-28-08, 7-23-12 and 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
175-57 AREA (I-1)
The minimum lot area shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
175-58 SETBACK (I-1)
Buildings shall be located twenty (20) feet or more from any street right-of-way which is fifty (50) feet or greater in width or forty-five (45) feet or more from the center line of any street right-of-way less than fifty (50) feet in width.
175-59 FRONTAGE AND YARDS (I-1)
A. The minimum lot width shall be sixty (60) feet.
B. Each side and rear yard shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet. The side and rear yard adjoining or adjacent to a residential district shall be forty (40) feet.
175-60 HEIGHT (I-1)
Buildings may be erected up to a height of forty-five (45) feet. Chimneys, flues, cooling towers, flagpoles, radio or communication towers or their accessory facilities not normally occupied by workmen are excluded from this limitation. Parapet walls are permitted up to four (4) feet above the height of the building on which the walls rest.
175-61 LOT COVERAGE (I-1)
Buildings or groups of buildings with their accessory structures may cover up to seventy percent (70%) of the area of the lot.
175-62 CORNER LOTS (I-1)
A. Of the two (2) or more yards of a corner lot with frontage along multiple streets, the front yard shall be established by the following criteria:
1. For new subdivision applications, the front yard shall be identified by the applicant on the subdivision site plan and approved by the Town on the approved final plat.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-121
2. For new construction on existing corner lots where no front yard is designated on the approved final plat, the property owner shall determine the front yard on the Zoning Permit application and shall be approved by the Town on the approved Zoning Permit.
3. For existing structures, the front yard shall be the yard with frontage that the front façade of the primary building faces.
4. The approved front yard established by this Code Section shall only be changed by review and approval of a revised final plat approved by the Planning Commission. Such future requests shall be approved if the Planning Commission determines that the proposed front yard is consistent with other properties along the same street frontages.
(Amended “A” 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
B. The side yard setback on the side facing a side street shall be twenty (20) feet or more for main buildings, and twenty (20) feet or more for accessory buildings.
(Amended “B” 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
C. Each corner lot shall have a minimum width at the setback line of one hundred (100) feet.
D. The rear yard setback if facing a street shall be fifty (50) feet or more for both main and accessory buildings.
(Added “D” 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
175-63 PLANS REQUIRED; ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS (I-1)
A. Before a building permit shall be issued or construction commenced on any permitted use in this district or a permit issued for a new use, the plans, in sufficient detail to show compliance with substantive provisions of this chapter and the operations and processes, shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for study. The Administrator shall refer these plans to the Planning Commission for its recommendation. Modification of the plans may be required. Such plans shall be drawn in accordance with Sections 175-116 and 175-117.
B. Except where otherwise specifically approved in the Town Code, permitted uses shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building.
(Amended 1-28-13-Effective Upon Passage)
C. Outdoor storage, outdoor display or outdoor sale of goods shall only be permitted when each of the following standards are met.
1. Outdoor storage, outdoor display, or outdoor sale of goods shall be used in direct association with the primary use or uses of the property.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-122
2. Outdoor storage, outdoor display and/or outdoor sales shall be screened to obstruct view from any adjacent public street. A screen may consist of a building, solid masonry wall, uniformly painted solid board fence or landscaping. The height of the screening shall be 6’ feet unless an alternative height is approved by the Planning Commission during the review of a site plan.
3. The following types of outdoor display and/or outdoor sales shall be exempt from the
requirements of Section 175-63.C.2.
a. Motor vehicles.
b. Power operated machines designed for outdoor labor, such as farming, construction or lawn maintenance, as well as large equipment, products, and materials designed to be kept outdoors. Plants and other landscaping products typically sold with plants.
c. Temporary or seasonal activities, such as but not limited to, peddlers and itinerant merchants that have obtained approval from the Town.
d. Pre-manufactured buildings.
e. Vending machines.
f. General products, goods, merchandise, and/or materials, provided that (i) no more than 200 square feet of area is used, and (ii) outdoor display and/or sales are restricted from the evening and night hours from 8PM to 5AM, except that general products, goods, merchandise, and/or materials may be kept outdoors if located under a roofed structure.
(Added (C.3a-g) 1-28-13-Effective Upon Passage ; Removed “g” 10-10-17-Effective Upon Passage)
D. The Planning Commission may require landscaping within any established or required front setback area. The plans and execution must take into consideration traffic circulation. Landscaping may be permitted up to a height of three (3) feet and to within fifty (50) feet from the corner of any intersecting streets.
E. Sufficient area shall be provided to adequately screen permitted uses from adjacent business and residential districts and for off-street parking, which shall be in accordance with the provisions set forth in Section 175-104.
F. The Administrator shall act on any application received within thirty (30) days after receiving the application. If formal notice in writing is given to the applicant, the time for action may be extended for a thirty-day period. Failure on the part of the Administrator to act on the application within the established time limit shall be deemed to constitute approval of the application.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-123
INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT DISTRICT (I-2)
(Amended 1-23-95 Repealed former Heavy Industrial I-2)
175-64 STATEMENT OF INTENT (I-2)
The I-2 Industrial Employment District is designed to:
A. Enable the establishment of industrial and employment uses and structures in appropriate locations of the town.
B. Prevent land or structures from being used in a manner so as to create any dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable risk of fire, explosion, radioactivity or other hazardous condition; noise or vibration, smoke, dust, odor or other form of air pollution; electrical or other disturbance, glare or heat; liquid or solid waste; or other condition that would detract from the residential and commercial desirability of the adjoining areas.
C. Provide controls and standards for the establishment of industrial and employment uses and structures in keeping with the purposes of this Article and the Front Royal Comprehensive Plan.
175-65 USE REGULATIONS (I-2)
A. Subject to the standards and requirements set forth in this Chapter, except as prohibited or restricted by separate restrictions of record that may pertain to property within the I-2 District, the following uses of land and buildings are permitted by-right in the I-2 District:
RESIDENTIAL:
Caretaker quarters
COMMERCIAL:
Automobile and truck sales lots and leasing agencies, in accordance with 175-44.E
Automobile garage (auto repair)
Automobile service stations (gas stations)
Business Offices
Coal and wood yards, lumberyards and feed/seed stores
Commuter parking facilities
Contractor’s offices, display rooms and storage
Furniture stores
Lumber and building supply
Professional Offices
Technology Business
Veterinary hospitals
(Amended to Add “Business Offices; Professional Offices; Technology Business” 3-28-16-Eff.e Upon Passage)
INDUSTRIAL:
Distribution facilities
Light Manufacturing
Woodworking and upholstery shop.
Wholesale
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-124
ORGANIZATIONAL:
Laboratory, pharmaceutical and/or medical
Schools
(Amended to Add “Schools” 3-28-16-Effective Upon Passage)
MISCELLANEOUS:
Accessory uses, structures and buildings
Home occupations
Open Space
Public facilities.
Public parks and playgrounds
Public utilities
Signs, as set forth in Section 175-106
Special childcare services
Such other uses as determined similar to one or more enumerated uses by the Zoning Administrator
B. The following uses are permitted within the I-2 District only by approval of a special use permit, except as prohibited or restricted by separate restrictions of record that may pertain to property within the I-2 District:
RESIDENTIAL:
COMMERCIAL:
Airport (including heliports)
Assembly Halls.
Barber and beauty shops
Catering Services
Clubs
Daycare and daycare facilities
Kennels
Recreation facility, commercial
Restaurant, including drive-in restaurants
Retail Stores
(Added “Technology Business” 6-26-00-Effective Upon Passage)
(Added “Kennels” 4-14-03-Effective Upon Passage)
(Added “Recreation Facility, Commercial” 7-28-08-Effective Upon Passage)
(Added “Catering Services” 1-28-11-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended by moving Business Offices; Prof Offices, Tech Business to (A) above 3-28-16-Effective Upon Passage)
INDUSTRIAL:
Automobile Graveyard
Hazardous Material Storage
Heavy Manufacturing
Medium Manufacturing
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-125
Scrap metal processing
ORGANIZATIONAL:
MISCELLANEOUS:
Any use permitted under Section 175-65.A., or specifically listed above under this subsection, that proposes to occupy a building or structure that exceeds the height requirements of Section 175-67, subject to the requirements of Section 175-136. Additional heights approved by a special use permit shall be required to increase the required setback and yard area requirements by an equivalent distance from each property line.
Communications Towers and cable television facilities, with wireless telephone (cell phone) communications tower subject to the supplemental provisions prescribed in Section 175-110.4.
Conservation Areas
Mini-warehouses
Parking Structures
(Added “Wireless Telephone” 9-26-05-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended reference to portable storage containers 7-25-05-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended Entire Section 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
175-66 AREA REGULATIONS (I-2)
A. Minimum lot size: twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: eighty (80) feet.
C. Minimum district size: ten (10) acres.
(Amended 8-12-91-Effective Upon Passage)
175-67 MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS (I-2)
A. All buildings/structures: seventy-five (75) feet, except as provided for in Section 175-65B.
B. Exemptions to height requirements:
1. Chimneys and flues.
2. Cooling towers.
3. Flagpoles.
4. Radio and communications towers.
5. Parapet walls up to four (4) feet above the height of the building on which the wall rests.
6. Water towers.
7. Elevator towers.
175-68 MINIMUM YARD DIMENSIONS (I-2)
A. All structures:
1. Front: twenty-five (25) feet.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-126
2. Side: ten (10) feet.
3. Rear: zero (0).
4. Corner side: twenty-five (25) feet.
B. Transitional requirements, when adjoining a residential district
1. Side: forty (40) feet.
2. Rear: forty (40) feet.
3. All transitional yards shall be landscaped in accordance with Section 148-44.
175-69 LOT COVERAGE (I-2)
A. Maximum building coverage: - fifty percent (50%).
B. Maximum impervious surface coverage: - seventy-five percent (75%).
175-70 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS (I-2)
The following performance standards shall apply to all uses within the I-2 Industrial Employment District:
A. Vibration:
1. No continuous, frequent or repetitive vibrations shall be produced which are discernible to a person of normal sensitivities, without instruments, on land that is not zoned for industrial uses.
2. Vibrations from temporary construction and vehicles leaving the property (such as trucks or trains) are excluded. Vibrations from on-site equipment or vehicles that remain primarily on-site are included.
3. Vibrations of no more than five (5) minutes in any one (1) day between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. shall not be deemed continuous, frequent or repetitive.
B. Glare: Any operation or activity producing intense light or glare shall be performed in such a manner as not to create a glare effect across lot lines. Direct illumination from any source shall be screened from adjoining properties.
C. Heat:
1. Heat from an industrial use shall not at any time cause a temperature increase in the air on any adjacent property in excess of ten degrees Fahrenheit (10 F.).
2. Heat from an industrial use shall not at any time cause a temperature increase in a stream, wetland, lake or any other body of water, at or beyond the property line of the lot on which it is located, that would have an adverse effect on any aquatic life.
D. Liquid or Solid Wastes:
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-127
1. No industrial use shall result in the discharge of liquid or solid waste into any public sewer, private sewage system, public waters or into the ground except in compliance with applicable federal, state or local laws governing such discharge.
2. There shall be no accumulation outdoors of solid wastes conducive to the breeding of rodents or insects.
3. All discharges into any public sewer shall comply with the provisions of Section 134-2, et seq.
E. Smoke and Particulate Matter:
1. Open storage and open processing operations, including on-site transportation movements which are the source of windborne dust or other particulate matter or which involve dust or other particulate air contaminant generating equipment (such as used in paint spraying, grain handling, sand or gravel processing or sandblasting) shall be conducted so that dust and other particulate air contaminants are not transported in visible quantities across the boundary line of the tract on which the industrial use is located.
2. All industrial uses shall comply with state and federal air pollution control regulations.
F. Toxic and Hazardous Materials:
1. All toxic and hazardous materials used in industrial operations shall be registered with the Front Royal Fire Department for purposes of safety.
2. Activities involving the storage or use of materials or products which decompose by detonation shall be registered with the Front Royal Fire Department.
3. Explosives shall be stored, used and manufactured in accordance with applicable state and federal regulations.
G. Odor:
1. No continuous, frequent or repetitive emission of odors or odor-causing substances of such intensity and character as to be detrimental to the health and welfare of the public or neighboring landowners or to interfere with the comfort of the public or neighboring landowners at or beyond the property line shall be permitted. Any such odor or odor causing activity or substance shall be removed, stopped or so modified as to remove the odor.
2. An odor which is evident no more than once in any one (1) day for a period not exceeding five minutes shall not be deemed as continuous, frequent or repetitive within the meaning of these regulations.
H. Noise:
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-128
1. No industrial activity shall generate noise that tends to have an annoying or disruptive effect upon uses located beyond the property boundary.
2. Where technical evidence of violation is warranted, sound levels shall be measured at locations specified in Section 175-71 with a sound level meter and associated octave band filter, manufactured in accordance with the American Standards Association. Measurements shall be made using the flat network of the sound level meter. No sound pressure level shall exceed the decibel levels in the octave bands shown herein.
3. Maximum permitted sound levels (in decibels):
Octave Band Cycles Maximum Permitted
Per Second Sound Level
in Decibels
0 to 75 72
75 to 150 67
150 to 300 59
300 to 600 52
600 to 1200 46
1200 to 2400 41
2400 to 4800 38
Above 4800 35
4. Noise resulting from temporary construction activity between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. shall be exempt from this section.
I. Screening:
1. Except where otherwise specifically approved in the Town Code, permitted uses shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building.
(Amended 1-28-13-Effective Upon Passage)
2. Outdoor storage, outdoor display or outdoor sale of goods shall only be permitted when each of the following standards are met.
a. Outdoor storage, outdoor display, or outdoor sale of goods shall be used in direct association with the primary use or uses of the property.
b. Outdoor storage, outdoor display and/or outdoor sales shall be screened to obstruct view from any adjacent public street. A screen may consist of a building, solid masonry wall, uniformly painted solid board fence or landscaping. The height of the screening shall be 6’ feet unless an alternative height is approved by the Planning Commission during the review of a site plan.
(Added (2a-b) 1-28-13-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-129
3. The following types of outdoor display and/or outdoor sales shall be exempt from the requirements of Section 175-70.I.2.b.
a. Motor vehicles.
b. Power operated machines designed for outdoor labor, such as farming, construction or lawn maintenance, as well as large equipment, products, and materials designed to be kept outdoors.
c. Plants and other landscaping products typically sold with plants.
d. Temporary or seasonal activities, such as but not limited to, peddlers and itinerant merchants that have obtained approval from the Town.
e. Pre-manufactured buildings.
f. Vending machines.
g. General products, goods, merchandise, and/or materials, provided that (i) no more than 200 square feet of area is used, and (ii) outdoor display and/or sales are restricted from the evening and night hours from 8PM to 5AM, except that general products, goods, merchandise, and/or materials may be kept outdoors if located under a roofed structure.
(Added (3a-h) 1-28-13-Effective Upon Passage ; Removed “h” 10-10-17-Effective Upon Passage)
4. All sites and parking areas shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions of Sections 148-46, 148-47 and 148-48.
5. Automobile graveyards and junkyards, including those in existence at the time of the adoption of this chapter, shall completely screen, on any side open to view from a public road, the operation or use by a solid masonry wall, a uniformly-colored solid fence or dense evergreen plantings at least six (6) feet in height at the time of planting.
175-71 LOCATIONS FOR DETERMINATION OF PERFORMANCE STANDARDS (I-2)
Measurements may be made at ground level or at habitable levels of buildings. Measurements shall be made at the property boundary of the parcel where the industrial use is located.
175-72 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF PERFORMANCE STANDARDS (I-2)
A. Before a building permit or zoning permit shall be issued or construction commenced on any uses in this district or a permit issued for a new use, the development plans shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for review. Sufficient detail shall be provided on said plans to show
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-130
compliance with the substantive provisions of this chapter and compliance of the operations and processes to the performance standards.
B. Determinations of a violation shall be made pursuant to a test using either the senses of the Zoning Administrator and a second municipal official/employee, or using equipment before notice of violation is issued. The operator of an industrial use shall be given written notice of the time and place of the test and given a reasonable opportunity to witness the test.
C. The Zoning Administrator will notify landowners and business operators/tenants in writing of violations and will then seek compliance. When notified of a violation, a landowner or tenant will have the opportunity to demonstrate that the operation predates the application of this Article and is therefore a valid nonconforming use. A finding of violation may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals and then to the courts.
D. If a violation exists and the operator fails to take satisfactory action within two (2) weeks, the Zoning Administrator shall take or cause to be taken such action as is appropriate to cause correction of such violation. Failure to obey lawful orders concerning correction of such violation shall be punishable as provided generally for violations in the Zoning Ordinance and in other laws or regulations affecting the case.
175-73 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING (I-2)
A. Parking space requirements:
1. Industrial uses/manufacturing/distribution areas: one (1) space per employee and one (1) space for every vehicle used on site, plus one (1) space per delivery/loading bay.
2. Automobile garages: two (2) spaces per service bay, or two (2) spaces for every three hundred sixty (360) square feet. Every such facility shall have a minimum of three (3) spaces.
3. Industrial uses/office component: one (1) space per three hundred (300) square feet of office area.
4. Other uses not specifically enumerated: see Section 175-104.
B. Location: Minimum setback for loading areas, driveways and parking: five (5) feet from side and rear property lines for parking areas with fewer than fifteen (15) spaces and five (5) feet from front property line except where driveway entrance is located. All parking areas with fifteen (15) or more spaces shall meet the requirements of Section 148-48.
C. Loading space requirements:
1. Number: one (1) space for first ten thousand (10,000) square feet of gross floor area, plus one (1) space for each additional forty thousand (40,000) square feet or fraction thereof. For
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-131
purposes of this section, gross floor area shall include gross outdoor storage areas, covered or uncovered.
2. Size of space: minimum twelve (12) feet wide and fifty-five (55) feet in length, with a minimum clear height of fifteen (15) feet.
FLOODPLAIN ZONING
(Amended Entirely 7-11-88, 10-14-08)
175-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS (Floodplain)
A. Statutory Authority: This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to localities by Virginia Code § 15.2-2280.
(Amended 3-28-16-Effective Upon Passage)
B. Purpose: The purpose of these provisions is to prevent: the loss of life and property, the creation of health and safety hazards, the disruption of commerce and governmental services, the extraordinary and unnecessary expenditure of public funds for flood protection and relief, and the impairment of the tax base by:
1. Regulating uses, activities, and development which, alone or in combination with other existing or future uses, activities, and development, will cause unacceptable increases in flood heights, velocities, and frequencies;
2. Restricting or prohibiting certain uses, activities, and development from locating within districts subject to flooding;
3. Requiring all those uses, activities, and developments that do occur in flood-prone districts to be protected and/or flood-proofed against flooding and flood damage; and,
4. Protecting individuals from buying land and structures which are unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazards.
C. Applicability: These provisions shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the Town of Front Royal and identified as a being in the 1% annual chance of a flood (Special Flood Hazard Area), by the Federal Insurance Administration.
D. Compliance and Liability:
1. No land shall hereafter be developed and no structure shall be located, relocated, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, or structurally altered except in full compliance with the terms and provisions of this ordinance and any other applicable ordinances and regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this ordinance.
2. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on acceptable engineering methods of study.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-132
Larger floods may occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This ordinance does not imply that districts outside the Floodplain District or that land uses permitted within such district will be free from flooding or flood damages.
3. Records of actions associated with administering this ordinance shall be kept on file and maintained by the Zoning Administrator.
4. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the Town of Front Royal or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made there under.
E. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions: This ordinance supersedes any ordinance currently in effect in flood-prone districts. However, any underlying ordinance shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that its provisions are more restrictive than this ordinance.
F. Severability: If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance shall be declared invalid for any reason whatever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this ordinance. The remaining portions shall remain in full force and effect; and for this purpose, the provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be severable.
G. Administration:
1. Designation of the Floodplain Administrator. The Floodplain Administrator is hereby appointed to administer and implement these regulations and is referred to herein as the Floodplain Administrator. The Zoning Administrator is hereby designated as the Floodplain Administrator for the Town of Front Royal. The Floodplain Administrator may:
a. Do the work themselves. In the absence of a designated Floodplain Administrator, the duties are conducted by the Town of Front Royal chief executive officer.
b. Delegate duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations to qualified technical personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and other employees.
c. Enter into a written agreement or written contract with another community or private sector entity to administer specific provisions of these regulations. Administration of any part of these regulations by another entity shall not relieve the community of its responsibilities pursuant to the participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program as set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations at 44 C.F.R. Section 59.22.
2. Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator: The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include but are not limited to:
a. Review applications for permits to determine whether proposed activities will be located in the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-133
b. Interpret floodplain boundaries and provide available base flood elevation and flood hazard information.
c. Review applications to determine whether proposed activities will be reasonably safe from flooding and require new construction and substantial improvements to meet the requirements of these regulations.
d. Review applications to determine whether all necessary permits have been obtained from the Federal, State or local agencies from which prior or concurrent approval is required; in particular, permits from state agencies for any construction, reconstruction, repair, or alteration of a dam, reservoir, or waterway obstruction (including bridges, culverts, structures), any alteration of a watercourse, or any change of the course, current, or cross section of a stream or body of water, including any change to the 100-year frequency floodplain of free-flowing non-tidal waters of the State.
e. Verify that applicants proposing an alteration of a watercourse have notified adjacent communities, the Department of Conservation and Recreation (Division of Dam Safety and Floodplain Management), and other appropriate agencies (VADEQ, USACE) and have submitted copies of such notifications to FEMA.
f. Advise applicants for new construction or substantial improvement of structures that are located within an area of the Coastal Barrier Resources System established by the Coastal Barrier Resources Act that Federal flood insurance is not available on such structures; areas subject to this limitation are shown on Flood Insurance Rate Maps as Coastal Barrier Resource System Areas (CBRS) or Otherwise Protected Areas (OPA).
g. Approve applications and issue permits to develop in flood hazard areas if the provisions of these regulations have been met, or disapprove applications if the provisions of these regulations have not been met.
h. Inspect or cause to be inspected, buildings, structures, and other development for which permits have been issued to determine compliance with these regulations or to determine if non-compliance has occurred or violations have been committed.
i. Review Elevation Certificates and require incomplete or deficient certificates to be corrected.
j. Submit to FEMA, or require applicants to submit to FEMA, data and information necessary to maintain FIRMs, including hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses prepared by or for the Town of Front Royal within six months after such data and information becomes available if the analyses indicate changes in base flood elevations.
k. Maintain and permanently keep records that are necessary for the administration of these regulations, including:
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-134
[1] Flood Insurance Studies, Flood Insurance Rate Maps (including historic studies and maps and current effective studies and maps) and Letters of Map Change; and
[2] Documentation supporting issuance and denial of permits, Elevation Certificates, documentation of the elevation (in relation to the datum on the FIRM) to which structures have been floodproofed, inspection records, other required design certifications, variances, and records of enforcement actions taken to correct violations of these regulations.
l. Enforce the provisions of these regulations, investigate violations, issue notices of violations or stop work orders, and require permit holders to take corrective action.
m. Advise the Board of Zoning Appeals regarding the intent of these regulations and, for each application for a variance, prepare a staff report and recommendation.
n. Administer the requirements related to proposed work on existing buildings:
[1] Make determinations as to whether buildings and structures that are located in flood hazard areas and that are damaged by any cause have been substantially damaged.
[2] Make reasonable efforts to notify owners of substantially damaged structures of the need to obtain a permit to repair, rehabilitate, or reconstruct. Prohibit the non-compliant repair of substantially damaged buildings except for temporary emergency protective measures necessary to secure a property or stabilize a building or structure to prevent additional damage.
o. Undertake, as determined appropriate by the Floodplain Administrator due to the circumstances, other actions which may include but are not limited to: issuing press releases, public service announcements, and other public information materials related to permit requests and repair of damaged structures; coordinating with other Federal, State, and local agencies to assist with substantial damage determinations; providing owners of damaged structures information related to the proper repair of damaged structures in special flood hazard areas; and assisting property owners with documentation necessary to file claims for Increased Cost of Compliance coverage under NFIP flood insurance policies.
p. Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency when the corporate boundaries of the Town of Front Royal have been modified and:
[1] Provide a map that clearly delineates the new corporate boundaries or the new area for which the authority to regulate pursuant to these regulations has either been assumed or relinquished through annexation; and
[2] If the FIRM for any annexed area includes special flood hazard areas that have flood zones that have regulatory requirements that are not set forth in these regulations, prepare amendments to these regulations to adopt the FIRM and appropriate requirements, and submit the amendments to the governing body for adoption; such
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-135
adoption shall take place at the same time as or prior to the date of annexation and a copy of the amended regulations shall be provided to Department of Conservation and Recreation (Division of Dam Safety and Floodplain Management) and FEMA.
q. Upon the request of FEMA, complete and submit a report concerning participation in the NFIP which may request information regarding the number of buildings in the SFHA, number of permits issued for development in the SFHA, and number of variances issued for development in the SFHA.
r. It is the duty of the Community Floodplain Administrator to take into account flood, mudslide and flood-related erosion hazards, to the extent that they are known, in all official actions relating to land management and use throughout the entire jurisdictional area of the Community, whether or not those hazards have been specifically delineated geographically (e.g. via mapping or surveying).
3. Use and Interpretation of FIRMs. The Floodplain Administrator shall make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of special flood hazard areas, floodplain boundaries, and floodway boundaries. The following shall apply to the use and interpretation of FIRMs and data:
a. Where field surveyed topography indicates that adjacent ground elevations:
[1] Are below the base flood elevation, even in areas not delineated as a special flood hazard area on a FIRM, the area shall be considered as special flood hazard area and subject to the requirements of these regulations;
[2] Are above the base flood elevation, the area shall be regulated as special flood hazard area unless the applicant obtains a Letter of Map Change that removes the area from the SFHA.
b. In FEMA-identified special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation and floodway data have not been identified and in areas where FEMA has not identified SFHAs, any other flood hazard data available from a Federal, State, or other source shall be reviewed and reasonably used.
c. Base flood elevations and designated floodway boundaries on FIRMs and in FISs shall take precedence over base flood elevations and floodway boundaries by any other sources if such sources show reduced floodway widths and/or lower base flood elevations.
d. Other sources of data shall be reasonably used if such sources show increased base flood elevations and/or larger floodway areas than are shown on FIRMs and in FISs.
e. If a Preliminary Flood Insurance Rate Map and/or a Preliminary Flood Insurance Study has been provided by FEMA:
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-136
[1] Upon the issuance of a Letter of Final Determination by FEMA, the preliminary flood hazard data shall be used and shall replace the flood hazard data previously provided from FEMA for the purposes of administering these regulations.
[2] Prior to the issuance of a Letter of Final Determination by FEMA, the use of preliminary flood hazard data shall be deemed the best available data pursuant to Section 3.1.A.3. and used where no base flood elevations and/or floodway areas are provided on the effective FIRM.
[3] Prior to issuance of a Letter of Final Determination by FEMA, the use of preliminary flood hazard data is permitted where the preliminary base flood elevations or floodway areas exceed the base flood elevations and/or designated floodway widths in existing flood hazard data provided by FEMA. Such preliminary data may be subject to change and/or appeal to FEMA.
4. Jurisdictional Boundary Changes. In accordance with the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 44 Subpart (B) Section 59.22 (a) (9) (v), the Town will notify the Federal Insurance Administration and optionally the State Coordinating Office in writing whenever the boundaries of the Town have been modified by annexation or the Town has otherwise assumed or no longer has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for a particular area. A copy of a map of the Town, suitable for reproduction, and clearly delineating the new corporate limits or new area for which the Town has assumed or relinquished floodplain management regulatory authority must be included with the notification.
5. District Boundary Changes. The delineation of any of the Floodplain Districts may be revised by the Town where natural or man-made changes have occurred and/or where more detailed studies have been conducted or undertaken by the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers or other qualified agency, or an individual documents the need for such change. However, prior to any such change, approval must be obtained from the Federal Emergency Management Agency. A completed Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) is a record of this approval.
6. Interpretation of District Boundaries. Initial interpretations of the boundaries of the Floodplain Districts shall be made by the Zoning Officer. Should a dispute arise concerning the boundaries of any of the Districts, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall make the necessary determination. The person questioning or contesting the location of the District boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present his case to the Board and to submit his own technical evidence if he so desires.
7. Submitting Model Backed Technical Data. A community’s base flood elevations may increase or decrease resulting from physical changes affecting flooding conditions. As soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the date such information becomes available, a community shall notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency of the changes by submitting technical or scientific data. The community may submit data via a LOMR. Such a submission is necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-137
affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and flood plain management requirements will be based upon current data.
8. Letters of Map Revision. When development in the floodplain will cause or causes a change in the base flood elevation, the Town shall require the applicant of the development to notify FEMA by applying for a Conditional Letter of Map Revision and then a Letter of Map Revision.
9. Penalty for Violations. Any person who fails to comply with any of the requirements or provisions of this article or directions of the director of planning or any authorized employee of the Town shall be guilty of the appropriate violation and subject to the penalties thereof. Violations and associated penalties related to the floodplain provisions are found under Section 175-145 of this Chapter. In addition to the above penalties, all other actions are hereby reserved, including an action in equity for the proper enforcement of Sections 175-74 through 175-81.3. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of, or noncompliance with, the provisions of Sections 175-74 through 175-81.3, shall not excuse the violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations within a reasonable time. Any structure constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered or relocated in noncompliance with this article may be declared by the Town to be a public nuisance and abatable as such. Flood insurance may be withheld from structures constructed in violation of this article.
(Added Entire “G – Administration” 3-28-16-Effective Upon Passage)
175-75 DEFINITIONS (Floodplain)
The following definitions apply to the floodplain regulations found within this chapter, specifically Sections 175-74 through 175-81.3:
(Added 3-28-16-Effective Upon Passage)
A. ACCESSORY STRUCTURE or APPURTENANT STRUCTURE – For purposes of the floodplain regulations of this chapter, shall mean an accessory building not in excess of 200 square feet. (Added 3-28-16-Effective Upon Passage)
B. BASE FLOOD - The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
C. BASE FLOOD ELEVATION – The water surface elevations of the base flood, that is, the flood level that has a one percent or greater chance of occurrence in any given year. The water surface elevation of the base flood in relation to the datum specified on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate map. For the purposes of this ordinance, the base flood is the 1% annual chance flood.
(Amended 3-28-16-Effective Upon Passage)
D. BASEMENT - Any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-138
E. BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS - The Board appointed to review appeals made by individuals with regard to decisions of the Zoning Administrator in the interpretation of this ordinance.
F. BREAKAWAY WALL - A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
G. DEVELOPMENT - Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
H. ELEVATED BUILDING - A non-basement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, or columns (posts and piers).
I. ENCROACHMENT - The advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fills, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
J. EXISTING CONSTRUCTION – Structures for which the “start of construction” commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975 for FIRMs effective before that date “existing construction” may also be referred to as “existing structures”.
(Added 3-28-16-Effective Upon Passage)
K. FLOOD OR FLOODING -
1. A general or temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
a. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or,
b. The unusual and rapid accumulation or run-off of surface waters from any source.
c. Mudflows which are proximately caused by flooding as defined in paragraph (1)(b) of this definition and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by current of water and deposited along the path of the current.
(Added “c” 3-28-16-Effective Upon Passage)
2. The collapse or subsistence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-139
cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in paragraph (1) (a) of this definition.
L. FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) – An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. A FIRM that has been made available digitally is called a Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM).
(Added 3-28-16-Effective Upon Passage)
M. FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) – A report by FEMA that examines, evaluates and determines flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudflow and/or flood-related erosion hazards.
(Added 3-28-16-Effective Upon Passage)
N. FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD-PRONE AREA - Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source.
O. FLOODWAY - The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.
P. FREEBOARD - A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. “Freeboard” tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization in the watershed.
Q. FLOOD-PROOFING - Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
R. HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE – The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
(Added 3-28-16-Effective Upon Passage)
S. HISTORIC STRUCTURE – Any structure that is:
1. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-140
2. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a register historic district;
3. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or,
4. Individually listed on a local inventory of history places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either
a. by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or,
b. directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
(Added “S” 3-28-16-Effective Upon Passage)
T. HYDRAULIC AND HYDRAULIC ENGINEERING ANALYSIS – Analyses performed by a licensed profession engineer, in accordance with standard engineering practices that are accepted by the Virginia Department of Conservation and Recreation and FEMA, used to determine the base flood, other frequency floods, flood elevations, floodway information and boundaries, and flood profiles.
(Added 3-28-16-Effective Upon Passage)
U. LETTERS OF MAP CHANGES (LOMC) – A letter of Map Change is an official FEMA determination, by letter, that amends or revises an effective Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood Insurance Study. Letters of Map Change include:
1. LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA) – An amendment based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective Flood Insurance Rate Map and establishes that a land as defined by meets and bounds or structure is not located in a special flood hazard area.
2. LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR) – A revision based on technical data that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations, and planimetric features. A Letter of Map Revision based on Fill (LOMR-F), is a determination that a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer exposed to flooding associated with the base flood. In order to qualify for this determination, the fill must have been permitted and placed in accordance with the community’s floodplain management regulations.
(Added “U” 3-28-16-Effective Upon Passage)
V. LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE – The lowest natural elevation of the ground surface next to the walls of structure.
(Added 3-28-16-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-141
W. LOWEST FLOOR – The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of Federal Code 44CFR §60.3.
X. MANUFACTURED HOME – A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes the term “manufactured homes” also include park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days.
(Added 3-28-16-Effective Upon Passage)
Y. MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION – A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
(Added 3-28-16-Effective Upon Passage)
Z. MEAN SEA LEVEL – Is an elevation point that represents the average height of the ocean’s surface (such as the halfway point between the mean high tide and the mean low tide) which is used as a standard in reckoning land elevation.
(Added 3-28-16-Effective Upon Passage)
aa. NEW CONSTRUCTION - For the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of an initial Flood Insurance Rate Map July 15, 1988, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, new construction means structures for which start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
bb. POST-FIRM STRUCTURES – A structure for which construction or substantial improvement occurred after July 15, 1988. (Added 3-28-16-Effective Upon Passage)
cc. PRE-FIRM STRUCTURES – A structure for which construction or substantial improvement occurred on or before July 15, 1988.
(Added 3-28-16-Effective Upon Passage)
dd. RECREATIONAL VEHICLE - A vehicle which is:
1. Built on a single chassis;
2. 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-142
3. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and,
4. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use.
ee. REPETITIVE LOSS STRUCTURE – A building covered by a contract for flood insurance that has incurred flood-related damages on two occasions, in which the cost of the repair, on the average, equaled or exceeded 25 percent of the market value of the structure at the time of each such flood event; and at the time of the second incidence of flood-related damage, the contract for flood insurance contains increased cost of compliance coverage.
(Added 3-28-16-Effective Upon Passage)
ff. SEVERE REPETITIVE LOSS STRUCTURE – A structure that: (a) is covered under a contract for flood insurance made available under the NFIP; and (b) has incurred flood related damage – (i) for which 4 or more separate claims payments have been made under flood insurance coverage whit the amount of each such claim exceeding $5,000, and with the cumulative amount of such claims payments exceeding $20,000; or (ii) for which at least 2 separate claims payments have been made under such coverage, with the cumulative amount of such claims exceeding the market value of the insured structure.
(Added 3-28-16-Effective Upon Passage)
gg. SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA - The land in the floodplain subject to a one (1%) percent or greater chance of being flooded in any given year, commonly known as the one-hundred (100) year floodplain.
hh. START OF CONSTRUCTION - The date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, substantial improvement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of the construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
ii. STRUCTURE – For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
(Added 3-28-16-Effective Upon Passage)
jj. SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE - Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to it’s before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-143
kk. SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT - Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
1. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
2. Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure, or
3. Historic structures undergoing repair or rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvement as defined above, must comply with all ordinance requirements that do not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure. Documentation that a specific ordinance requirement will cause removal of the structure from the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places must be obtained from the Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer. Any exemption from ordinance requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
(Added “kk” 3-28-16-Effective Upon Passage)
ll VIOLATION – The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in Sections 175-74 through 175-81.3 of this Chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
(Added 3-28-16-Effective Upon Passage)
mm. WATERCOURSE - A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur.
175-76 ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS
A. Basis of Districts - The various floodplain districts shall include special flood hazard areas. The basis for the delineation of these districts shall be the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for the Town of Front Royal prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Federal Insurance Administration, dated June 3, 2008, as amended.
(Amended “A” 5-12-08-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-144
B. The Floodway District, also referred to as the AE zone, is delineated, for purposes of this ordinance, using the criterion that certain areas within the floodplain must be capable of carrying the waters of the Special Flood Hazard Area without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one (1) foot at any point. The areas included in this District are specifically defined in Table 4 of the above-referenced Flood Insurance Study and shown on the accompanying Flood Boundary and Floodway Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map. The following provisions shall apply within the Floodway District of an AE zone:
1. Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or other development shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment will not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently-accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough review by the Floodplain Administrator. Development activities which increase the water surface elevation of the base flood may be allowed, provided that the applicant first applies – with the Town’s endorsement – for a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR), and receives the approval of the Federal Emergency Management Agency. If the requirements of this section are satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction standards.
2. The placement of manufactured homes (mobile homes) is prohibited, except when replacing an existing manufactured home in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A replacement manufactured home may be placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision provided the anchoring, elevation and encroachment standards are met.
(Amended “B” 6-23-08-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended “B” and Added (1-2) 3-28-16-Effective Upon Passage)
C. The Flood-Fringe District shall be that area of the Special Flood Hazard Area not included in the Floodway District. The basis for the outermost boundary of the District shall be the Special Flood Hazard Area elevations contained in the flood profiles of the above-referenced Flood Insurance Study and as shown on the accompanying Flood Boundary and Floodway Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map.
D. The Approximated Floodplain District, also referred to as the A Zone, as illustrated on the FIRM accompanying the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) shall be those areas for which no detailed flood profiles or elevations are provided, but the one percent annual chance floodplain boundary has been approximated. For these areas, the following provisions shall apply:
1. The Approximated Floodplain District shall be that floodplain area for which no detailed flood profiles or elevations are provided, but where a one percent annual chance floodplain boundary has been approximated. Such areas are shown as Zone A on the maps
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-145
accompanying the FIS. For these areas, the base flood elevations and floodway information from federal, state, and other acceptable sources shall be used, when available. Where the specific one percent annual chance flood elevation cannot be determined for this area using other sources of data, such as the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers Floodplain Information Reports, U. S. Geological Survey Flood-Prone Quadrangles, etc., then the applicant for the proposed use, development and/or activity shall determine this base flood elevation. For development proposed in the approximate floodplain the applicant must use technical methods that correctly reflect currently accepted practices, such as point on boundary, high water marks, or detailed methodologies hydrologic and hydraulic analyses. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough review by the Floodplain Administrator.
2. The Floodplain Administrator reserves the right to require a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis for any development. When such base flood elevation data is utilized, the lowest floor shall be elevated to or above the base flood plus twelve (12) inches. Additional elevation above 12 inches over the base flood is recommended if possible because it may reduce the cost of flood insurance.
3. During the permitting process, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain:
a. The elevation of the lowest floor (in relation to mean sea level),including the basement, of all new and substantially improved structures; and,
b. If the structure has been flood-proofed in accordance with the requirements of this article, the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure has been flood-proofed.
4. Base flood elevation data shall be obtained from other sources or developed using detailed methodologies comparable to those contained in a FIS for subdivision proposals and other proposed development proposals (including manufactured home parks and subdivisions) that exceed fifty lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser.
(Amended “D” and Added (1-4) 3-28-16-Effective Upon Passage)
175-77 OVERLAY CONCEPT (Floodplain)
A. The Floodplain Districts described above shall be overlays to the existing underlying districts as shown on the Official Zoning Ordinance Map, and as such, the provisions for the floodplain districts shall serve as a supplement to the underlying district provisions.
B. If there is any conflict between the provisions or requirements of the Floodplain Districts and those of any underlying district, the more restrictive provisions and/or those pertaining to the floodplain districts shall apply.
C. In the event any provision concerning a Floodplain District is declared inapplicable as a result of any legislative or administrative actions or judicial decision, the basic underlying provisions shall remain applicable.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-146
175-78 FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
A. The boundaries of the Special Flood Hazard Area and Floodplain Districts are established as shown on the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map and/or Flood Insurance Rate Map which is declared to be a part of this Ordinance and which shall be kept on file at the Town of Front Royal Planning Offices.
(Amended “A” 6-23-08-Effective Upon Passage)
B. District Boundary Changes: The delineation of any of the Floodplain Districts may be revised by the Town of Front Royal where natural or man-made changes have occurred and/or where more detailed studies have been conducted or undertaken by the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers or other qualified agency, or an individual documents the need for such change. However, prior to any such change, approval must be obtained from the Federal Insurance Administration.
C. Interpretation of District Boundaries: Interpretations of the boundaries of the Floodplain Districts shall be made by the Zoning Administrator. Should a dispute arise concerning the boundaries of any of the Districts, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall make the necessary determination. The person questioning or contesting the location of the District boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present his case to the Board and to submit his own technical evidence if he so desires.
175-79 DISTRICT PROVISIONS (Floodplain)
A. Permit Requirement: All uses, activities, and development occurring within any floodplain district shall be undertaken only upon the issuance of a Zoning Permit. Such development shall be undertaken only in strict compliance with the provisions of the Ordinance and with all other applicable codes and ordinances, as amended, and the Town of Front Royal Subdivision Regulations. Prior to the issuance of any such permit, the Zoning Administrator shall require all applications to include compliance with all applicable state and federal laws.
(Amended “A” 11-23-98-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended “A” 6-23-08-Effective Upon Passage)
B. Site Plans and Permit Applications: All applications for development within any floodplain district and all building permits issued for the floodplain shall incorporate the following information:
1. For structures to be elevated, the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement).
2. For structures to be flood-proofed (non-residential only), the elevation to which the structure will be flood-proofed.
3. The elevation of the Base Flood at the site.
4. Topographic information showing existing and proposed ground elevations.
(Amended former “F’ 4-19-99-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-147
(Amended “B” 5-12-08-Effective Upon Passage)
(Added “B” (3 & 4) 3-28-16-Effective Upon Passage)
175-80 GENERAL STANDARDS (Floodplain)
In all special flood hazard areas the property owner is ultimately responsible for insuring the following provisions have been considered:
A. New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
B. New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
C. New construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
D. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment and other service facilities, including duct work, shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
E. New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
F. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters.
G. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
H. Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building that is in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance shall meet the requirements of “new construction” as contained in this ordinance.
I. Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building that is not in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance, shall be undertaken only if said non-conformity is not furthered, extended, or replaced.
J. Prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of any channels or of any watercourse, stream, etc., within this jurisdiction a permit shall be obtained from the U. S. Corps of Engineers, the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality, and the Virginia Marine Resources Commission (a joint permit application is available from any of these organizations). Furthermore, notification of the proposal shall be given by the applicant to all affected adjacent jurisdictions, the Department of Conservation and Recreation (Division of Dam Safety and Floodplain Management) and the Federal Insurance Administration.
K. The flood carrying capacity within an altered or relocated portion of any watercourse shall be maintained.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-148
L. Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(Added “L” 3-28-16-Effective Upon Passage)
(Added Entire Section 10-14-08-Effective Upon Passage)
175-81 SPECIFIC STANDARDS (Floodplain)
In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevations have been provided in the Flood Insurance Study or generated according to Section 175-81.1(A), the following provisions shall apply:
A. Residential Construction: New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation.
B. Non-Residential Construction: New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or non-residential building shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. Buildings located in all AE and AH zones may be flood-proofed in lieu of being elevated provided that all areas of the building components below the elevation corresponding to the Base Flood Elevation (BFE) plus one foot are water tight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and use structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification, including the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed, shall be maintained by the Floodplain Administrator.
(Amended “B” 3-28-16-Effective Upon Passage)
C. The Space Below the Lowest Floor: Enclosed areas, of new construction or substantially improved structures, which are below the regulatory flood protection elevation shall:
(Amended Title of “C” from Elevated Floor 3-28-16-Effective Upon Passage
1. Not be designed or used for human habitation, but shall only be used for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment (standard exterior door), or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms, except to enclose storage areas;
2. Be constructed entirely of flood resistant materials below the regulatory flood protection elevation;
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-149
3. Include, in Zones A and AE measures to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the openings must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum design criteria:
a. Provide a minimum of two openings on different sides of each enclosed area subject to
flooding.
b. The total net area of all openings must be at least one (1) square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding.
c. If a building has more than one enclosed area, each area must have openings to allow floodwaters to automatically enter and exit.
d. The bottom of all required openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above the adjacent grade.
e. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other opening coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions.
f. Foundation enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not require openings. Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is considered an enclosure and requires openings as outlined above.
D. Standards for Recreational Vehicle: All recreational vehicles placed on sites must be either:
1. In all designated Special Flood Hazard Areas, all manufactured homes placed, or substantially improved, on individual lots or parcels, must meet all the requirements for the zone in which they are located for new construction, including the elevation and anchoring requirements in this ordinance; or,
2. All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either
a. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions); or
b. Where allowed under the general zoning regulations of this Chapter, may be kept on the site for 180 days or more when all applicable floodplain standards for manufactured homes are complied with.
(Amended “D” and Added (1-2) 3-28-16-Effective Upon Passage)
(Added Entire Section 10-14-08-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-150
175-81.1 STANDARDS FOR APPROXIMATED FLOODPLAIN
A. When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, the Zoning Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or any other source, in order to administer the provisions of Section. When such base flood elevation data is utilized, the Zoning Administrator shall obtain:
1. The elevation (in relation to the mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including the basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; and,
2. If the structure has been flood-proofed in accordance with the requirements of Section 175-81(B) of this ordinance, the elevation in relation to the mean sea level to which the structure has been flood-proofed.
B. When the data is not available from any source as in Section 175-81.1(A), the lowest floor of the structure shall be elevated to no lower than one (1) foot above the highest adjacent grade.
C. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development proposals that exceed fifty lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser.
D. Standards for Subdivision Proposals.
1. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
2. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
3. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards, and
4. Base flood elevation data shall be obtained from other sources or developed using detailed methodologies, hydraulic and hydrologic analysis, comparable to those contained in a Flood Insurance Study for all major subdivision proposals and major site development plans, as defined under Chapter 148 of the Town Code.
(Added “D” 3-28-16-Effective Upon Passage)
E. Existing Structures in the Floodplain Areas. Any structure or use of a structure or premises must be brought into conformity with these provisions when it is changed, repaired, or improved, unless one of the following exceptions is established before the change is made:
1. The floodplain manager has determined that
a. change is not a substantial repair or substantial improvement; and,
b. no new square footage is being built in the floodplain that is not complaint; and,
c. no new square footage is being built in the floodway; and,
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-151
d. the change complies with this ordinance and the VA USBC; and,
e. the change, when added to all the changes made during a rolling 5 year period does not constitute 50% of the structure’s value.
2. The changes are required to comply with a citation for a health or safety violation.
3. The structure is a historic structure and the change required would impair the historic nature of the structure.
(Added “E” 3-28-16-Effective Upon Passage)
(Added Entire Section 10-14-08-Effective Upon Passage)
175-81.2 STANDARDS FOR THE FLOODWAY DISTRICT
The following provisions shall apply within the Floodway District:
Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other developments are prohibited unless certification (with supporting technical data) by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood discharge. The preceding uses, activities and development occurring within any floodway district shall be undertaken only upon the issuance of a Special Use Permit. Development activities in which an increase in the water surface elevation of the base flood may be allowed, provided that the applicant first applies – with the Town of Front Royal endorsement – for a conditional Flood Insurance Rate Map and floodway revision, and receives the approval of the Federal Emergency Management Agency. However, other activities such as demolition in which there is not an increase in the water surface elevation, will require a zoning permit in lieu of a special use permit.
175-81.3 FLOODPLAIN VARIANCES: FACTORS TO BE CONSIDERED
A. Variances shall be issued only upon (i) a showing of good and sufficient cause, (ii) after the Board of Zoning Appeals has determined that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (iii) after the Board of Zoning Appeals has determined that the granting of such variance will not result in (a) unacceptable or prohibited increases in flood heights, (b) additional threats to public safety, (c) extraordinary public expense; and will not (d) create nuisances, (e) cause fraud or victimization of the public, or (f) conflict with local laws or ordinances.
B. While the granting of variances generally is limited to a lot size less than one-half acre, deviations from that limitation may occur. However, as the lot size increases beyond one- half acre, the technical justification required for issuing a variance increases. Variances may be issued by the Board of Zoning Appeals for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-152
structures constructed below the base flood level, in conformance with the provisions of this section.
C. Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the criteria of this section are met, and the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
D. In passing upon applications for variances, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall satisfy all relevant factors and procedures specified in other sections of the zoning ordinance and consider the following additional factors:
(Added (A-D) 3-28-16-Effective Upon Passage)
1. The showing of good and sufficient cause.
2. The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments. No variance shall be granted for any proposed use, development, or activity within any Floodway District that will cause any increase in the Special Flood Hazard Area elevation.
3. The danger that materials may be swept on to other lands or downstream to the injury of others.
4. The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions.
5. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owners.
6. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community.
7. The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location.
8. The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use.
9. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
10. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area.
11. The safety of access by ordinary and emergency vehicles to the property in time of flood.
12. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-153
13. The historic nature of a structure. Variances for repair or rehabilitation of historic structures may be granted upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
(Added (13) 3-28-16-Effective Upon Passage)
14. Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this ordinance.
E. The Board of Zoning Appeals may refer any application and accompanying documentation pertaining to any request for a variance to any engineer or other qualified person or agency for technical assistance in evaluating the proposed project in relation to flood heights and velocities, and the adequacy of the plans for flood protection and other related matters.
(Amended 3-28-16-Effective Upon Passage)
F. Variances shall be issued only after the Board of Zoning Appeals has determined that the variance will be the minimum required to provide relief from exceptional hardship to the applicant.
G. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall notify the applicant for a variance, in writing, that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the Special Flood Hazard Area elevation (a) increases the risks to life and property and (b) will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance.
H. A record shall be maintained of the above notification as well as all variance actions, including justification for the issuance of the variances. Any variances that are issued shall be noted in the annual or biennial report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administrator.
(Added Entire Section 10-14-08-Effective Upon Passage)
HISTORIC DISTRICT OVERLAY AREAS
(Adopted 10-23-78; Amended Entire Section 4-13-92 and 3-22-93)
175-82 STATEMENT OF INTENT (Historic District)
A. The intent of this Article is to promote and protect the health, safety, comfort, recreation, prosperity and general welfare of the community through the identification, preservation and enhancement of buildings, structures, neighborhoods, landscapes, places and areas which have special historical, cultural, artistic, architectural or archaeological significance as provided by §15.2-2306 of the Code of Virginia, as amended.
(Amended VA Code Reference 9-25-00-Effective Upon Passage)
B. It is hereby recognized that the deterioration, destruction or alteration of said buildings, structures, places and areas may cause the permanent loss of unique resources which are of great value to the people of Front Royal, Warren County, the State of Virginia and the nation and that
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-154
the special controls and incentives are warranted to ensure that such losses are avoided when possible.
C. The purposes of establishing historic resource overlay areas are:
1. To preserve and improve the quality of life for residents of the Town of Front Royal by protecting familiar and treasured visual elements in the area.
2. To promote tourism by protecting historical and cultural resources attractive to visitors and thereby supporting local business and industry.
3. To stabilize and improve property values by providing incentive for the upkeep and rehabilitation of older structures and by encouraging desirable uses and forms of economic development.
4. To educate residents on the local cultural and historic heritage as embodied in the Historic District Overlay Areas and to foster a sense of pride in this heritage.
5. To promote local historic preservation efforts and to encourage the identification and nomination of qualified historic properties to the National Register of Historic Places and the Virginia Landmarks Register.
6. To prevent the encroachment of additions or new buildings and structures that are architecturally incongruous with their environs within areas of architectural harmony and historic character.
175-83 DEFINITIONS (Historic District)
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ALTERATION - Any change, modification or addition to a part of or all of the exterior of any building or structure.
BUILDING - Any enclosed or open structure which is a combination of materials to form a construction for occupancy or use.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS (C of A) - The approval statement signed by the Secretary of the Board of Architectural Review (BAR) and the Zoning Administrator that certifies approval by the BAR of the appropriateness of a particular request for the construction, alteration, reconstruction, repair, restoration, demolition or razing of all or a part of any building within an historic district overlay area, subject to the issuance of all other permits needed for the matter sought to be accomplished.
CONTRIBUTING PROPERTIES - Properties so designated on the inventory map of landmarks and contributing properties, which is adopted as a part of this Article, being generally those properties which, by reason of form, materials, architectural details and relation to surrounding
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-155
properties, contribute favorably to the general character of the part of the historic district in which they are located but, by reason of recent age, lack of historic significance or other factors, are not designated as local historic landmarks under the criteria of this Article.
DEMOLITION - The dismantling or tearing down of all or part of any building and all operations incidental thereto.
EXTERIOR FEATURES (ARCHITECTURAL APPEARANCE) - The architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other structure, including the color, the kind and texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs, other appurtenant fixtures and other natural features, such as trees and shrubbery, that are subject to the public view from a public street, public way or other public places.
HISTORIC DISTRICT OVERLAY AREA or HISTORIC DISTRICT - Any area delineated by the Town Council and consisting of public or private property within the Town, containing one (1) or more historic landmarks as established by the Virginia Department of Historic Resources, or one (1) or more areas, neighborhoods, sites, places, structures, objects, artifacts or buildings in which historic events occurred or reflecting significantly the lives of historic personages or great ideas or ideals of the people, having special public value because of notable architectural, economic, ethnic, military, natural, political, religious or social factors, such landmarks, buildings, structures or areas having been designated by the Council as being of such historic, architectural or cultural interest and significance as to warrant conservation and preservation. Such designated district or districts shall not extend farther than the property line of the land pertaining to such historical landmarks, sites, buildings, signs, appurtenances, structures or objects.
LOCAL HISTORIC LANDMARK - Any site (including significant trees or other plant life located thereon), building or structure of particular historic significance. "Landmarks" include sites, buildings or structures where the cultural, political, archaeological, spiritual, economic, social or artistic history of the community, state or nation is reflected or exemplified or which are identified with historic personages or with important events in local, state or national history or which embody the distinguishing characteristics of an architectural specimen, inherently valuable for a representation of a period, style or method of construction or a notable work of construction or a notable work of a master designer or architect whose individual genius influenced his age. Listing on the Virginia Landmarks Register and the National Register of Historic Places is encouraged for all "local historic landmarks."
NEW CONSTRUCTION - Any construction within an historic district overlay area that is independent and exclusive of an existing building or structure or part thereof.
NONCONTRIBUTING PROPERTIES - Properties with little historic or architectural value and with little or no contribution to the historic character of the district because of their recent age or alteration in such a way as to destroy their architectural integrity.
RECONSTRUCTION - Any or all work needed to remake or rebuild all or a part of any building to a sound condition but not necessarily of original materials.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-156
REPAIRS - Any work or all work involving the replacement of existing work with equivalent material for the purpose of maintenance but not including any addition, change or modification in construction.
RESTORATION - Any or all work connected with the returning to or restoring of a building or a part of any building to its original condition through the use of original or nearly original materials.
REVIEWING BODIES - All individuals, boards or elected/appointed bodies, given review authority under this Article, including the Zoning Administrator, Board of Architectural Review and Town Council, upon appeal.
(Added 10-27-97-Effective Upon Passage)
SIGNIFICANT CHANGE - A permanent change that alters the general appearance (architectural character) of a building.
(Added 10-27-97-Effective Upon Passage)
STRUCTURE - Anything man-made, including but not limited to main buildings, outbuildings, fences, walls, lampposts, light fixtures, signs, signposts, billboards and paving.
SUBSTANTIAL EXTERIOR ALTERATION - Any change, other than incidental repairs, to the supporting members of a building or portion thereof, such as the addition, removal or alteration of bearing walls, columns, beams, girders, roofs or foundations, that are visible on the exterior of the structure.
175-84 BOARD OF ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW (Historic District)
A. Establishment and Terms of Office:
1. A Board to be known as the "Board of Architectural Review (BAR)" is hereby established and shall consist of five (5) voting members who shall be appointed by the Town Council. All members shall have a demonstrated interest competence or knowledge in historic preservation. One (1) member shall be a property owner/resident of an historic district overlay area and one (1) shall have professional training or equivalent experience in architecture, history, American studies, architectural history, archaeology or planning. All members shall be residents of Warren County, with knowledge of and demonstrated interest in the historic character of the Town. These members shall serve terms of four (4) years each. (Amended 10-27-97, 1-8-01, 1-12-04-Effective Upon Passage)
2. BAR members may be reappointed for consecutive terms.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-157
3. The BAR shall elect from its own membership a Chairman and Vice Chairman, who shall serve annual terms as such and who may succeed themselves. The Board shall appoint a Secretary who shall serve at its pleasure.
4. When a vacancy occurs, a new appointment shall be made by the Town Council for the unexpired terms within sixty (60) days after the vacancy occurs. The Town Council shall publicly announce and solicit qualified candidates for Board of Architectural Review vacancies.
5. Any appointed member of the BAR may be removed from office by the Town Council for inefficiency, neglect of duties or malfeasance. An appointment to fill a vacancy shall be only for the unexpired term on the vacancy.
6. Members shall make every effort to attend at least one (1) training session annually sponsored by the Department of Historic Resources, the Preservation Alliance of Virginia or other organizations that are involved with historic preservation issues, design and review standards or other work of the BAR.
B. Duties, powers and responsibilities: The Board of Architectural Review shall have the power and authority for issuing or denying certificates of appropriateness for construction, reconstruction, substantial exterior alteration, razing or relocation within the historic district overlay area. In addition, the Board shall have the following duties:
1. To assist and advise the Town Council, the Planning Commission and other Town departments, agencies and property owners in matters involving historically significant sites and buildings or other properties in historic districts, such as but not limited to appropriate land usage, parking facilities and signs.
2. To continuously evaluate conditions and to advise owners of historic landmarks or contributing structures or other properties in historic districts on problems of preservation.
3. To conduct studies deemed necessary by the Town Council or the Planning Commission concerning location of historic districts and means of preservation, utilization, improvement and maintenance of historic assets in the Town.
4. To propose additional historic districts or additions or deletions to districts.
5. To adopt standards for review to supplement the standards set forth in this Article.
6. To establish an appropriate system of markers for selected historic sites and buildings, including proposals for the installation and care of such historic markers, and to invite each owner of a building of historical significance to display the marker thereon.
7. To cooperate with and enlist assistance from the Virginia Department of Historic Resources, the National Trust for Historic Preservation and other interested parties, both public and private, in its efforts to preserve, restore and conserve local historic landmarks, buildings, sites or areas within the Town.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-158
8. To prepare and adopt specific guidelines, illustrated as necessary, for those historic districts which have special characteristics and architectural features that are peculiar to the district and which should be preserved and to make these guidelines available to property owners within each historic district and to the general public. After these historic districts are approved, specific guidelines shall be adopted for such historic districts as may require specific guidelines.
9. To sponsor public information activities, when deemed appropriate, publicizing historic preservation efforts, which activities may include, but not be limited to, speaking engagements, handouts, press releases and films.
10. To hold public meetings as often as necessary to fulfill the responsibilities assigned by this Article.
C. Organization and Meetings:
1. The Chairman shall conduct the meetings of the BAR.
2. The Secretary shall keep the minutes of the meetings and a permanent record of all resolutions, motions, transactions and determinations.
3. All members of the BAR, except for advisory members, shall be entitled to vote; and the decisions of the BAR shall be determined by a majority vote.
4. A quorum of three (3) voting members present is required before the BAR may take any official action.
5. The BAR shall meet within twenty (20) days after notification by the Zoning Administrator of an application for a certificate of appropriateness or a permit requiring action by the BAR.
6. The Board of Architectural Review shall have regularly scheduled meetings at least four (4) times a year. The meetings of the BAR shall be open to the public, and a full and impartial hearing shall be granted. All regularly scheduled meetings shall be conducted in the evening hours for the convenience of the public.
7. The BAR shall vote and announce its decision on any matter properly before it not later than forty-five (45) days after the conclusion of the hearing on the matter, unless the time is extended with the written consent of the applicant.
8. In matters covering the procedures for meetings not covered by this document, the BAR may establish its own rules, provided that they are not contrary to Town policy or the intent of this Article.
D. Authority to Receive Funding and Advisory Services:
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-159
1. All persons interested in the preservation of historic buildings or historic sites in the Town are invited to make gifts, devises and bequests to the Town to be used for that purpose. All such donations, other than money, shall be subject to acceptance by the Town Council. All donations of money shall be made through the Department of Finance, and it is hereby authorized and directed to receive such donations and to deposit them in a special fund to be known as the "Historic Buildings and Sites Trust Fund, " and shall be used only for the purpose of preserving and promoting the preservation of historic buildings and sites in the Town. Expenditures from such fund shall be made by the Town Manager as authorized, from time to time, by the Town Council.
2. The BAR may seek federal, state or private grants or funding to assist in the performance of its duties as herein defined.
3. Within the limits of funds that may be made available to the BAR for the performance of its work, the BAR may obtain services of qualified persons to advise and assist the BAR as required.
4. Upon request of the BAR, with approval by the Town Manager, the departments, boards, commissions, offices and agencies of the Town government shall furnish to the Board such available information and render such service as may be required for the exercise of the powers and performance of the duties of the BAR.
175-85 CREATION OF HISTORIC DISTRICTS AND LANDMARKS
A. The Board of Architectural Review shall prepare and recommend for adoption as part of this Article a district boundary map and an inventory map covering the area or areas to be considered for inclusion in an historic district overlay area. These maps, when adopted in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Virginia Section 15.2-2285, shall be as much a part of this Article as if fully described herein and shall be filed as a part of this Article by the Clerk of the Town of Front Royal. The inventory map shall delineate local historic landmarks, contributing properties and noncontributing properties. The inventory and district boundary maps may be amended, from time to time, in the same manner as the Zoning District Map.
(Amended VA Code Reference 9-25-00-Effective Upon Passage)
B. The Board of Architectural Review may propose to the Planning Commission and the Town Council such amendments as deemed appropriate, including the establishment of historic districts or revision to existing historic districts. Upon receipt of said proposal, the Council may initiate such amendment pursuant to Section 175-146. The Board of Architectural Review shall prepare and submit simultaneously with said proposal a report to substantiate establishment of a historic district or a proposed amendment. Such report shall establish and define the historic district boundaries, as delineated upon an appropriate map, as well as describe the historic and/or architectural significance of the buildings, structures or sites to be protected, and the special characteristic, qualities and/or fabric to be preserved, and shall describe present trends and conditions, current and long-range planning and desirable public objectives for preservation. The report may also include plans for public action in or adjoining a district that is likely to affect its character or development.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-160
C. Applications for the creation or expansion of an historic district or for the designation of landmarks or landmark sites may also be filed by the Planning Commission, the Town Council, the owner, the contract purchaser with the owner's written consent or the owner's agent or sixty percent (60%) of the owners of all buildings within a proposed historic district. All requests shall be made in the same manner as other zoning amendments, as provided for in Section 175-146.
D. Any historic district and any historic district map which have been created and adopted by the Front Royal Town Council prior to the amendment of this Article shall not be repealed but shall remain intact and in effect, subject now to the provisions of this amended Article.
E. Any historic district created and adopted by the Front Royal Town Council after February 1, 1993, shall remain in effect, except as amended or modified pursuant to the regulations herein, for an initial maximum period of ten (10) years from the date of its adoption. Subsequent action by the Front Royal Town Council shall be made to continue the district beyond the initial ten-year period.
F. Upon the presentation of a request to withdraw from an adopted subarea within the historic district overlay area, with such request having been duly executed by at least sixty-seven percent (67%) of the owners of taxable parcels (with a vote for each separate tax parcel) within the designated historic subarea, the Town Council, at its next meeting, shall take appropriate action to remove the historic district designation. This provision shall be applicable only where the historic resource overlay area shall have been in place for a period of not less than two (2) years.
175-86 CRITERIA FOR SELECTION OF HISTORIC DISTRICTS OR LANDMARKS
Criteria for evaluating the merits of a given structure or space shall be based on architectural features as well as historic factors. Certain buildings or areas, although not associated with an historic personage or event, may be valuable examples of the Town's physical and cultural heritage. Structures of local significance shall be evaluated, as well as those of state and national significance, and any structures individually listed upon the National Register of Historic Places or the Virginia Landmarks Register shall be designated upon the Town Register. In addition, such evaluation shall be based on the following specific matters:
A. Architectural and landscape style: The evaluation shall respect the qualities of each architectural and landscape style and shall judge a structure's merit on how well it exemplifies the distinguishing characteristics of said style. Consideration will be given to:
1. The significance of the architectural design.
2. The scale and/or interrelationships of the structures and/or environmental features.
3. The significant patterns of development.
4. The quality of workmanship.
5. The amount of surviving original fabric.
6. The original location and use.
7. The remaining outbuildings or dependencies.
8. The surrounding environment; gardens, landscaping and walks.
9. The aesthetic quality.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-161
10. The original integrity of the structure and its details.
B. Historical and/or cultural significance:- Structures or spaces relating to one (1) or more of the following criteria will be considered historically or culturally valuable:
1. Association with an historic personage.
2. Association with an historic event.
3. Work of the leading architect or master craftsman.
4. Site or structure of cultural significance.
C. In addition, sole or infrequent surviving building types and structures not historic in themselves but adding to the character of an historic district need to be looked at as potentially deserving preservation.
175-87 BOUNDARIES OF HISTORIC DISTRICTS OR LANDMARKS
A. The boundaries of an historic district or overlay area shall, in general, be drawn to include areas containing buildings or places in which historic events occurred or having special public value because of notable architectural or other features relating to the cultural or artistic heritage of the community of such significance as to warrant conservation and preservation. The district may include either individual buildings or places of such character and a reasonable distance beyond, or it may include areas or groupings of structures which have significance relative to their patterns of development or social and economic or architectural interrelationships even though some structures in the area might not possess significant merit when considered alone. In any case, the location of the district shall be based upon careful studies that describe the characteristics of the area and support the purposes of conservation and preservation.
B. The boundaries of an historic district shall conform to the boundaries of individual lots of record. Where a street is proposed as an historic district boundary, the edge right- of-way adjoining the district shall be deemed the district boundary.
C. Historic districts are created as special overlay districts to be superimposed on other zoning districts contained in these regulations, and are to be so designated on the Official Zoning Map. The uses, housing types, minimum lot requirements, minimum yard requirements, maximum height and accessory uses and accessory signs shall be determined by the regulations applicable to the other districts over which the historic districts superimposed, except as these other districts may be modified by application of the regulations in the historic district.
D. A map delineating the adopted boundaries of each historic district shall be maintained in the office of the Zoning Administrator.
175-88 CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS REQUIRED (Historic District)
A. No building or structure within the Chester Street and downtown business areas of the Historic Front Royal District shall be erected, reconstructed, altered or restored unless and until an application for a certificate of appropriateness shall have been approved under the provisions of this Article.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-162
B. No building or structure within the downtown residential area of the Historic Front Royal District or property designated as a local historic landmark shall be erected, reconstructed or undergo substantial exterior alteration unless and until an application for a certificate of appropriateness shall have been approved under the provisions of this ordinance.
C. No building existing in any designated historic district shall be demolished or removed, in whole or in part, unless and until an application or a certificate of appropriateness shall have been approved by the Board of Architectural Review.
D. No application for a certificate of appropriateness to demolish a building in any historic district shall be considered by the BAR until a public hearing has been held thereon, pursuant to the notice of public hearing as required in Section 15.2-2204, Code of Virginia, as amended.
(Amended VA Code Reference 9-25-00-Effective Upon Passage)
175-89 BOARD REVIEW OF MAJOR ACTIONS (Historic District)
A. The following major actions and any other actions not specifically exempted by the terms of this ordinance or which, in the opinion of the Administrator, may constitute a major permanent and detrimental change to the character of an historic district shall be approved only after a public meeting and favorable action by a majority vote of the Board of Architectural Review:
1. The razing, demolishing or moving of a designated landmark or contributing structure.
2. Construction of any new main building, or an accessory building which exceeds five hundred (500) square feet in size within a designated historic district or on a site adjacent to a designated landmark site.
3. Any addition to or substantial alteration of a designated landmark or structure on a contributing property, which increases the square footage of the structure or otherwise alters substantially its size, height, contour or outline.
4. Any significant change or alteration of the exterior architectural style of a designated landmark or contributing property.
5. Any addition to a non-contributing structure, which alters substantially the size height, contour or outline by increasing the square footage and/or volume of the structure by one hundred percent (100%) or more of the original structure.
6. Any fence or sign that is not in conformance with the design guidelines adopted in accordance with this Article.
7. Any other major actions not specifically covered by the terms of this section but which would have a substantial effect on the character of the Historic District.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-163
B. The Board of Architectural Review shall be guided in its review by the guidelines and criteria established in Section 175-91. The BAR shall have authority to request modifications in order to comply with the guidelines and criteria.
C. The Board of Architectural Review shall not disapprove an application except with respect to the criteria and guidelines set forth in Section 175-91. The BAR shall give reasons for its decisions, shall act promptly on applications before it and shall coordinate its procedures with those of other agencies and individuals charged with the administration of this Article. The BAR shall be strict in its judgment of plans for those structures designated as landmarks and contributing properties but shall be lenient in its judgment of plans for non-contributing properties. For plans involving new construction the Board's concern shall focus on whether such plans are compatible with and enhance the historic or architectural value of surrounding structures or the surrounding area.
D. In all final decisions rendered pursuant to this Article, the BAR shall briefly state its findings in writing, and in the case of disapproval, it may make recommendations to the applicant with respect to the design, texture, material, color, line, mass, dimension or lighting of the alteration or the improvement involved. The requirements of this section shall be deemed to have been satisfied if such findings and recommendations, if any, are set forth in the regularly maintained minutes of the BAR.
(Amended/Added “C & D” 10-27-97-Effective Upon Passage)
175-89.1 ACTIONS REQUIRING ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW (Historic District)
A. The following actions will require administrative review by the Zoning Administrator:
1. The razing, demolishing, or moving of a non-contributing structure or a structure which is substantially damaged to the point of being completely uninhabitable.
2. Construction of a new accessory structure less than five hundred (500) square feet in size within a designated historic district or on a site adjacent to a designated landmark site that is generally in keeping with the character of the historic district and its surroundings.
3. Substantial alteration of a non-contributing structure.
4. Any addition to a non-contributing structure, which increases the size (square footage and/or volume) of the structure by less than one hundred percent (100%) of the original structure.
5. Landscaping, fences and signs in conformance with the design guidelines adopted in accordance with this Article.
B. The Zoning Administrator shall be guided in his decisions by the standards and guidelines adopted by the Board of Architectural Review and shall have authority to request modifications of specific proposal in order that the proposal may comply with said standards and guidelines. In any case where the Administrator is uncertain of his authority to act on a particular application under this section or in any case where the Administrator and the applicant cannot agree on changes in the proposal, the application shall be referred to the Board of Architectural Review for action by
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-164
said Board. In case of disapproval by the Administrator, the applicant may appeal the Administrator's decision within thirty (30) days thereof to the Board of Architectural Review. The Administrator shall keep a record of his decisions under this section and shall report such decisions to the Board of Architectural Review at its next regular meeting.
(Amended Entire Section 10-27-97-Effective Upon Passage)
175-90 EXEMPTIONS FROM REVIEW (Historic District)
Certain minor actions which are deemed not to permanently affect the character of the historic district are exempted from review for architectural compatibility. Such actions shall include:
1. Repainting resulting in the same or a similar color. (Original painting of masonry surfaces is not exempted from review.)
(Amended to add “similar” 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
2. Repair or construction in kind, resulting in no significant changes in appearance or form.
3. Addition or deletion of storm windows and doors, window gardens, awnings, temporary canopies or similar appurtenances and window air conditioners.
4. Addition or deletion of television or radio antennas, skylights or solar collectors in locations not visible from a public place.
5. Installation of plant materials but not including landscape treatment which substantially alters the contour of a contributing property or involves landscaping or construction of fences, pools and the like that affect the appearance of a contributing property.
6. Permitted outside storage in a residential or commercial district that does not require structural changes.
7. Improvements, alterations and renovations that can be accomplished without obtaining a building permit, except fences, signs, and window replacement.
8. Any changes to a structure that are not visible from a public street, alley or public place.
9. Temporary window signs. (Amended Entire Section 10-27-97-Effective Upon Passage)
175-90.1 AUTHORITY TO STOP WORK (Historic District)
The Zoning Administrator shall have authority to order that work be stopped and that an appropriate application be filed or reviewed in any case where, in his opinion, the action may produce arresting and spectacular effects, violent contrasts or materials or colors and intense and lurid colors or patterns or a multiplicity of incongruous details clearly inconsistent with the character of the present structures or with the prevailing character of the surroundings and the
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-165
historic district or when it appears that the work does not conform to the list of administrative review or exempted actions stated herein and, in fact, is more extensive than originally represented.
(Added 10-27-97-Effective Upon Passage)
175-91 GUIDELINES AND CRITERIA FOR REVIEW (Historic District)
A. All reviewing bodies shall be guided by the following guidelines and criteria:
1. The historic archaeological or architectural value and significance of a structure and its relationship to the historic value of the surrounding area.
2. The age and character of the historic structure, its condition, and its probable life expectancy and the appropriateness of the proposed changes to the period or periods during which the structure was built.
3. The general compatibility of the site plan and the exterior design arrangement, texture and materials proposed to be used.
4. The view of the structure or area from a public street or road, present or future.
5. The present character of the setting of the structure or area and its surroundings.
6. The probable effect of proposed construction on trees, wooded areas or historic sites.
7. Any other factors, including aesthetic factors, which the reviewing bodies deem to be pertinent.
8. The appropriateness of the exterior architectural features of such building or structure to the compatibility with the exterior architectural features of landmarks, buildings or structures in the district, taking into consideration the following:
a. General design.
b. Character and appropriateness of design.
c. Form.
d. Proportion and scale.
E. Mass.
f. Configuration.
g. Arrangement.
h. Texture.
i. Material
j. The permanent color of exterior materials (excluding paint).
k. The relationship of such elements to similar features of structures in the immediate surroundings.
l. Congruity with the character of the Historic District.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-166
B. The reviewing bodies shall not adopt or impose any specific architectural style in the administration of this Article.
C. The reviewing bodies shall also be guided by the purposes for which landmarks, landmark sites and historic districts are designated and by the particular standards and considerations contained in the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation.
(Amended Entire Section 10-27-97-Effective Upon Passage)
175-92 ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS (Historic District)
A. Within fifteen (15) days of approval for construction or alteration pursuant to 175-88, a certificate of appropriateness signed by the Zoning Administrator and bearing the date of issuance but subject to the provisions of 175-92B, shall be made available to the applicant.
B. Any certificate of appropriateness issued pursuant to 175-88 shall expire of its own limitations twelve (12) months from the date of issuance if the work authorized by said certificate has not commenced and, further, if any such work is suspended or abandoned for a period of twelve (12) months after being commenced. Any period or periods of time during which the right to use any such certificate is stayed pursuant to this Article shall be excluded from the computation of the twelve- month period.
(Amended Entire Section 10-27-97-Effective Upon Passage)
175-93 BUILDING DEMOLITION AND RELOCATION (Historic District)
A. No historic landmark, building or structure within any historic district shall be razed, demolished or moved until the razing, demolition or movement thereof is approved by the Board of Architectural Review or approved on appeal as provided herein.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A, the owner of a historic landmark, building or structure shall, as a matter of right, be entitled to raze or demolish such a building or structure, provided that:
1. He has applied to the Town Council for such right;
2. The owner has, for the period of time set forth in the time schedule hereinafter contained and at a price reasonably related to its fair market value, made a bona fide offer to sell such building or structure and the land pertaining thereto to any person, firm, corporation, government or agency thereof or political subdivision or agency thereof which gives reasonable assurance that it is willing to preserve and restore the building or structure and the land pertaining thereto. In order to demonstrate the making of a bona fide offer to sell, the owner shall file a notice with the Zoning Administrator identifying the property and stating the offering price and the name of the real estate agent, if any. No time period set forth herein shall begin to run until said notice has been filed. Within five (5) days of receipt, copies of the notice shall be delivered by the Zoning Administrator to the members of the Town Council, the members of the Planning Commission and the Town Manager; and
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-167
3. No bona fide contract, binding upon all parties thereto, shall have been executed for the sale of any such building or structure and the land pertaining thereto prior to the expiration of the applicable time period set forth in the time schedule hereinafter contained. Any appeal from the decision of the BAR, whether instituted by the owner or by any other proper party, notwithstanding the provisions herein pertaining to a stay on appeal, shall not affect the right of the owner to make the bona fide offer to sell. No offer to sell shall be made more than one (1) year after the final decision of the BAR, but thereafter the owner may renew his request to the BAR to approve the razing or demolition of the historic landmark, building or structure. The time schedule for offers to sell shall be as follows:
OFFERING PRICE MINIMUM OFFER-TO-SELL
Period (Months)
Less than $25,000.00 3
$25,000.00 to $39,999.99 4
$40,000.00 to $54,999.99 5
$55,000.00 to $74,999.99 6
$75,000.00 to $89,999.99 7
$90,000.00 or more 12
4. For the purpose of this Article, a bona fide offer to sell shall be defined as a selling price not greater than ten percent (10%) more than the fair market value appraisal of a certified land appraiser employing appropriate, recognized appraisal criteria for the area in question. The Town shall retain the right to contest the bona fide nature of the offer as follows: the reasonable relationship of the offering price to the fair market value of the historic landmark, building or structure, by filing injunctive proceedings in the Warren County Circuit Court, whenever the Town obtains an appraisal of the property in question by a certified land appraiser at a value at least ten percent (10%) below the offering price asked by the owner, regardless of any conflicting appraisal obtained by the property owner.
175-94 APPEALS (Historic District)
A. Any applicant aggrieved by a final decision of the Board of Architectural Review may appeal said decision to the Front Royal Town Council, provided that such appeal is filed, in writing, with the Town Clerk within ten (10) days after the final decision is rendered by the BAR. The Town Council will hear the matter at its next regularly scheduled meeting and will render its decision on the appeal at the following regularly scheduled meeting. The Council, in its discretion, may consider additional evidence and submissions during the period between meetings and at the second regularly scheduled meeting prior to rendering its decision.
B. Any applicant aggrieved by a final decision of the Board of Architectural Review following the decision rendered on appeal to the Front Royal Town Council, may appeal said decision to the Circuit Court of Warren County, Virginia, by filing a petition at law setting forth the alleged illegality of the BAR's action, provided that such petition is filed with the Circuit Court within thirty (30) days after the appealed decision of the Front Royal Town Council. The filing of said
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-168
petition with the Circuit Court shall stay the decision of the BAR pending the outcome of the appeal, except that the filing of such petition shall not stay the decision of the BAR if such decision denies the right to raze or demolish an historic landmark, building or structure. The Circuit Court may reverse or modify the decision of the BAR, in whole or in part, if the Court finds, upon review, that the decision is arbitrary and constitutes an abuse of discretion. The Circuit Court may also affirm the decision of the BAR.
175-95 MAINTENANCE, PUBLIC SAFETY AND PERMITTED USES (Historic District)
A. Nothing in this Article shall allow the BAR to prevent the routine maintenance or repair of any exterior elements of any building or structure so long as there is no change in form or materials; nor shall anything in this Article be construed to prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration or demolition of any exterior elements that the authorized municipal officers shall certify as required by public safety.
B. Nothing in this Article shall be construed to prevent any use of any land, building or structure permitted by the regulations prescribed in this Chapter for the district in which such land, building or structure is otherwise located. Due to peculiar conditions of design and construction in historic neighborhoods where buildings and structures are often built close to the lot lines, it is in the public interest to retain a neighborhood's historic appearance by granting variances to normal yard requirements, where appropriate and where it is deemed that such a variance will not adversely affect neighboring properties. The BAR may recommend to the Board of Zoning Appeals that such variance to standard yard requirements be made.
175-96 YARD VARIANCES (Historic District)
Due to peculiar conditions of design and construction in historic neighborhoods where buildings and structures are often built close to the lot lines, it is in the public interest to retain a neighborhood’s historic appearance by granting variances to normal yard requirements, where appropriate and where it is deemed that such a variance will not adversely affect neighboring properties. The BAR may recommend to the Board of Zoning Appeals that such variance to standard yard requirements be made.
175-97 (RESERVED)
175-98 EXEMPTION FOR PUBLIC WORKS (Historic District)
The Front Royal Town Council may exempt public structures, works, utilities and buildings from compliance with this Article where public safety is endangered or an emergency situation arises. Retroactive approval for emergency work undertaken shall be sought within thirty (30) days following completion of the work. All work shall strive to maintain architectural compatibility within the historic district for its public works and structures.
ENTRANCE CORRIDOR OVERLAY DISTRICT (EC)
(Adopted 10-11-99)
175-98.1 STATEMENT OF INTENT (EC)
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-169
Pursuant to Section 15.2-2306 of the Code of Virginia 1950, as amended, the intent of this Entrance Corridor Overlay District (EC) is to promote and protect the health, safety, comfort and general welfare of the community through establishing high quality design criteria. The implementation of these criteria will help to stabilize and improve property values; to protect and enhance the Town's attractiveness to tourists and other visitors; to sustain and enhance the economic benefits accruing to the Town from tourism; and to support and stimulate complimentary development appropriate to the historic and architectural character of the Town. Benefits attributable to the promotion of superior design and appearance of structures constructed along the arterial entrance corridor will ultimately promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the Town of Front Royal.
175-98.2 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS (EC)
The Entrance Corridor Overlay District (EC) will overlay all other zoning districts where it is applied so that any parcel of land lying in an EC shall also lie within one (1) or more other land use districts. The regulations and requirements of both the underlying district(s) and the EC shall apply. However, when the regulations applicable to the EC conflict with the regulations of the underlying district, the more restrictive regulations shall apply.
175-98.3 DISTRICT BOUNDARIES (EC)
A. EC boundaries shall be designated on the official zoning map of the Town of Front Royal.
B. The district boundaries shall be designated as the full depth of all parcels of land contiguous to the following public highways, and located within the corporate boundaries of the Town:
(Amended “B” 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
1. U.S. Route 340 from Interstate 66 to the southern corporate limit, except those properties lying within the adopted boundaries of the Historic Front Royal District.
(Amended to add “Interstate 66” 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
C. Any property or project partially located within the EC shall be considered to be fully located within the EC and subject to the regulations herein.
175-98.4 REVIEW FOR DESIGN COMPLIANCE (EC)
A. When Required: The requirements of the EC District shall be applicable to any property located within the EC boundaries for new development, exterior renovations, and new land use activities that propose outdoor lighting, outdoor storage, outdoor sales, and/or outdoor display areas, except that the following exceptions shall be exempt from the requirements of the EC.
1. Regular maintenance of structures, including minor alterations that do not significantly alter the appearance of the structure.
2. Single-family detached dwellings.
3. Accessory buildings under 200 square feet in area.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-170
4. Additions less than 500 square feet in area for buildings existing as of January 1, 1999.
5. Exempt signs and temporary signs.
6. Authorized temporary or seasonal activities and structures.
(Amended/Added “1-6” 1-28-13-Effective Upon Passage)
B. Review Authority: The review authority responsible for the review and approval of projects in accordance with the EC shall be the Director, except for the construction of new buildings and new non-exempt ground-mounted signs, which shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission. Such review shall take place in conjunction with the review of the site development plan or a zoning permit for the property.
(Amended “B” by Adding “Authority & Director” 1-28-13-Effective Upon Passage)
175-98.5 SITE AND DESIGN STANDARDS (EC)
A. Outside Storage, Outdoor Display or Outdoor Sales: In addition to the standards for the underlying zoning district, outdoor storage, outdoor display and/or outdoor sales within the EC District shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission when located within the required yard adjacent to Route 340. The Planning Commission may place reasonable design conditions on such activities, including the designation of a specific area to be used, and/or the requirement of a distance buffer, screen or landscaping.
(Amended 1-28-13-Effective Upon Passage)
B. Utilities: Utility lines, including electric, cable and telephone, to serve the development project shall be installed underground. All junction and access boxes shall be screened. All utility pad fixtures, meter boxes, etc. shall be shown on the site plan and integrated with the architectural elements of the site.
C. Fences: Fences exceeding four (4) feet in height shall be located in the side and rear yards only. Chain link fences, including those with slats, are discouraged, particularly where visible from the public right-of-way. No chain link fence shall be permitted in the front yard in the EC.
D. Mechanical Equipment: Mechanical equipment shall be shielded and screened from the public view and designed to be perceived as an integral part of the building.
E. Integrated Development: All buildings within the property shall be developed as a cohesive entity, ensuring that building placement, architectural treatment, vehicular and pedestrian circulation and other development elements work together functionally and aesthetically. Architectural treatment shall be designed so that all building facades of the same building (whether front, side, or rear) that are visible from the public right-of-way, shall consist of similar architectural treatment in terms of materials, quality, appearance and detail.
F. Orientation: Building facades and entrances should be oriented in a manner toward the primary means of vehicular access.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-171
G. Building Bulk and Mass: All buildings and parking areas should be designed with treatments to break up the mass and bulk. The treatment of buildings shall include vertical architectural treatment at least every 25-30 feet to break down the scale of the building into smaller components. Any facade with a blank wall shall be screened in a manner consistent with the requirements of environmental planting screens in Section 148-44. Architectural details shall continue on all facades visible from the public right-of-way. Large expanses of blank walls facing the street are inappropriate.
H. Scale and Proportion: New construction should relate to the dominant proportions of buildings in the immediate area. The ratio of height to width and the ratio of mass (building) to void (openings) should be balanced. The scale and mass of a proposed project should relate to nearby buildings or the streetscape.
I. Materials: Building materials shall be typical of those prevalent in Front Royal/Warren County, including, but not limited to, stucco, brick, architectural block, wood siding and standing seam metal roofs. Inappropriate materials include reflective glass and metal wall panels. No facade visible from the adjoining property or the roadway shall be constructed of unadorned cinder block, unadorned concrete, corrugated metal or sheet metal.
J. Color: The permanent color of building materials (to be left unpainted) shall resemble the predominate tones, primarily earthen tones, prevalent in the historic areas of the community. Garish and striking colors shall be avoided.
K. Adjoining Historic Properties: New construction on properties that adjoin designated historic properties should seek to incorporate the scale, massing and treatment of the historic property into the new construction. Efforts shall be made to relate to the building height, when in proximity to the principle historic structure. New construction shall not overshadow the adjoining historic property.
L. Lighting: All outdoor lighting fixtures shall be down-directed, with light trespass not to exceed 0.5 foot-candles at the property line. All island canopy ceiling fixtures shall be recessed.
175-98.6 ADOPTION OF STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES (EC)
The Front Royal Planning Commission may adopt written standards and guidelines to illustrate and clarify the design standards herein, provided that such standards and guidelines are consistent with the intent and provisions of the EC.
175-98.7 APPEALS (EC)
Any decision made under the provisions of this Section may be appealed to the Front Royal Town Council, following the process outlined in Section 175-94 (A), by any applicant aggrieved by such decision. Further appeal may be made to the Circuit Court, pursuant to Section 15.2-2306.A.3 of the Code of Virginia 1950, as amended.
SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-172
175-99 WIDENING OF STREETS OR HIGHWAYS
Whenever there shall be plans in existence, approved by either the State Department of Highways and Transportation or by the Front Royal Town Council for the widening of any street or highway, the Commission may recommend additional front yard setbacks for any new construction or for any structures altered or remodeled adjacent to the future planned right-of-way in order to preserve and protect the right-of-way for such proposed street or highway widening.
175-100 RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND TRAVEL TRAILERS
A. Recreational vehicles and travel trailers may be stored in a side, corner side, or rear yard of a lot, provided they are stored in a location that meets the minimum yard requirements as would be required for an accessory building of the same dimensions. Except as provided in subsection B below, no recreational vehicles shall be stored closer to a street than the minimum setback line or yard requirement in any district and occupancy shall be prohibited. Other restrictions, as found under Chapter 158, Section 19.1, apply to the parking of recreational vehicles within the public right of way.
(Amended 1-28-13-Effective Upon Passage)
B. Temporary parking of recreational vehicles and travel trailers that does not comply with Subsection A may be allowed in the front yard only for the following circumstances:
(Amended 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
1. Temporary parking of up to three (3) consecutive days, located entirely on private property, and on a paved driveway, for the sole purposes of cleaning and preparing the unit for use or storage.
2. Temporary parking of up to fourteen (14) days within any calendar month, up to three times during the calendar year, for temporary accommodation of visitors. The vehicle shall not be permanently connected to public utility system. However, the vehicle may be connected to electricity temporarily for charging batteries or other purpose related to the preparation of the vehicle for use.
3. Temporary parking for the purpose of camping where campgrounds are permitted, or permitted by special use permit.
4. Extensions of time to the above restrictions of this subsection may only be granted under the same conditions as found under Section 175-109.2.E.
(Amended Section 7-22-96-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended “B” and Added “1-4” 1-28-13-Effective Upon Passage)
175-101 VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS
On a corner lot, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow, except street signs, utility poles or traffic signs, in such a manner as to impede vision between a height of two and one-half (2 1/2) and ten (10) feet above the center-line grades of the intersecting streets in the area
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-173
bound by the street lines of such intersecting streets and a line joining the street center lines at a distance of fifty (50) feet from the point of intersection.
175-102 FENCES
A. No fragile, readily flammable material, such as paper, cloth or canvas, shall constitute a part of any fence, nor shall any such material be employed as an adjunct or supplement to any fence.
B. Fences on corner lots shall meet the requirements of Section 175-101.
(Amended 8-14-98-Effective Upon Passage)
C. Fences in residential districts shall not exceed the height of four (4) feet in the required front yard or six (6) feet in the side or rear yard as measured from the top most point thereof to the ground or surface, along the center line of the fence.
(Added 2-24-03-Effective Upon Passage)
D. Within commercial zoning districts, fences located within the front yard shall not exceed the height of six (6) feet as measured from the top most point thereof to the ground or surface, along the center line of the fence. Fences located within commercial zoning districts may be eight (8) feet in height when located within a side or rear yard. The Planning Director may authorize fences in the front yard to be up to eight (8) feet in height when the additional height is determined to be necessary for safety or screening purposes of permitted uses. Appropriate landscape screening may be required for approval of additional fence height in the front yard.
(Amended 2-24-03 and 2-25-13-Effective Upon Passage)
E. Fences surrounding industrial sites, public playgrounds, institutions or schools may not exceed a height of fourteen (14) feet.
F. No fence shall be constructed or altered to include protruding nails, or other materials, that would create a dangerous condition.
(Added “F” 2-25-13-Effective Upon Passage)
G. Notwithstanding the other requirements of this chapter, a finished fence side shall face toward improved public streets and adjoining lots used for residential purposes. For the purposes of this requirement, a finished fence side shall consist of the side covered with pickets, or similar material, such as, but not limited to, panels, wire, and/or fabric, if any, and opposite of a side with exposed rails, or similar supports, excluding posts and caps, Illustration 175-102.G. depicts a typical finished side of a fence.
(Added “G” 3-24-14-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-174
175-103 ACCESS TO STREETS, SERVICES, FIRE PROTECTION AND PARKING
Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to a public or private street approved by the Town, and all buildings shall be located on lots as to provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection and required off-street parking.
175-104 OFF-STREET PARKING
All new uses or developments, and changes of use, shall comply with the off-street parking requirements of Chapter 148.
(Amended 5-14-90, 6-23-92, 3-22-93, 4-14-97 and 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
175-105 OFF-STREET LOADING
All new uses or developments, and changes of use, shall comply with the off-street loading requirements of Chapter 148.
(Amended Section 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
175-106 SIGNS
A. General Provisions:
1. Purpose and Intent: The purpose of this section is to regulate the size, location, height and construction of all signs placed for public observance; to protect the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare; to facilitate the creation of a convenient, attractive and harmonious community; to protect property values; and to further the urban design and economic development objective of the Town plan. To these ends, these regulations are intended to promote signs that are:
a. Compatible with the landscape/streetscape and architecture of surrounding buildings, including historic sites and structure;
b. Legible and appropriate to the activity to which they pertain;
c. Not distracting to motorists; and
d. Constructed and maintained in a structurally sound and attractive condition.
2. Applicability: These sign regulations shall apply to all signs erected within the Town of Front Royal following the effective date of this ordinance.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-175
3. Sign Permit Required: Except as provided herein, no sign shall be erected, installed, used, altered, relocated, replaced or reconstructed until a sign permit has been issued (and a certificate of appropriateness, if applicable). For the purpose of this Ordinance, all signs are considered accessory uses and accessory structures. Unless specifically qualified, all signs shall be located on the same lot with the principal use to which they pertain.
4. Special Definitions: For the purposes of these sign regulations, unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms shall have the meanings established below:
ANIMATED SIGN - A sign or part of a sign that moves or appears to move, including, but not limited to propellers, discs, digital screens, projections and flashing lights, but specifically excluding the hands of a clock, clocks, digital displays of only the time, date and temperature, weather vanes, and flags.
(Amended 1-9-12-Effective Upon Passage)
ARTISTIC MURAL - A work of art (as a painting) applied to and made integral with a building wall that is prepared by a skilled artist and shows imaginative skill in arrangement or execution.
(Added 6-26-95-Effective Upon Passage)
AWNING SIGN - A sign placed, painted or printed directly on the surface of an awning.
(Amended by adding “painted” 11-8-93-Effective Upon Passage)
BANNER - A temporary sign applied to cloth, paper, balloons or fabric of any kind. Governmental flags or symbolic flags of religious, charitable, public or nonprofit organizations shall not be considered banners.
(Amended by adding “temporary” 1-9-12-Effective Upon Passage)
BILLBOARD SIGN - See "off-premise sign."
CANOPY SIGN - A sign attached or otherwise affixed to a canopy.
(Amended 11-8-93-Effective Upon Passage)
CHANGE OF USE - Any change from one business activity to another, except a name change for a specific established business activity.
(Added 11-8-93-Effective Upon Passage)
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN - A sign or part of a sign that is designed so that characters, letters or illustrations can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or surface of the sign.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-176
DIRECTIONAL SIGN - An on-premises sign designed to guide vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic by using such words as "Entrance," "Exit," "Parking," "One Way" or similar directional instruction, but not including any advertising message.
DIRECTORY SIGN - A sign on which the names and locations of occupants or the use of a building or group of buildings is given.
FLAG – Any fabric, cloth, canvas or any non-rigid lightweight material that can be easily folded or rolled and attached to or designed to be flown from a flagpole or similar device and containing distinctive colors, patterns or symbols.
(Added 1-9-12-Effective Upon Passage)
FLAG SIGN – A flag used as a sign
(Added 1-9-12-Effective Upon Passage)
FLAG SIGN, TRADITIONAL – A flag sign, excluding a sign on a “feather flag”, that does not exceed fifteen (15) square feet in area, and no one side exceeding a length of five feet (5’).
(Added 1-9-12-Effective Upon Passage)
FLAG SIGN, NON-TRADITIONAL – A flag sign other than a traditional flag sign. A “feather flag” is an example of a non-traditional flag sign.
(Added 1-9-12-Effective Upon Passage)
FLASHING SIGN - A sign used for identification, direction, advertising or promotion that includes lights which flash, blink or turn on and off intermittently.
FREESTANDING SIGN - See "ground-mounted sign."
GROUND-MOUNTED SIGN - A sign which is supported by structures or supports in or upon the ground and independent of any support from any building.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN - A sign which displays only the address and name or crest, insignia or trademark, occupation or profession of an occupant or the name of any building on the premises.
ILLUMINATED SIGN - A sign illuminated in any manner by an artificial light source, whether internally or externally lit, including neon.
(Amended by adding “neon” 11-8-93-Effective Upon Passage)
INSTITUTIONAL BULLETIN BOARD SIGN - A sign containing a surface upon which is displayed the name of a religious institution, school, library, community center or similar institutional or community service use and the announcement of its service.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-177
MARQUEE - A permanent structure projecting beyond a building wall at an entrance to a building or extending along and projecting beyond the building's wall and generally designed and constructed to provide protection against the weather.
MARQUEE SIGN - A sign attached to and made part of a marquee or any other similar projection from a building.
MONUMENT SIGN - A sign affixed to and made an integral part of a structure built on-grade that does not involve the use of poles as its major sign support and is less than eight (8) feet in height.
(Amended 11-8-93-Effective Upon Passage)
OFF-PREMISES SIGN - A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or establishment conducted, sold or offered at a location other than the premises on which the sign is erected.
PORTABLE SIGN - Any sign, except an exempt sign that is not permanently affixed to the ground or another structure and is capable of being moved by mechanical or non-mechanical means.
PROJECTING SIGN - Any sign, other than a wall, awning or marquee sign, which is affixed on a building wall perpendicularly, typically by use of brackets.
(Amended 11-8-93-Effective Upon Passage ; Amended 1-9-12-Effective Upon Passage)
RE-FACE – The act of creating a new sign message by replacing or refurbishing the non-structural components or surface of an existing lawful sign, without creating a new nonconformity to the requirements of this chapter.
(Added 2-25-13-Effective Upon Passage)
ROOF SIGN - A sign erected or constructed, in whole or in part, upon or above the highest point of a building with a flat roof, or the lowest portion of a roof for any building with a pitched roof.
SANDWICH BOARD SIGN – A two-sided, self-supporting sign attached at the top with the two sides separated by approximately 45 degrees.
(Added 11-22-10-Effective Upon Passage)
SIGN - Any device employing letters, words, symbols, etc., used or intended to attract the attention of the public from streets, sidewalks or other outside public rights-of-ways. For the purposes of this Article, the term "sign" shall include all structural members.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-178
SIGN AREA - The surface area encompassed within any regular geometric figure (square, rectangle, circle, triangle, etc.) which would enclose all parts of the sign, excluding structural supports.
TEMPORARY SIGN - A sign or advertising display designed or intended to be displayed for a short period of time. Unless otherwise specified within this section, a temporary sign may only be used two (2) times within a 12-month period, and for a total time of ninety (90) days or fewer during the same 12-month period of time.
(Amended 1-9-12-Effective Upon Passage)
WALL SIGN - A sign attached to a wall, or painted on or against a flat vertical surface of a structure, which displays only one (1) advertising surface.
WINDOW SIGN - All signs attached to or applied directly onto the internal or external surface, or set back less than one (1) foot from the interior surface, of any window in view of the general public from outside the structure.
5. Prohibited Signs: The following signs are expressly prohibited unless specifically stated otherwise
a. Billboards and Off-premise signs.
b. Portable Signs, except sandwich board signs, as defined above, but including signs displayed on a stationary vehicle.
(Amended “b” by adding “sandwich board signs” 11-22-10-Effective Upon Passage)
c. Changeable Copy Signs, except for approved institutional bulletin boards and gas station fuel price signs as permitted by this ordinance, and where such signs are incorporated as an element within another permanent sign, provided that the changeable copy area does not exceed twenty (20) square feet or fifty percent (50%) of the total sign area, whichever is less.
d. Simulated Traffic Signs or any sign which may be confused with or obstruct the view of any authorized traffic sign or signal.
e. Animated Signs, including but not limited to propellers and discs. This prohibition shall not apply to the hands of a clock, a weather vane or flags.
(Amended by removing “pennants” 1-9-12-Effective Upon Passage)
f. Flashing Signs, except for time and temperature signs.
g. Glaring Signs or signs with light sources of such brightness as to constitute a hazard, as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-179
h. Strings of lights outlining property lines, sales areas or any portion of a structure, unless part of an approved sign or sign structure. This prohibition shall not apply to seasonal decorations.
i. Roof Signs.
j. Signs affixed to a tree, other natural vegetation, rocks, public utility poles or public signs.
k. Signs that obstruct the visibility of intersections or block any window, door, fire escape, stairway or any opening intended for light, air or access to any building.
l. Signs erected in or over a public right-of-way or on public land, except as allowed in the Historic Overlay District, or as specifically approved by the Town Council.
m. Home Occupation Signs, except an address or identification sign as provided in Section 175-106A (6)(a) below.
(Amended 11-8-93-Effective Upon Passage)
n. Non-traditional Flag Signs, except when used as a temporary sign, as regulated by this Chapter.
(Added 1-9-12-Effective Upon Passage)
o. Offensive Signs, including signs that include obscene, indecent or profane language.
(Added 2-25-13-Effective Upon Passage)
6. Exempt Signs: Sign permits shall not be required for the following signs; however, all other applicable regulations of this ordinance shall apply.
a. Address or Identification sign. Signs indicating the address and/or names of occupants of premises, not exceeding two (2) square feet in area.
b. Changing the message content of an approved directory, institutional bulletin board, theater marquee or changeable copy element of an approved sign.
c. Commemorative plaques and historical markers erected by a recognized historical agency or governmental body.
d. Flags, emblems and insignia of any governmental agency or religious, charitable, public or nonprofit organization; provided, however, that no single flag shall exceed fifty (50) square feet in area and no single zoning lot shall display more than three (3) such flags. If the total area of such flags exceeds seventy-two (72) square feet, the excess area shall be included in the sign area calculations for the zoning lot.
e. Traditional Flag Signs, provided that the following conditions are met:
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-180
[1] Only one (1) exempt traditional flag sign per parcel shall be allowed.
[2] Each exempt traditional flag sign shall be a maximum of fifteen (15) square feet in area.
[3] Words or letters used on an exempt traditional flag sign shall only communicate the language “Open” or “Open for Business”, and within the Historic District Overlay District may also identify a non-profit organization or Town government.
[4] Compliance with Section 175-106B.3 when located within the public right-of-way on property within the Historic Overlay District.
[5] Shall be located within fifty (50) feet from the building entrance.
(Added Entire “e” 1-9-12-Effective Upon Passage)
f. Handicapped Parking Space Sign.
(Amended 6-26-95-Effective Upon Passage)
g. Directional Signs, not exceeding three (3) square feet in area and located on private property. Such signs exceeding 2 1/2 feet in height shall be located no closer than 10 feet from the curb line of abutting streets.
h. Security and Warning signs. Signs posted on private property warning the public against trespassing or similar messages, provided that any such sign does not exceed 1.5 square feet in area.
i. Private Drive Signs, one (1) per drive entrance, not exceeding two (2) square feet in area, with the message content limited to the words "Private Drive" and the address of any residences utilizing the private roadway.
j. Public Signs, including traffic, utility, parking, directional, identification, public event and festival signs approved by the Town Council and other signs displayed for governmental purposes.
k. Seasonal and temporary displays of patriotic, religious or civic character on private property, not advertising a product or service.
l. Signs not visible beyond the boundaries of the lot or parcel upon which they are located or from any public right-of-way.
m. Temporary political campaign signs on private property not to exceed eight (8) square feet in area and six (6) feet in height. Such signs shall be removed within five (5) days after the election.
(Amended 3-25-02-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-181
n. Sandwich Board Signs, subject to the requirements of Section 175-106A.9.e.
(Added 1-9-12-Effective Upon Passage)
o. Temporary private yard sale signs, not exceeding three (3) in number per yard sale and not placed in a public right-of-way.
p. Temporary real estate signs, located on the premises, not exceeding five (5) square feet in area for single-family residential districts or eight (8) square feet in area for other zoning districts. No real estate sign shall exceed a height of six (6) feet. One (1) real estate sign shall be permitted per property, except for corner lots, which may have two (2) such signs. Temporary real estate signs shall be removed within seven (7) days of the settlement or lease of the property.
(Amended 11-8-93-Effective Upon Passage)
q. Temporary window signs shall cover no more than fifty percent (50%) of the window area and shall not be displayed above the first floor. Such signs shall not remain in place for more than eight (8) weeks.
(Amended 6-26-95-Effective Upon Passage)
r. Vehicle safety inspection signs not exceeding ten (10) square feet in area. Such signs may be either a wall sign or attached to an existing authorized ground-mounted sign structure [one (1) per business] not to exceed the height of the ground mounted sign.
s. The re-facing of a sign, as defined, except when located within the Historic Overlay District or Entrance Corridor. (Added 2-25-13-Effective Upon Passage)
7. Signs Requiring Temporary Sign Permit: The following signs shall require the issuance of a temporary sign permit by the Zoning Administrator prior to their erection. The permit shall cite the length of time any such sign may be displayed. If, after the expiration of the temporary sign permit, such signs are not removed, the Town may remove them and charge the costs of removal to the enterprise or proprietor responsible.
a. Special Sales Events Signs, exceeding a 14-day display period, announcing such events and grand openings, new management and going-out-of-business sales. Such signs, shall be attached to an existing principal structure or sign pole, shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area.
(Amended 1-9-12-Effective Upon Passage)
b. Temporary and Seasonal Produce, Fireworks and Tree Stand Signs. The total area of all such signs shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet, nor shall any sign exceed six (6) feet in height.
(Amended 11-8-93-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-182
c. Construction Signs not to exceed one (1) per street frontage, limited to a maximum height of eight (8) feet. The total area of all such signs shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet. Such signs shall be removed within fourteen (14) days following completion of construction.
d. Temporary Residential Subdivision and Model Home Identification Signs. One (1) sign may be erected for not more than two (2) years at each principal entrance to the development. Such signs shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height or sixteen (16) square feet in area. In addition, one (1) model home sign of not more than four (4) square feet may be maintained at each model home.
e. Temporary Signs on vacant lots announcing an upcoming event (such as "Coming Soon"). Such signs shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in size and may be displayed on a given property for one (1) period, not to exceed ninety (90) days, within a twelve-month period.
(Added “e” 11-8-93-Effective Upon Passage)
8. General Sign Standards:
a. Determination of Sign Height and Setback. The height of a sign shall be measured from the average elevation of the street to which the sign is oriented. The setback shall be measured from the property boundary to the closest point of the sign.
b. Number of Sign Faces. No sign shall have more than two (2) sign faces.
c. Determination of Sign Area. The area of signs shall include the area enclosing the face of the sign, including all frames or other components not otherwise used for support.
d. Area of Signs with Two (2) Sign Faces. The area of a sign with two (2) sign faces shall be computed according to the following:
[1] Sign faces separated by an interior angle of forty-five degrees (45 degrees) or greater, both sign faces shall be included.
[2] Sign faces separated by an interior angle of less than forty-five degrees (45? degrees), one (1) sign face shall be included; provided, however, that the area of the largest sign face shall be used when two (2) faces are unequal in area.
9. Development Standards for Permitted Sign Type: All new signs and all existing signs which are replaced, reconstructed, extended or changed structurally shall comply with the following development standards:
a. Ground mounted sign: Development Standards.
[1] Road Frontage Requirements: Ground mounted signs up to the maximum allowable size shall be permitted on lots with 100 feet or more of lot width. Where a lot has
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-183
less than 100 feet of lot width, a ground mounted sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in size.
(Amended [1] 11-8-93, and 6-26-95-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended by removing “zoning” 1-9-12-Effective Upon Passage)
[2] Minimum Clearance: Where a ground mounted sign is located within twenty-five (25) feet of an intersecting developed street, or Town-maintained alley, a minimum ten (10) foot clearance from the ground to the bottom of the sign shall be provided. For a monument sign, the placement of the sign shall conform with the requirements of Section 175-101.
(Amended [2] 11-8-93 and 6-26-95-Effective Upon Passage)
[3] Maximum Height: Twenty (20) feet or the height of the principal structure, whichever is less; provided, however, that the maximum height of any ground-mounted sign serving two (2) or more business uses within 1,000 feet of the right-of-way for Interstate 66 shall be twenty-five (25) feet.
(Amended [3] 11-8-93, 6-26-95, 5-28-02 -Effective Upon Passage)
b. Projecting Sign: Development Standards.
[1] Frontage Requirements: Eighteen (18) feet of ground level frontage.
[2] Angle of Projection: Ninety (90?) degrees.
[3] Limit on Projection: Six (6) feet.
[4] Projection over Right-Of-Way. No sign outside the Historic Overlay District shall project over the public right-of-way, unless specifically approved by the Town Council.
(Amended [4]6-23-92-Effective Upon Passage)
[5] Minimum Clearance: Seven (7) feet vertical clearance, measured from the established grade directly below the sign to the closest point of the sign.
(Amended [5] 1-9-12-Effective Upon Passage)
[6] Maximum Height: Fourteen (14) feet or the lowest point of the roof, whichever is lowest.
(Amended [6] 11-8-93-Effective Upon Passage)
c. Wall Sign - Development Standards:
[1] Placement, Generally: No wall sign shall cover, cross or otherwise hide columns, belt courses or other decorative architectural features of the building, including balconies.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-184
[2] Maximum Height of Wall Signs: Twenty (20) feet or the lowest point of the roof, whichever is less; provide, however, that the maximum height of any wall sign for a business structure located within 1,000 feet of the right-of-way for Interstate 66 shall be fifty-five (55) feet.
(Amended [2] 11-8-93 and 5-28-02-Effective Upon Passage)
[3] Limit on Projection: Twelve (12) inches.
[4] Permanent Window Signs: Additional Restrictions. Permanent window signs shall be limited in area to twenty-five percent (25%) of the window area or twenty-five (25) square feet, whichever is less, and shall be included in the sign area calculations.
d. Awning, Canopy and Marquee Signs: Development Standards.
[1] Location: Parallel to the face and not projecting above or below the face of the awning, canopy or marquee.
[2] Limit on Projection: To within one (1) foot of the vertical placement of curbs, but shall in no way interfere or obstruct either pedestrian or vehicular traffic. No such sign outside the Historic Overlay District shall project over the public right-of-way, except as approved by the Town Council.
(Amended [2] 11-8-93-Effective Upon Passage)
e. Sandwich Board Signs: Development Standards
(Amended “e” by adding “Development Standards” 1-9-12-Effective Upon Passage)
[1] Location: Shall be located within fifty (50) feet from the building entrance on the same property as the business that the sign is advertising except for the following:
[a] The Zoning Administrator may allow one (1) sandwich board sign up to one hundred fifty (150) feet from the building entrance, subject to the consideration of the factors listed under subsection [3] below.
[b] The Town Manager may allow (1) sandwich board sign in the public right-of-way if a right-of-way utilization permit is submitted and approved, with all appropriate indemnification or other conditions.
(Amended [1]/Added [a-b] 3-23-15-Effective Upon Passage)
[2] Duration of Use: The signs may only be displayed during business hours.
[3] Number: Only one (1) sandwich board sign shall be permitted per business. Within the Historic Overlay District, a business may apply to the Administrator for a second sandwich board sign. The Administrator shall consider the following factors in determining whether to permit a second sandwich board sign:
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-185
[a] Mobility of pedestrians in the affected areas
[b] Residential or commercial character of the area
[c] Effect of second sandwich sign on other facilities and uses in the affected area,
[d] Such other reasonable conditions or factors deemed relevant by the Administrator
[e] The message content on a second sandwich board signs greater than 50 feet from the building entrance shall be language, shapes, symbols, or illustrations that principally advertise directions to the location of the business.
(Amended “e” 11-22-10 and 1-9-12-Effective Upon Passage)
[f] Without requiring a Certificate of Appropriateness, the Zoning Administrator shall consider if the sign is consistent with the guidelines for signs in the Historic District, as published in the Board of Architectural Review’s Historic Overlay District Guidelines.
(Amended [3]/Added [a - f] 3-23-15-Effective Upon Passage)
[4] Appearance: Signs that are crudely drawn or lettered, such as, but not limited to, when a spray paint can is used to create a sign message that appears nonprofessional; signs that are poorly crafted, or crafted on unfinished materials that are commonly finished, such as, but not limited to plywood; and signs that are poorly maintained, such as, but not limited to a sign that is significantly damaged or weathered or excessively dirty.
(Amended [4] 3-23-15-Effective Upon Passage)
f. Traditional Flag Signs: Development Standards
[1] Location: Shall only be located on private property, except where a Right-of-Way Utilization Permit is granted by the Town.
[2] Maximum Height: Twenty (20) feet.
[3] Visibility at Intersections: Compliance with Section 175-101.
[4] Frontage Requirements: Eighteen (18) feet of ground level frontage.
[5] Projection: If a projecting sign, compliance with Section 175-106A.9.b.
(Added “f” 1-9-12-Effective Upon Passage)
10. Construction and Maintenance Standards:
a. Building Code Compliance. All signs shall be constructed in compliance with the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. All illuminated signs shall comply with the National Electrical Code.
b. Condition of Signs. All signs and components shall be maintained in good repair and in a safe, clean and attractive condition.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-186
c. Repair or Removal of Nuisance Signs. Any sign which is declared to be an immediate or imminent hazard to life or property may be caused to be immediately removed or repaired. All costs associated with the removal or repair shall be charged to the owner of the premises or to the owner of the sign.
d. Removal of Obsolete Signs. Any sign which is obsolete because of discontinuation of the advertised activity or any other reason which would cause the sign to be obsolete shall be removed within thirty (30) days.
11. Nonconforming Signs:
a. Nonconforming Sign, generally: Any sign which was lawfully in existence at the time of the effective date of this Ordinance which does not conform to the provisions herein, shall be deemed a nonconforming sign and may remain except as qualified in Section 175-160A.11.b, herein. No non-conforming sign shall be enlarged, extended or structurally reconstructed in any manner, unless it is in conformance with these sign regulations. However, a nonstructural sign face may be changed to a new sign face.
(Amended “a” 11-8-93, 6-26-95, 1-9-12, 2-25-13-Effective Upon Passage)
b. Removal of Nonconforming Signs: Nonconforming signs may remain, provided that they are kept in good repair, except for the following:
[1] Damage or Destruction of Nonconforming Sign: A nonconforming sign which is destroyed or damaged to the extent exceeding fifty percent (50%) of its appraised value shall not be altered, replaced or reinstalled unless it is in conformance with these sign regulations. If the damage or destruction is fifty percent (50%) or less of the appraised value, the sign may be restored within two (2) years of the destruction but shall not be enlarged in any manner. The present day replacement cost of an identical new sign, as determined by a sign contractor or manufacturer, shall be considered the appraised value.
[2] Damage or Destruction of Use: A non- conforming sign shall be removed if the structure or use to which it is accessory is destroyed or demolished to the extent exceeding fifty percent (50%) of the principal structure's appraised value.
(Amended by removing [3]-Change of Use” 6-26-95-Effective Upon Passage)
B. Signs Permitted by Zoning Districts:
1. Agricultural and Residential Zoning Districts; Permitted Signs:
a. General Regulations:
[1] Minimum Setback: Ten (10) feet from all public rights-of-way unless further restricted by provisions of this section.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-187
[2] Illumination of Signs in Residential Districts: The following signs may be illuminated, by white light only: institutional bulletin boards and residential development identification signs.
b. Signs for Permitted Uses:
[1] Single-Family and Two-Family Dwellings: None, except for those signs exempt from permit requirements.
[2] Residential Developments: Permanent subdivision or development identification signs indicating only the name and/or address of the premises. The identification sign shall be a ground mounted or monument sign, and the maximum sign area shall be determined as follows:
[a] Development of (20) units or less: One (1) ground mounted sign, not to exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area or eight (8) feet in height, at each major street entrance.
[b] Development of (21) units or more: one (1) ground-mounted sign at each major street entrance not to exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in area or eight (8) feet in height.
(Amended [b] 11-8-93-Effective Upon Passage)
[c] Where signs are incorporated as part of a monumental entrance structure, such as a gateway, archway or freestanding entry columns, the lettering or signage incorporated therein may be physically divided and still considered as one (1) entrance sign. The total of all lettering or signage shall not exceed the maximum allowed in this Section.
[3] General Farming Activities: Two (2) ground mounted farm signs per property up to eight (8) feet in height, with a combined area not to exceed twenty-four (24) square feet.
(Amended [3] 11-8-93-Effective Upon Passage)
[4] Institutional Signs and Bulletin Boards: One (1) ground-mounted or wall sign per use, not to exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in area and eight (8) feet in height for ground-mounted signs or ten (10) feet in height for wall-mounted signs. The Town Council may, by special permit, approve an increase in size to thirty-two (32) square feet. In addition to the signs otherwise allowed by this section, any educational institution located on not less than fifty (50) contiguous acres and with road frontage on not fewer than four (4) public streets may have up to four (4) ground-mounted identification signs, facing outwards from the grounds of the institution, each not to exceed seventy-five (75) square feet in area and eight (8) feet in height. Two (2) of such signs may have a second face, on the side facing into the institution.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-188
(Amended [4] 11-8-93 and 6-13-05-Effective Upon Passage)
[5] Professional Office, Nursing Homes and Bed & Breakfast Homes: One (1) sign not to exceed twenty-four (24) square feet per principal structure and eight (8) feet in height.
(Amended [5] 11-8-93-Effective Upon Passage)
[6] Medical Centers: In lieu of the other requirements of this section, Medical Centers may be granted alternative standards for signs, subject to the following provisions.
a. A master signage plan shall be submitted with a sign permit application showing the location, size, height and appearance of each proposed sign on the property.
b. The sign permit and master signage plan shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission and decided on within 60 days of submittal, unless otherwise agreed upon by the Applicant. Town Staff may authorize the refacing of signs or other minor alterations that meet the same specifications approved by the Planning Commission.
c. Wall signs shall not exceed the maximum height requirement for the zoning district in which they are located.
d. Wall signs may be permitted to encompass up to 20% of the area of each building wall, provided that, under no circumstance may the total amount of wall signage exceed 200 square feet per building wall.
e. Ground Mounted signs may be allowed by the Planning Commission up to 150 square feet along public streets and up to 75 square feet along private streets. Monument style signs are recommended.
f. All signs shall be setback no less than 5 feet from the property line, and not less than 5 feet from any private street, driveway, parking aisle, or other vehicle maneuvering area.
g. For the purposes of this subsection, Medical Centers shall only include medical facilities that are part of an integrated development and are located on at least two (2) acres. Other permitted uses on the same property shall be allowed wall signage in accordance with Town Code 175-106.B.2. Ground mounted signs for other permitted uses shall be restricted, unless the Planning Commission authorizes the use to share signage primarily used for the Medical Center or if the signage is exempt by this Section.
(Amended [6] 3-9-20-Effective Upon Passage)
c. Signs for Accessory Uses:
[1] Accessory Management or Rental Offices: One (1) sign up to four (4) feet in area and four (4) feet in height.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-189
[2] Other Accessory Uses: one (1) sign up to four (4) square feet in area and four (4) feet in height.
2. Business and Industrial Zoning Districts: Permitted Signs.
a. Signs in Business and Industrial Districts: General Regulations:
[1] Development and Construction Standards: All signs requiring a permit shall comply with the development, construction and maintenance standards of Sections 175-106A.9. and 175-106A.10.
[2] Signs Facing Residential Areas: Any sign erected within one hundred (100) feet of either the principal structure of an existing residential use or the boundary of a residential zoning district shall be non-illuminated and limited to thirty-two (32) square feet in area.
(Amended [2] 11-8-93 and 6-26-95-Effective Upon Passage)
[3] Minimum setback of ground Mounted and Monument Signs: Five (5) feet from any public right- of-way, service drive or entrance.
b. Signs for Individual Businesses: A single business located on one (1) lot or separate businesses located on separate road frontages may erect signs as follows:
(Amended “b” by removing “zoning” 1-9-12-Effective Upon Passage)
[1] Maximum Number of Signs Per Business: Five (5); however, only through lots as defined in Section 175-3 shall be permitted to have more than one (1) ground-mounted sign, with only one (1) sign erected on each street frontage. For structures with a gross floor area of 50,000 square feet or more permitted by Special Permit, additional unlimited wall signs may be permitted, within the maximum area permitted by Section 175-106B.2.b[3], as part of a coordinated design package, reviewed in conjunction with the Special Permit. Such structures previously granted a Special Permit may apply for additional signage by amendment to the Special Permit.
(Amended [1] 6-26-95 and 7-28-03-Effective Upon Passage)
[2] Types of Signs Permitted: Wall, ground mounted, monument style, projecting, window, awning, canopy, marquee, permitted temporary, sandwich board, and traditional flag.
(Amended by adding “sandwich board style signs” 11-22-10-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended by adding “traditional flag” 1-9-12-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-190
[3] Maximum Size of Signs:
[a] Wall or Marquee Sign: One (1) square foot per linear foot of building width on which the sign is to be attached, up to a maximum of sixty (60) square feet of signage on any building elevation which fronts on a public street or parking area; provided, however, that the maximum size of any wall sign for a business located within 1,000 feet of the right-of-way of Interstate 66 shall be 120 square feet. In addition to the basic 60 square feet sign area, structures permitted by Special Permit with a gross floor area of 50,000 square feet or more, may be permitted to increase the total wall sign area, calculated as described herein, not to exceed 120 square feet of additional area, for a maximum total of 180 square feet. Such additional sign area shall be permitted only as part of a coordinated design package reviewed in conjunction with the Special Permit application. Such structures previously granted a Special Permit for increased building area may apply for additional sign area by amendment to the Special Permit. Artistic murals containing business or product advertising may be approved for a size exceeding sixty (60) square feet by special permit, pursuant to Section 175-136, when located outside the Historic Overlay District or by the Board of Architectural Review, pursuant to Section 175-88, when located within the Historic Overlay District.
(Amended [a] 11-8-93, 6-26-95, 5-28-02 and 7-28-03-Effective Upon Passage)
[b] Ground Mounted or Monument Signs: On lots with 100 feet or more of lot width, one (1) square foot per three (3) linear feet of lot width on the side where the sign is to be located, up to a maximum size of sixty (60) square feet and a maximum height of twenty (20) feet. Lots with less than 100 feet of lot width shall conform to the maximum size in Section 175-106A.9.a.[1]. On shared signs permitted pursuant to Section 175-106B.2.h. a maximum size of sixty (60) square feet per sign and a maximum height of twenty-five (25) feet for the sign structure including all sign faces.
(Amended [b] 11-8-93, 6-26-95 and 5-28-02-Effective Upon Passage)
[c] Awning or Canopy Sign: One (1) square foot per linear foot of the awning or canopy, up to ten (10) square feet.
[d] Projecting Sign: One (1) square foot per linear foot of building width on which the sign is to be attached, up to sixteen (16) square feet.
(Amended [d] 11-8-93-Effective Upon Passage)
[e] Traditional Flag Sign: Maximum of fifteen (15) square feet, and no one side exceeding a length of five (5) feet.
(Added [e] 11-8-93-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-191
[f] Sandwich Board Sign: 2’ wide and 4’ high
(Added [f] 11-8-93-Effective Upon Passage)
c. Signs for a Single Lot Having Two or More Businesses: Multiple businesses located on a single lot may erect signs as follows:
(Amended “c” by removing “zoning” 1-9-12-Effective Upon Passage)
[1] Maximum Number of Signs Per Lot: A lot shall be permitted to have erected either one (1) projecting sign and one (1) ground mounted sign on a street frontage, but not both.
(Amended [1] by removing “zoning” 1-9-12-Effective Upon Passage)
[2] Maximum Number of Signs Per Business With An Individual Outside Entrance: Two (2), except that one (1) additional sign for a corner unit facing a street or parking lot is permitted. For structures with a gross floor area of 50,000 square feet or more permitted by Special Permit, additional unlimited wall signs may be permitted within the maximum area permitted by Section 175-106B.2.b[3][a], as part of a coordinated package, reviewed in conjunction with the Special Permit. Such structures previously granted a Special Permit may apply for an unlimited number of signs by amendment to the Special Permit.
(Amended [2] 6-26-95 and 7-28-03-Effective Upon Passage)
[3] Types of Signs Permitted: Wall, ground mounted, monument style, projecting, awning, canopy, window, marquee, traditional flag or permitted temporary.
(Amended by adding “traditional flag” 1-9-12-Effective Upon Passage)
[4] Maximum Size of Signs: Same as for individual businesses [Section 175 106B.2.b. or multiple businesses located on a single lot [Section 175-106B.2.c.2.
(Amended [4] 7-28-03-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended [4] by removing “zoning” 1-9-12-Effective Upon Passage)
[5] Directory Sign: One (1) up to sixty (60) square feet in area and twenty (20) feet in height. A ground mounted directory sign precludes the use of any other ground mounted sign on that same street frontage.
[6] Wall Signs For Individual Businesses Sharing A Common Entrance: One (1) wall sign, not to exceed twelve (12) square feet, is permitted for each business tenant.
(Amended [6] 11-8-93 and 6-26-95-Effective Upon Passage)
[7] Tenant Spaces Under Canopied Walkway: Where tenant spaces are recessed under a canopied walkway, one additional double-faced projecting sign [not to exceed six
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-192
(6) square feet] located under the canopy adjacent to the main entry of the individual tenant may be permitted.
d. Signs for Commercial, Office and Industrial Centers: Commercial, office or industrial uses located within a center or park of at least two (2) acres in size and including five (5) or more establishments planned as an integrate development shall be authorized to erect signs based on the following:
[1] Signs for Individual Establishments Within Center: the same as for individual or multiple businesses, as appropriate [Section 175-106B.2.b. or c., respectively].
[2] Center Identification Sign: One (1) ground mounted or monument style sign per street frontage, with an area of one (1) square foot per four (4) linear feet of lot frontage on which the sign is to be erected, up to a maximum of sixty (60) square feet Upon request by the owner or owners of the center or park, and with submission of a master plan showing all proposed signage within the center or park, the Planning Commission may approve, or approve with conditions, an increase to the maximum size for a Center Identification Sign up to a maximum area of 150 square feet, and an increase to the maximum number of Center Identification Signs up to a total of two (2), provided that the total square feet of the two (2) signs does not exceed 150. In review of such a request, the Planning Commission will consider the sign(s) appearance, impact(s) to adjacent properties, proximity to other ground-mounted signs, visibility from adjacent roads, and the overall size of the development. The center identification sign shall display only the name and address of the center and establishments located therein. No other ground-mounted signs, other than exempt signs, shall be permitted on that same road frontage within the center or park. (Amended [2] 1-9-12-Effective Upon Passage)
e. Signs For Gasoline Stations: Automobile service and gasoline stations shall comply with all applicable sign regulations within this section; provided, however, that the following additional regulations shall apply:
[1] Changeable Fuel Price Signs: Ground mounted or monument style signs shall be authorized to include changeable fuel price signs indicating the current price of fuel dispensed on the premises. If the fuel price sign is freestanding, it shall be erected as an integral part of the ground mounted sign and shall not be included in the sign area calculations, except for any portion of the price sign that exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the total sign areas.
(Amended [1] 6-26-95-Effective Upon Passage)
[2] Gas Pump Signs: Each gas pump shall be permitted a total of one (1) square foot of sign area to identify the product dispensed.
[3] Canopy Signs: A canopy covering gas pumps shall be permitted additional logo signage located on the canopy, not to exceed a total of twenty-four (24) square feet. Such signs shall be included in the maximum number of signs allowed.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-193
f. Signs For Theaters: Theaters are authorized to erect one (1) of the permitted wall or marquee signs with a changeable copy board displaying the name(s) and time(s) of the current motion picture or theatrical production.
g. Signs For Other Uses Within Business and Industrial Employment Districts: In cases where neither the regulations within Section 175-106B.1. or 175-106B.2. specifically address a sign for a permissible use within a business or employment district, the Zoning Administrator shall make a written interpretation of the section, which shall be kept on file and used as a guide for future determinations.
h. Shared signs for businesses located within 1,000 feet of the right-of-way of Interstate 66: Any two (2) adjacent businesses located within 1,000 feet of the right-of-way of Interstate 66 and which share a common highway entrance shall be authorized to erect one (1) sign structure containing a separate sign for each business which may be erected on the property of either business or partially on each property; provided that such sign structure and the signs thereon comply with the provisions of this section with regard to height and maximum size for each sign on the structure.
(Added “h” 5-28-02-Effective Upon Passage)
3. Signs in the Historic Overlay District:
a. Certificate of Appropriateness Required: Signs within the Historic Overlay District require the approval of a Certificate of Appropriateness by the Board of Architectural Review prior to the issuance of a sign permit by the Zoning Administrator.
b. Area, Height and Location of Signs: The area, height and location standards for the underlying zoning district shall be applicable to signs erected in the Historic Overlay District.
c. Sign Requirements May Be Waived: The Zoning Administrator may authorize the waiver of the sign requirements for setback, spacing, number, frontage, height, area and type of signs within the Historic Overlay District if the Board of Architectural Review approves a specific sign proposal consistent with the character of the building to which it relates and other surrounding properties. In no case, however, may a sign exceed a maximum of sixty (60) square feet.
d. Additional Review Criteria: Any sign erected within the Historic Overlay District shall also satisfy all applicable standards and guidelines adopted by the Board of Architectural Review.
e. Signs within the Public Right-of-Way: A sign may be placed within, or project into, the public right-of-way inside of the Historic Overlay District, but only if a Right-of-Way Utilization Permit is issued by the Town.
(Amended “3” 6-23-92-Effective Upon Passage ; Amended “e” 1-9-12-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-194
C. Administration:
1. Sign Permit Procedures:
a. Applicability: A sign permit shall be required for each sign erected after the effective date of this Article, except for those signs which are specifically excluded from the sign permit requirements as provided in Section 175-106A.6.
(Amended “a” 11-8-93-Effective Upon Passage)
b. Filing of Application; Fees: Applications for sign permits shall be filed by the applicant or his agent with the Zoning Administrator, shall contain information required herein and shall be accompanied by a fee, as established from time to time by resolution of the Town Council.
c. Information Required: All applications for sign permits shall contain or have attached thereto the following information in either written or graphic form:
[1] Name, address and telephone number of the sign erector and the sign owner.
[2] Position of the sign in relation to adjacent lot lines, buildings, sidewalks, streets and intersections.
[3] Type of sign and general description of structural design and construction of materials to be used.
[4] Purpose of the proposed sign.
[5] Drawings of the proposed sign which shall contain specifications indicating the height, perimeter and area dimensions, means of support, method of illumination, colors and any other significant aspect of the proposed sign.
[6] Size and placement of all existing signs to remain on the property.
[7] Any other information requested by the Zoning Administrator in order to carry out the purpose and intent of these regulations.
d. Recording of Sign Permit: The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of all sign permits issued. All sign permits shall be numbered in the order of their issuance.
e. Inspections: A final inspection shall be completed after installation of approved signs. Any discrepancies between the approved sign and the sign as constructed shall be identified and may result in the halt of construction or sign removal, if so ordered by the Zoning Administrator.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-195
f. Revocations: The Zoning Administrator may revoke a permit or approval if it is found that there has been concealment or misrepresentation of material facts in either the application or plans.
g. Appeals: Any decision made by the Zoning Administrator while interpreting or enforcing these sign regulations may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
2. Temporary Sign Permit Procedures: All signs requiring the issuance of a temporary sign permit, as established in Section 175-106(A)(7), shall submit all information requested by the Zoning Administrator prior to the issuance of such permit. The approved permit shall include the expiration date of the temporary permit. The applicant may request extensions of said permit for good cause. Temporary signs remaining after the expiration of the permit shall be considered in violation of this chapter and shall be immediately removed.
3. Expiration of Sign Permits; Signs Not Constructed: A sign permit shall expire and become null and void if the approved sign is not completely erected within a period of twelve (12) months from the date the permit was originally issued. The Zoning Administrator may grant one (1) extension of the sign permit for a period of six (6) months, but in no case shall a permit be valid for more than a total of eighteen (18) months. Extensions may be granted only when the proposed sign is in compliance with all current applicable regulations.
4. Variances to Certain Sign Regulations Not Permitted. Unless specifically authorized herein, no variance to the standards established for regulating the size of signs shall be authorized.
(Amended Section 5-13-91-Effective Upon Passage)
175-107 NURSING AND CONVALESCENT HOMES, INCLUDING HOMES FOR THE ELDERLY
In addition to the requirements of the district in which the nursing or convalescent home is located, such uses shall meet the following requirements:
A. All state rules and regulations for the licensing of such uses.
B. All requirements of the State Health Department and Fire Marshal's office regarding such uses.
C. Parking requirements as established in Chapter 148.
(Amended to Add “Chapter 148”6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
D. Architectural barriers, such as stairs, for residents of such establishments shall be overcome to the greatest extent possible. Additional safety features, such as handrails, in various areas shall be installed.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-196
175-107.1 DAY CARE AND DAY-CARE FACILITIES IN RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS BY SPECIAL PERMIT
The following provisions shall apply to day care and day-care facilities located in residential zoning districts:
A. All day-care operations in residential zoning districts shall be restricted to not more than one hundred (100) children per day-care facility.
B. All day-care operations and day-care facilities shall be licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia in accordance with the provisions of Virginia Code Section 63.1-196, as amended, unless otherwise specifically exempted from such licensing requirements under provisions of the Virginia State Code.
C. Day-care operations in residential districts shall not be permitted in single-family or multifamily residential dwellings.
D. Day-care operations in residential districts shall be restricted to schools, churches, lodges, hospitals, rest, convalescent or nursing homes, offices or halls which are otherwise permitted by right in the respective residential district in question, or any of the aforementioned facilities which are currently in existence as a nonconforming use, or any of the aforementioned facilities which have previously been approved for non-day-care purposes by special permit. The day-care operation shall be an ancillary or additional use to the facility in question. Facilities shall not be constructed in residential districts solely for daycare use.
E. All day-care facilities in residential zoning districts shall be required to have a minimum lot size of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet for day-care operations with fifty (50) children or fewer and forty thousand (40,000) square feet for day-care operations with more than fifty (50) children.
F. In assessing the request for a special use permit to conduct day-care operations in residential zoning districts, the Council shall consider and may require the availability of safe on-site drop-off and pickup areas, outdoor play areas not located in the facility's front yard, fenced play areas and screening or noise buffers for adjacent properties. The Council shall also consider the nature and suitability of the proposed facility, the size, location and characteristics of the grounds or yard, the safety of the children to be cared for at the facility, peak and non-peak traffic patterns, parking, the effects on nearby property and residents, noise and such other factors which the Council deems pertinent in assessing the suitability of any proposed day-care operation in a residential zoning district. (Added Entire Section 10-23-89-Effective Upon Passage)
175-107.2 BED AND BREAKFAST USES IN RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS BY SPECIAL PERMIT
The following provisions shall apply to Bed and Breakfast Uses located in residential zoning districts:
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-197
A. The minimum lot size for a Bed and Breakfast Home use shall be 1.5 acres if associated uses referenced in Subsection H are proposed on the property. The minimum lot size for a Bed & Breakfast with no associated uses in 0.5 acres.
(Amended 9-27-10-Effective Upon Passage)
B. The maximum number of guest rooms shall be six (6) for Bed & Breakfasts with a lot size of 1.5 acres or greater. The maximum number of guest rooms shall be three (3) for Bed and Breakfasts with a lot size of 0.5 acres to 1.49 acres.
(Amended 9-27-10-Effective Upon Passage)
C. No provisions shall be allowed for cooking in individual guest rooms.
D. Parking shall be provided as follows: Two (2) spaces for residents, one (1) space per guest room and spaces for associated uses as determined by the Planning Commission. Tandem or stacked parking arrangements may be approved. Parking for associated uses must be provided on site.
(Amended 9-27-10-Effective Upon Passage)
E. The provision of the required parking and the traffic created due to this use shall not adversely impact any adjacent residential uses.
F. The exterior appearance of the structure shall not be altered from its single-family character.
G. Adequate landscaping, distancing and/or restriction of hours of operation shall be provided to buffer the adjacent residential uses from any noise or light generated by this use that is either uncharacteristic of residential neighborhoods or takes place at times uncharacteristic to residential neighborhoods.
H. Associated uses are allowable and may include but not be limited to catered events such as receptions and dinner parties, provided that such associated uses do not adversely impact any adjacent residential uses.
I. The owner must reside on premise.
(Added 9-27-10-Effective Upon Passage)
J. Applicable provisions of the Uniform Statewide Building Code and all other laws, regulations, inspections, and licenses must be met. (Added 9-27-10-Effective Upon Passage)
K. Each Bed and Breakfast shall be allowed one (1) on premise sign no larger than two feet by two feet (2’ x 2’).
(Added 9-27-10-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-198
L. The owner must submit a plat of the property showing the existing conditions and location of the proposed parking.
(Added “A-H” 9-27-10-Effective Upon Passage)
107-107.3 BED AND BREAKFAST USES IN COMMERCIAL C-1 AND C-2 ZONING DISTRICTS BY SPECIAL USE PERMIT
A. The maximum number of guest rooms shall be six (6).
B. No provisions shall be allowed for cooking in individual guest rooms.
C. The owner must reside on premise.
D. The exterior appearance of the structure must not be altered from its single family character.
E. Parking shall be provided as follows: two (2) spaces for residents and one (1) space per guest room.
F. Applicable provisions of the Uniform Statewide Building Code and all other applicable laws, regulations, inspections, and licenses shall be met.
G. The owner must submit a plat of the property showing the existing conditions and the location of proposed parking.
(Added Section 9-27-10-Effective Upon Passage)
175-108 PROFESSIONAL OFFICES
Regulations pertaining to professional offices shall be as follows:
A. Professional offices (doctors, lawyers, engineers and architects, among others) are permitted in the R-3 District after meeting all requirements of this chapter.
B. All activity and equipment, other than parking, must be housed in a fully enclosed building.
C. No noise or odor produced as a result of activity in such offices shall be discernible beyond the boundaries of the lot.
D. All vehicular access to the site shall be from a street which meets Town standards for streets.
E. No display in the building shall be visible from outside of the building.
175-108.1 HOME OCCUPATIONS
All home occupations shall meet the following standards:
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-199
A. The use shall be clearly incidental to the principal use of the property for residential purposes and shall not change the exterior appearance of the dwelling unit, or change the character of the neighborhood.
(Amended 3-25-13-Effective Upon Passage)
B. Operators of home occupations must be residents on the same parcel, or parcels, where the home occupation is located. Notwithstanding subsection B, nonresident employees may also work for the home occupation, but no more than one (1) nonresident employee may work from the parcel, or parcels, at the same time.
(Amended 3-25-13-Effective Upon Passage)
C. No outdoor display, sales or storage of goods, materials or equipment shall be permitted. except that, the Zoning Administrator may authorize up to two (2) business vehicles, including any vehicle used by a nonresident employee. Indoor storage is permitted, provided that it does not violate the other restrictions of this section, including, but not limited to, changing the appearance of the dwelling unit, changing the character of the neighborhood, or increasing traffic.
(Amended 3-25-13-Effective Upon Passage)
D. No wholesale or retail business shall be permitted unless it is conducted entirely by mail and/or telephone and does not involve the bulk shipment/delivery of merchandise to and from the premises; provided, however, that articles produced by the home occupation operators may be sold on the premises.
E. Provided that the other requirements of this section are complied with, home occupations shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following uses: home offices, computer repair services, telecommunication services, artist studios, instructional services/tutoring, dressmaking, babysitting/babysitting services, or small item repair services. Uses that are restricted from being classified as home occupations shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following uses: motor vehicle repair, beauty/barber shops (with more than one (1) customer at a time), restaurants, animal hospitals/kennels, retail sales, and dance studios.
(Amended 3-25-13-Effective Upon Passage)
F. In the instance of a home occupation involving a nonresident employee, at least one (1) additional off-street parking place shall be provided.
(Amended 3-25-13-Effective Upon Passage)
G. No home occupation shall create greater vehicular or pedestrian traffic than is otherwise normal for the district in which it is located.
H. No home occupation shall create noise, dust, vibrations, smells, smoke, glare, electrical interference, fire hazard or any other hazard or nuisance to any greater or more frequent extent than that usually experienced in the district on residentially used zoning lots where no home occupation exists.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-200
I. Notwithstanding other regulations within this Chapter, signs are not permitted for home occupations, except that the Zoning Administrator may authorize a sign for the following circumstances.
1. When the sign is located on an authorized business vehicle and does not exceed ten (10) square feet in size.
2. When the sign is located within the C-1, C-2, C-3, I-1, I-2, or MCD Zoning District, subject to the following conditions.
a. Shall not exceed four (4) square feet in size.
b. Shall not exceed six (6) feet in height, if freestanding.
(Added Section 10-10-94-Effective Upon Passage ; Amended “I” 3-25-13-Effective Upon Passage)
175-109 TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION TRAILERS
A. Zoning permits for temporary trailers may be issued by the Zoning Administrator in any zoning district for construction purposes only. Temporary trailers may not be used for residential purposes or sales offices. All permits for temporary construction trailers shall be subject to the following conditions:
1. The Zoning Administrator shall review and approve or deny all requests for temporary construction trailer permits. In assessing a request for a temporary construction trailer permit, the Zoning Administrator shall consider the necessity for such temporary construction trailer, its location and its effects on the surrounding neighborhood and/or adjoining property owners and may require terms and conditions on the location and placement, type and number of trailers, screening and such other reasonable conditions as the Zoning Administrator shall deem necessary.
2. The location of temporary construction trailers on a specific site shall be necessary for the purpose of a construction office or storage.
3. The request for a temporary construction trailer permit shall be filed by the contractor, landowner or State Department of Highways and Transportation as being essential to the construction activity.
4. A minimum area of two thousand (2,000) square feet shall be provided for each temporary construction trailer space.
5. Each temporary construction trailer shall have a minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces in addition to other parking spaces required by this chapter for other activities.
6. All sanitary facilities must conform to State Health Department trailer camp sanitation requirements.
B. The maximum period allowable for the placement of a temporary construction trailer shall be six (6) months or until completion of the project, whichever is shorter. Applications for renewal
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-201
for a successive six-month periods may be submitted if additional time is required to complete the project. However, each renewal application must be filed at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the original temporary construction trailer permit.
C. The Zoning Administrator, in granting a temporary construction trailer permit, may require the posting of a bond to insure that the temporary construction trailer will be removed and the site left in good order at the expiration of the permit.
D. The Zoning Administrator may establish such additional requirements and conditions as may be in the best interests of the Town.
(Amended 1-8-90-Effective Upon Passage)
175-109.1 TEMPORARY TRAILERS; NONRESIDENTIAL USES
A. The Town Council in its discretion may grant a special permit for approval not to exceed one (1) year for the use of a temporary trailer or a temporary manufactured home for specified nonresidential purposes related to the following permitted uses:
(Amended “A” by adding “manufactured” 7-23-12-Effective Upon Passage)
1. Hospitals.
2. Schools.
3. Churches.
4. Institutions.
5. Rest, convalescent or nursing homes.
6. Public utilities.
7. Industrial facilities.
B. The special permit may be granted for any zoning district, provided that the underlying use is permitted in that zoning district. For good cause shown, Council may vote to grant a single extension for an additional period not to exceed one (1) year.
C. All temporary trailers approved under this section for a period of six (6) months or more shall be placed and anchored on a foundation appropriate for a two-year duration. All such foundations shall be skirted.
D. The special permit application shall specify the event or solution that will terminate the need for the temporary trailer. In assessing the application for a special permit, Council shall consider the following:
1. The effect on surrounding properties.
2. The effect on community appearance.
3. The stated need for a temporary facility, and the availability of alternative solutions.
4. Traffic and safety factors.
5. Such additional factors as may apply to the site, and the particulars of the application.
(Added 2-14-94-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-202
175-109.2 PORTABLE STORAGE CONTAINERS
A. Portable Storage Containers - Notwithstanding any contrary provision of the Town Code, portable storage containers located outside of a fully enclosed building or structure shall be permitted in all zoning districts, subject to the following restrictions:
(Amended 1-28-13-Effective Upon Passage)
B. In Residential Districts and commercial business districts no more than one (1) portable storage container shall be allowed on a lot of record, and for no longer than a total of thirty (30) days in any consecutive twelve (12) month period. In industrial districts, the use of portable storage containers shall be limited to a period of time not to exceed (90) days, unless the portable storage containers are converted to permanent structures that comply with all applicable zoning and building code requirements.
C. In agricultural districts, on lots where the principal use is a bona fide agricultural activity, and in industrial districts, there shall be no restriction on the number of portable storage containers permitted as accessory uses.
D. In commercial business districts, portable storage containers may be allowed for more than thirty (30) days in any consecutive twelve (12) month period upon approval of a special use permit.
E. In any district, if the owner or lawful occupant of property can demonstrate, to the reasonable satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator, the need to continue the use of a portable storage unit on the property to alleviate an issue or problem to permit or allow the reasonable use or repair of the property occasioned on or to the property due to an act of God (defined herein as a natural disaster or phenomena including a hurricane, tornado, storm, flood, high water, wind-driven water, tidal wave, earthquake, or fire caused by natural or non-negligent accidental causes), the Zoning Administrator may extend the use of portable storage containers on the property for a period of thirty (30) days longer than the corresponding period otherwise allowed in that district. The Town Manager may authorize additional extensions when such extension of time is necessary to permit or allow the reasonable use or repair of the property for the reasons set forth in the above sentence.
F. In residential districts, no portable storage containers shall have dimensions greater than sixteen feet (16') in length, eight feet (8') in height or eight feet (8') in width. Portable storage containers in commercial business districts shall be limited to twenty feet (20') in length, eight feet six inches (8’ 6”) in height or eight feet (8') in width.
G. No portable storage container shall be located closer than five (5) feet from the side or rear property line.
H. Portable storage containers shall not be located closer than eight (8) feet from required parking spaces, and shall not project into any area required for vehicular mobility and maneuvering.
I. Portable storage containers shall be allowed only upon issuance of a permit by the Zoning Administrator. The fee for such permit shall be set by Town Council by resolution.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-203
J. Only one (1) portable storage container per one (1) calendar year period shall be allowed per lot or parcel of record in residential and commercial districts; and only one (1) portable storage container per twelve (12) consecutive month period shall be allowed per owner or lawful occupant of property.
(Added Section (A-H) 7-25-05-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended Section (A-H) 1-28-13-Effective Upon Passage ; Added “J” 1-28-13-Effective Upon Passage)
175-110 AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS
The Town Council, upon recommendation from the Planning Commission, may place certain restrictions on automobile service stations in the C-1, C-2, I-1 and I-2 Zones, in addition to the regulations of those zones, based on the following criteria:
A. The effect of such proposed buildings and use upon the character of the neighborhood, traffic conditions, public facilities and other matters pertaining to the public health, safety and general welfare.
B. All appliances for dispensing gasoline installed outside of enclosed buildings shall be located not less than fourteen (14) feet from any property line adjoining the public street and all such appliances shall be installed and maintained in such location as to prevent any part of vehicles being serviced from standing on the street, alley or sidewalk area.
(Amended “B” 8-24-98-Effective Upon Passage)
175-110.1 INOPERATIVE MOTOR VEHICLES
A. No more than one (1) inoperative motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, as defined by Virginia Code Section 46.1-1, which is inoperative, shall be kept outside a completely enclosed building on any property zoned for residential or commercial purposes. Such inoperative vehicle must be fully screened year-round from public view by plantings, fencing or a professionally manufactured car cover. Any inoperative vehicle stored under a car cover shall not be maintained on the same lot for more than six months in a twelve month period. In no case shall any inoperative vehicles be stored in the required parking spaces for the use or in any required yard adjoining a public street.
(Amended “A” 7-24-95, 10-8-01-Effective Upon Passage)
B. For the purpose of this section, the word "inoperative" shall mean:
1. A motor vehicle, pursuant to Virginia Code §15.2-904.A.(ii), which for a period of 60 days or longer has been partially or totally disassembled by the removal of tires and wheels, the engine, or other essential parts required for operation of the vehicle.
2. A motor vehicle, pursuant to Virginia Code §15.2-904.A.(iii), on which there are displayed neither valid license plates nor a valid inspection decal.
(Amended “B” 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-204
C. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a person, firm or corporation which has been regularly and continuously licensed and engaged in the business of an automobile dealer, salvage dealer or scrap processor at the property in question since June 26, 1970.
D. The owners of property zoned for residential or commercial purposes shall at the demand of the Town Council or its designated agent remove from their property any such inoperative motor vehicles, trailers or semitrailers that are not kept within a fully enclosed building or structure. Notice of the demand shall be sent to the property owner by first class mail to the owner's address as it appears in the Town tax records. In the event that the inoperative vehicle has not been placed in a fully enclosed building or structure, fully screened year- round from public view by plantings, fences or a professionally manufactured car cover, or removed from the property within ten (10) days from the date the notice was sent, then the Town or its designated agent may remove the inoperative vehicle, and thereafter dispose of the same upon furnishing the vehicle owner with ten (10) days' written notice. If the vehicle owner cannot be determined, the property shall be disposed of in accordance with Town Code Section 124-1 et seq.
(Amended 7-24-95-Effective Upon Passage)
E. The cost of inoperative vehicle removal, storage and/or disposal shall be chargeable to the owners of the vehicle or the owners of the premises, and may be collected by the Town as taxes and levies are collected. Every cost authorized by this section which is assessed against the owners of the premises shall constitute a lien against the property from which the vehicle was removed, and shall continue to constitute a lien until actual payment in full has been made to the Town.
(Added Section 7-22-85-Effective Upon Passage ; Amended “E” 7-24-95-Effective Upon Passage)
175-110.2 TRUCKS AND SEMITRAILERS
A. In the zoning districts listed below in this subsection, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep, park or store upon any lot in R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3 Residential Zoning Districts or any residential portion of a PND or MCD District, any tractor truck or semitrailer designed to be used with a tractor truck, as defined in Virginia Code Section 46.2-100, or any truck with a registered gross weight in excess of twelve thousand (12,000) pounds. These provisions shall apply regardless of whether such a vehicle is kept, parked or stored in the open or within an enclosed structure.
1. R-1 District
2. R-1A District
3. R-2 District
4. R-3 District
5. PND District (only within areas approved solely for residential use)
(Amended “A” by adding (1-5) and Changed Title 1-28-13-Effective Upon Passage)
B. The provisions of subsection 175-110.2.A. shall not apply to any of the following vehicles:
(Amended “B: by Adding Subsection # 1-28-13-Effective Upon Passage)
1. School buses, church buses and other buses engaged in public transportation.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-205
2. Pickup trucks with a registered gross weight of twelve thousand (12,000) pounds or less.
3. Panel truck with a registered gross weight of twelve thousand (12,000) pounds or less.
4. Motor homes, camping trailers and recreational vehicles as defined in Virginia Code Section 46.2-100. See 175-100 for recreational vehicle regulations.
(Amended 1-28-13-Effective Upon Passage)
5. Trailers of every type, except semitrailers designed to be used with a tractor truck.
6. Hospital mobile units and fire and rescue vehicles.
7. Vehicles owned and operated by public utilities.
8. Farm vehicles used in agricultural pursuits on parcels of land one (1) acre or larger.
C. The provisions of subsection 175-110.2.A. shall not apply to any vehicle which comes upon property for pickups, deliveries and service to property made in the regular course of business or which comes upon the property in the course of construction, maintenance or improvement to the property or adjoining streets and facilities.
D. Other than areas where semitrailers are restricted, as listed above under subsection A, trailers may be used for temporary storage; provided that, (i) the location of the semitrailer(s) is not located in the required yard area adjacent to any public street, (ii) the location of the semitrailer(s) does not interfere with required parking, vehicular mobility and vehicular maneuvering, (iii) the location is on an all-weather surface material, (iv) all fire and building code requirements are complied with, (v) a zoning permit is obtained from the Town, and (vi) no more than one trailer for temporary storage shall be permitted on property in any commercial zoning district. A 6’ high opaque fence, hedge, landscape screen, wall, building wall, or berm may be used for screening to prevent view of a trailer used for temporary storage.
(Added Section 5-13-91-Effective Upon Passage ; Added (D) 1-28-13-Effective Upon Passage)
175-110.3 MOTOR VEHICLE PAINTING AND BODY WORK
Motor vehicle body work and painting establishments shall comply with the following requirements:
A. All work shall be conducted in a completely enclosed building.
B. Used or damaged equipment removed from vehicles during the process shall be stored indoors, in a completely screened enclosure or shall be deposited in an approved covered outdoor collection receptacle for appropriate off-site disposal.
C. Temporary overnight outdoor storage and parking of vehicles waiting for repair or pickup shall be permitted. All damaged vehicles shall be stored indoors or in a completely screened enclosure. No long-term storage (sixty (60) days or more) shall be permitted.
D. A certificate of compliance with the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code shall be obtained for the use prior to commencement of the activity.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-206
E. All hazardous waste material, including paint, oil, antifreeze, etc., shall be disposed of only with a licensed hazardous waste removal firm.
F. The facility shall be equipped with adequate filtering to ensure that no overspray or particulate matter from the operation shall be discernible beyond the property line.
G. Notwithstanding the provisions of 175-3 pertaining to the definition of junkyard, authorization for the outdoor storage of up to eight (8) vehicles intended to be salvaged for parts may be made as part of the special permit approval. Such vehicles shall be confined to a defined storage area that is effectively screened from public view.
(Added Section 10-25-99-Effective Upon Passage ; Added “G” 6-26-00-Effective Upon Passage)
175-110.4 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION TOWERS
A. The following sites shall be considered by applicants as the preferred order of location of proposed broadcasting or communication facilities:
1. Existing wireless telecommunication towers.
(Amended “1” by removing broadcasting or communication 3-24-13-Effective Upon Passage)
2. Public structures, such as water towers, utility structures, fire stations, bridges, and other public buildings within all zoning districts not utilized primarily for residential uses.
3. New wireless telecommunication towers.
(Amended “3” by adding wireless telecommunications 3-24-13-Effective Upon Passage)
B. No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of Town Council that no other existing tower or structure can reasonably accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna.
C. The maximum height of any wireless telecommunication tower shall be made a condition of the special permit, but in no event shall exceed one hundred fifty feet (150') above finished grade of the property upon which it stands.
(Amended “C” by adding telecommunication 3-24-13-Effective Upon Passage)
D. Wireless telecommunication towers shall conform to each of the following minimum setback and minimum yard requirements:
(Amended “D” by adding telecommunication and minimum yard 3-24-13-Effective Upon Passage)
1. Towers shall have a minimum front, side and rear yard setback equal to the height of the tower; except that, Town Council may allow a reduction to these setback standards when it is designed with breakpoint technology. If the wireless telecommunication tower has been
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-207
constructed using breakpoint technology, as defined, the minimum setback distance shall be equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the distance from the top of the structure to the height of the breakpoint, plus the standard minimum setback distance for the underlying zoning district; except that, in no case shall the setback be less than ½ the height of the entire tower.
(Amended “1” 3-24-13-Effective Upon Passage)
2. Towers guys and accessory structures shall satisfy the minimum setback requirements of the underlying zoning district.
3. Towers shall not be located between the principal structure and a public street.
E. All towers shall be designed, structurally, electrically and in other respects, to accommodate both the applicant's antennas and comparable antennas for at least two (2) additional users.
F. Towers shall be illuminated as required by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and/or the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), but no lighting shall be incorporated if not required by the FCC and/or FAA, other than essential security lighting. Site lighting shall not be directed toward adjacent properties.
G. The use of any portion of a tower for signs other than warning or equipment information signs is prohibited.
H. Before activating the facility into service the applicant/developer shall provide the Town with a certificate by a qualified consultant that the radio frequencies used by the facility shall not interfere with any other pre-existing radio frequencies in use within the coverage area of the facility including, but not limited to, public safety communication frequencies.
I. For any proposed tower, photographs shall be taken of a balloon test, which shall be conducted as follows:
1. The applicant shall provide the Administrator with at least seven (7) days prior notice of the conducting of the test; provided that this deadline may be extended due to inclement weather or by the agreement of the applicant and the Administrator.
2. The test shall consist of raising one or more balloons from the site to a height equal to the proposed facility.
3. The balloons shall be of a color or material that provides maximum visibility.
4. The photographs of the balloon test shall be taken from the nearest residence and from appropriate locations on abutting properties, along each publicly used road from which the balloon is visible, and other properties and locations as deemed appropriate by the Administrator.
J. If antennas are proposed to be added to an existing structure, all existing antennas and other equipment on the structure, as well as all ground equipment, shall be identified by owner, type and
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-208
size. The method(s) by which the antennas will be attached to the mounting structure shall be depicted.
K. The Town shall require the review of the application by a third-party consultant retained by the Town at the expense of the applicant.
L. The applicant shall execute a letter of intent to allow other parties to share space (co-locate) on their tower and negotiate in good faith with other interested parties, including the Town Council and the Board of Supervisors of Warren County for emergency services radio and telephone facilities.
M. The tower construction shall be of a design that minimizes the visual impact of the tower and related facilities shall be camouflaged and/or screened from view from adjacent properties and rights-of-way to the greatest extent practicable. To this end, the application must provide for the retention of existing stands of trees and the installation of screening where existing trees do not mitigate the visual impact of the facility. Such screening shall, at a minimum, include a double row of evergreen trees at least two inches (2") in diameter at breast height separated by not further than ten feet (10') on center. The Planning Commission may recommend and the Council may require additional trees and screening when the minimum provisions do not mitigate adverse visual impacts of the facility.
N. The electromagnetic fields produced by the facility and any attachments to the tower do not exceed the radio frequency emissions standards established by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI).
O. The tower shall be inspected annually and certified as safe by a private firm acceptable to the Town and contracted for by the applicant. A copy of the inspection report with a certification that the tower is structurally safe and all microwave equipment is in proper working condition shall be provided to the Town Manager.
P. The tower shall be demolished and removed within ninety (90) days after abandonment. In order to ensure the demolition and removal of the tower, the applicant shall post and keep in place a renewable letter of credit or other security with adequate surety in a form acceptable to the Town Attorney and in an amount reasonably determined by the Town to be sufficient to pay for the costs of demolition and removal.
Q. Any equipment cabinet not located within an existing building shall be fenced only with the approval of the Administrator upon finding that the fence: (i) would protect the facility from trespass in areas of high volumes of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or in rural areas, to protect the facility from livestock or wildlife; (ii) would not be detrimental to the character of the area; (iii) would not be detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare; and (iv) shall assist in the effective screening of the facility.
R. Each tower shall be constructed so that all cables, wiring and similar attachments that run vertically from the ground equipment to the antennas are place on the pole to face the interior of
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-209
the property and away from public view, as determined by the Administrator, or so that vertical cables, wiring and similar attachments are contained within the tower's structure.
S. The following shall be submitted to the Administrator after installation of the tower is completed and prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy: (i) certification by a registered surveyor stating the height of the tower, measured both in feet above ground level and in elevation above mean sea level, using the benchmarks or reference datum identified in the application; and (ii) certification stating that any lightning rod's height does not exceed two (2) feet above the top of the tower and width does not exceed a diameter of one (1) inch.
(Added Section 9-26-05-Effective Upon Passage)
175-110.5 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR URBAN AGRICULTURE
Urban Agriculture, as defined under Section 175-3 of this Chapter, shall comply with the following performance standards.
A. A zoning permit shall be required for the keeping of animals kept in association with urban agriculture when located on a lot less than 1 acre. Such a zoning permit application shall include a management plan that adequately addresses waste disposal, site suitability, setbacks, animal density, biosecurity and health measures, odor control, noise control, appearance, and maintenance. The management plan shall be reviewed by the Virginia Cooperative Extension Office, or other qualified expert, nonprofit organization or government entity. Conditions of approval or recommendations may be required as part of the zoning permit based on the management plan or other recommendations of the Virginia Cooperative Extension Office, or other qualified expert, nonprofit organization or government entity. The zoning permit shall only be valid for one (1) year; except that, the Zoning Administrator may successively renew the permit in additional one (1) year increments upon expiration; provide that, the use remains in compliance with the management plan and otherwise remains lawful.
B. Single family, duplex or two-family dwellings shall be permitted to keep up to six (6) female chickens (non-crowing hens only), six (6) bee hives, and/or six (6) rabbits.
C. Other types of residential uses, such as townhouses, condominiums, multi-family (apartments), are prohibited from keeping livestock, fowl or bees, except when authorized with a Special Use Permit or Proffer.
D. Commercial and industrial uses, excluding schools, are prohibited from keeping livestock, fowl or bees, except when authorized with a Special Use Permit or Proffer.
E. Roosters, livestock (excluding rabbits), and fowl (excluding hens) are prohibited on lots less than one (1) acre in land area.
F. Pigs are restricted, regardless of lot size, unless a Special Use Permit or Proffer is submitted and approved.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-210
G. Chickens, bees, and rabbits are restricted from the front yard and corner side yard on corner lots.
H. Chickens and rabbits shall be kept within an enclosed area that includes a chicken coop or rabbit hutch. Such facilities shall be kept clean and maintained in good condition.
I. Chickens coops shall be setback at least ten (10) feet from side and rear property lines. Additional setbacks may be required by the Zoning Administrator if recommended as part of the submitted management plan or review agency recommendation.
J. Any permit issued for Urban Agriculture may be revoked by the Zoning Administrator if such use significantly deviates from the approved zoning permit and/or management plan; or if such use creates a violation of the Town Code, including, but not limited to, an unpermitted expansion, noise violation, unpermitted development activity, or nuisance.
K. The sale of goods or services related to Urban Agriculture is not authorized, except where such sale or services is allowed as a principal use of the property. This restriction shall not include the incidental selling or trading with neighbors, family or friends; nor shall it exclude selling produce off-site at farm markets or other venues.
L. The above requirements are considered in addition to all other requirements of the Town Code that may apply.
M. Urban agriculture is not permitted as a principal use of a property; except that, this restriction shall not apply to outdoor gardens.
N. Bee hives must be setback at least ten (10) feet from side and rear property lines, and shall be enclosed on all sides by a fence at least 4 feet in height. A sign between two (2) and four (4) square feet shall be clearly located on the fence to communicate that bees are being kept within the enclosure.
O. Harvesting of honey shall take place within an enclosed building.
(Added Entire Section 11-23-15-Effective Upon Passage)
175-111 SHOPPING CENTERS
Shopping centers shall be in single ownership or under a guaranteed unified management control. Shopping centers shall consist of harmonious selection of uses and groupings of buildings, service and parking areas, circulation and open space and shall be subject to the provisions of the Condominium Act of Virginia and shall comply with the following regulations:
A. Permitted principal uses shall be as follows:
1. Stores for the sale of goods at retail or the performance of customary personal services or services clearly incidental to retail sales.
2. Business, professional or banking offices.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-211
3. Restaurants, cafes or similar places serving food and/or beverages.
4. Parking areas for transient auto vehicles, but not for the storage of new or used motor vehicles for sale.
5. Gasoline service stations, with repairs done within a building.
6. Theaters, not including drive-in theaters.
B. Permitted accessory uses located on the same lot with the permitted principal use. Only the customary accessory uses associated with a commercial district shall be permitted, provided that they are limited to the same lot as the principal uses.
C. Area and bulk regulations shall be as follows:
1. Lot size: The area for development shall be a minimum of two (2) acres.
2. Building height: two (2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet maximum.
3. Front yard: thirty (30) feet minimum.
4. Side yards: thirty (30) feet minimum.
5. Rear yard: thirty (30) feet minimum.
6. Lot coverage: twenty-five percent (25%) maximum.
D. Supplementary regulations.
1. Off-street parking and loading: Off-street parking shall be provided on the premises at the rate of five (5) parking spaces per one thousand (1,000) gross square feet for every shopping center facility ten thousand (10,000) square feet in size or less. For shopping centers over ten thousand (10,000) square feet, the parking requirement shall be four (4) parking spaces per one thousand (1,000) gross square feet. Parking shall be permitted in the areas required for front, side and rear yard setbacks up to a point of twenty- five (25) feet from any front, side or rear of the lot line of the shopping center. All parking areas shall be suitably paved with permanent hard-surfaced coverings. Off-street loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with Section 175-105.
(Amended “1” 11-25-91-Effective Upon Passage)
2. Access and traffic controls: All means of ingress or egress from the shopping center to any public street or state highway shall be located at least two hundred (200) feet from any other intersecting street or streets and shall be designed to conduct traffic in a safe manner. The developer shall be responsible for the purchase and erection of any necessary traffic control devices and the construction of additional acceleration or deceleration lanes or service walks as may be required by the State Department of Highways and Transportation or by the Town.
3. Interior circulation: Interior access ways shall be designed so as to prevent the blocking of vehicles entering or leaving the site. Areas provided for loading or unloading of trucks and/or other vehicles or for servicing of shops for rubbish collection or other services shall be adequate in size and shall be so arranged that they may be used without blocking or interfering with interior circulation and parking facilities.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-212
4. Lighting: Lighting for buildings, signs, access ways and parking areas shall be so arranged as not to reflect toward public streets or cause any annoyance to surrounding property owners or residents.
5. Shopping cart storage: Establishments furnishing carts or mobile baskets shall provide definite areas on the site for the storage of said carts. Storage areas shall be clearly marked and designated for the storage of shopping carts and/or mobile baskets.
6. Screening: All lot lines abutting residential districts along the side yard or rear yard shall be appropriately screened by fences, walls or year-round planting and/or other suitable enclosures of a minimum height of four (4) feet. All outdoor storage areas shall be screened or enclosed.
7. Storage of trash or rubbish: Storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be completely screened, and all organic rubbish shall be contained in containers with tightly-fitting lids. No such storage shall be permitted within any required yard space.
8. Signs: Signs shall conform to Section 175-106.
9. Development plan required:
a. Prior to the issuance of a special permit, ten (10) copies of a development plan shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator for review by the Administrator, Planning Commission and Town Council.
b. The Development Plan shall contain the following data, together with supplementary data for a particular development, as deemed necessary by the Planning Commission or Town Council.
c. Development site information:
[1] A vicinity map at a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals two thousand (2,000) feet.
[2] A title insurance policy or attorney's certificate showing the owner or owners of the subject property, marketable title to the subject property in such owner or owners, the source of applicant's title or interest in the subject property and the place of record of the latest instrument in the chain of title for each parcel constituting the tract.
[3] Total area of the tract.
[4] Abutting street names, widths and route numbers.
[5] Owners, zoning districts and uses of each adjoining tract.
[6] A topographic map with minimum contour intervals and scale acceptable to the Administrator.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-213
[7] Development design information.
[8] A concept plan, illustrating the location and functional relationship between all proposed land uses.
[9] A land use plan or plans, showing the location and arrangement of all proposed land uses, including the height and number of all buildings both above and below finished grade; the building setbacks and yard areas from the development boundaries and adjacent streets, road and alleys and easements; the proposed traffic circulation pattern, including the location and width of all streets, driveways, walkways and entrances to parking areas; all off-street parking and loading areas; all proposed open space areas, including common open space, dedicated open space and developed recreational open space; and the approximate location of existing and proposed utility systems of sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water, electric, telephone and gas lines, along with any necessary easements.
[10] A plan or statement showing the location and design of all screening and indicating the type and height of such screening.
[11] Statements or plans relating to all covenants, restrictions and conditions pertaining to the use, maintenance and operation of common spaces, and the percentage of the tract to be used as open space.
[12] A statement in tabular form of the anticipated commercial floor area.
[13] When the development is to be constructed in stages or units, a sequence-of- development schedule showing the order of construction of each principal functional element of such stages or units, the approximate completion date for each stage or unit and a cost estimate of all improvements within each stage or unit.
[14] A plan or report indicating the extent, timing and estimated cost of all off-site improvements, such as road, sewer and drainage facilities, necessary to construct the proposed development, which plan or report shall relate to the sequence-of-development schedule if the development is to be constructed in stages or units.
[15] Where required by the Planning Commission, a traffic-impact analysis, showing the effect of traffic generated by the project on surrounding roads.
[16] Where required by the Planning Commission, a fiscal-impact analysis, listing Town revenue generated by the project and Town expenditures resulting from the construction of the project.
175-112 TOWNHOUSES (Site Plan Requirements)
All townhouses shall comply with the following regulations:
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-214
A. Area regulations shall be as follows:
1. Minimum lot size for townhouse construction: twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
2. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet.
B. Minimum width shall be as follows:
1. Minimum lot width for development: one hundred twenty-five (125) feet at setback line.
2. Minimum lot width per townhouse unit: twenty (20) feet.
a. In the case of a lot at the end of a row of townhouses, the lot width shall be forty (40) feet.
b. For corner lots at street intersections, the minimum lot width shall be fifty (50) feet.
C. Minimum yard requirements shall be as follows:
1. Front yard: forty (40) feet from the road right-of-way line. Required parking may be located in a front yard, but not closer than ten (10) feet to the ultimate street right-of-way and not closer than ten (10) feet to any townhouse unit.
2. Rear yard: forty (40) feet for each townhouse dwelling.
3. Side yard: twenty (20) feet for each end unit; thirty (30) feet for each corner lot at street intersections. When a townhouse abuts an R-1, or R-2 District, the side yard shall be thirty-five (35) feet.
D. Maximum building height shall be as follows:
1. Two and one-half (2) stories, but not to exceed thirty-five (35) feet.
E. Minimum parking space shall be as follows:
1. There shall be two (2) off-street parking spaces for each townhouse unit.
2. An off-street parking space shall be a minimum of ten by twenty (10 x 20) feet.
3. No parking space shall be located closer than ten (10) feet to any townhouse unit.
F. Other regulations for all townhouse construction:
1. There shall be no more than eight (8) townhouse units constructed in a continuous series.
2. Each dwelling shall be separated by a noncombustible party wall going through the roof, with a fire resistance of not less than two (2) hours duration.
3. Each townhouse shall front on a public or private street approved by the Town.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-215
4. Concrete curb and gutters shall be installed along both sides of all new streets within the development. However, should a new street act as a boundary for townhouse developments, curb and gutter need only be installed on the side of the street adjacent to the development.
5. Walkways of four (4) feet in width, constructed of concrete or brick, shall be installed from parking areas to all townhouse structures served by such parking areas.
6. The radii of cul-de-sac shall be at least fifty (50) feet. No more than twenty-five (25) dwelling units shall be located on any cul-de-sac.
7. Accessory buildings are not permitted, except that on any lot there may be an enclosed storage shed not exceeding seven (7) feet in height nor exceeding ten (10) feet in length by ten (10) feet in width.
8. A ten-foot easement along the side and rear of each townhouse structure shall be provided in addition to the side yard in all townhouse developments.
9. Variation in townhouse design. The facades of dwelling units in a townhouse structure shall be varied by changed front yards of not less than three (3) feet and variation in materials and design so that not more than four (4) abutting units will have the same front yard depth and the same or essentially the same architectural treatment of facades and rooflines. Balconies and roofed porches may encroach up to five (5) feet into the front yards.
10. As determined by the Planning Commission and approved of by the Town Council, parking, as shown on the site plan, may be permitted in the rear of properties and access to such spaces may be permitted over an alley.
G. Special regulations for townhouse developments of one (1) acre and over. For townhouse developments of one (1) acre or more, the following regulations shall apply in addition to those previously noted:
1. Parking areas shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from property lines of the development.
2. There shall be provided twenty-five hundredths (0.25) square feet of usable open space (not including parking or driveway areas) devoted to recreational use for every one (1) square foot of gross residential floor area. This space shall take the form of parks or play areas, etc. Usable open space shall not include front, rear or side yard areas of individual townhouse units.
3. Management of open space:
a. All open space shall be preserved for its intended purpose as expressed in the final site plan.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-216
b. Should the units be for rental purposes, the developer or rental agent shall be responsible for maintenance and management of open space.
c. Should the units be for sale, there shall be an establishment of a nonprofit association, corporation, trust or foundation of all individuals or corporations owning residential property within the planned development to ensure the maintenance of open spaces.
d. When the development is to administer open space through an association, nonprofit corporation, trust or foundation, said organization shall conform to the following requirements:
[1] The developer must establish the organization prior to the sale of any lots and/or units.
[2] Membership in the organization shall be mandatory for all residential property owners, present or future, within the planned community, and said organization shall not discriminate in its members or shareholders.
[3] The organization shall manage all open space and recreational and cultural facilities, shall provide for the maintenance, administration and operation of said land and improvements and any other common land within the planned community and shall secure adequate liability insurance on the land.
[4] The organization shall conform to the Condominium Act, Code of Virginia 1950, as amended.
4. The horizontal distance between groups of townhouses shall be:
a. Two (2) times the average height of the two (2) groups of townhouses for front or rear walls facing front or rear walls.
b. One and one-half (1 1/2) times the average height for front or rear walls facing side walls.
c. Equal to the height of the highest building for side walls facing side walls.
5. Access and service shall be provided in the front of each townhouse. Parking may be provided on the lot, as carports, as an integral part of the townhouse or a joint parking facility for a group of townhouses with such deed restrictions as are necessary to determine ownership and maintenance of common parking facilities and methods of assigning charges for maintenance, snow removal and repairs.
6. Usable open space devoted to recreational use as herein required shall be designed for use by tenants of the development and shall be improved and equipped by the developer in accordance with plans submitted and approved by the Town Planning Commission.
7. Screening shall be provided of sufficient height and density to screen the site from adjoining residential districts whether R-1 or R-2. A planting plan specifying type, size and location
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-217
of existing and proposed planting material shall be submitted with the application for the permit. Screening shall be at least six (6) feet in height.
8. Parking facilities:
a. Required parking spaces shall be provided on the same lot as the building served or within three hundred (300) feet of property. All parking shall be off-street.
b. All access drives shall be at least fifteen (15) feet from any building on the lot and from exterior lot lines.
c. Parking areas shall not be designed or located so as to require or encourage cars to back into a public street in order to leave the lot.
d. Entrance and exit ways to parking areas shall have a minimum width of twelve (12) feet for each lane of traffic entering or leaving the site, but shall at no time exceed thirty (30) feet in width at the point of intersection with the street.
(Amended “d” 8-14-98-Effective Upon Passage)
e. All dead-end parking lots shall be designed to provide sufficient back-up area for the end stalls of the parking area.
f. All access ways and parking areas shall be paved with a hard surface, a double-surface treatment or concrete covering.
g. Entrance and exit ways and interior access ways shall be designed so as to prevent the blocking of vehicles entering or leaving the site.
h. Any other requirements deemed necessary by the Planning Commission or Town Council for the public safety shall be complied with.
9. Drainage:
a. A storm runoff and drainage system shall be installed by the developer in accordance with sound engineering practice so as to adequately drain the project site, to adequately dispose of all runoff and drainage away from the project site and so as not to permit excess flow of water across streets or adjoining properties. Plans for such drainage systems shall be submitted with the application for the permit and shall be subject to approval by the Town Engineer, who may request assistance from other agencies.
b. All provisions of existing Town ordinances and regulations regarding storm drainage shall be complied with.
10. Lighting: Lighting for buildings, access ways and parking areas shall be so arranged as not to reflect toward public streets or cause any annoyance to building occupants or surrounding property owners or residents.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-218
11. Storage of trash and rubbish: Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be well screened on three (3) sides with evergreen plantings, and trash shall be contained in vermin-proof containers. Interior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall at all times be kept in an orderly and sanitary fashion.
12. Site plan review and approval: Site plans for new townhouses shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission and approved or rejected by the Town Council. Such plans shall be drawn in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 148.
(Amended “12” by adding “for new townhouses” 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
175-113 APARTMENTS
All apartment developments shall comply with the following regulations:
A. Area regulations: The minimum lot size for apartment developments is ten thousand (10,000) square feet for an apartment structure having three (3) units, with an additional two thousand (2,000) square feet of lot area for each additional unit above three (3).
B. The minimum lot width shall be one hundred twenty-five (125) feet at the setback line.
C. Minimum yard requirements shall be as follows:
1. Front yard: - forty (40) feet from road right-of-way. Required parking may be located in a front yard, but not closer than ten (10) feet to the ultimate street right-of-way.
2. Rear yard: - forty (40) feet.
3. Side yard: - thirty-five (35) feet on each side.
D. Maximum building height shall be three (3) stories, but not to exceed thirty-five (35) feet.
E. Other regulations for all apartment construction:
1. Each apartment structure and/or apartment parking area shall have parking areas on a dedicated public street or on an access easement meeting State Department of Transportation and Town standards.
2. Concrete curb and gutters shall be installed along both sides of all new streets within the development. However, should a new street act as a boundary for an apartment development, curb and gutter need only be installed on the side of the street adjacent to the development.
3. Walkways of four (4) feet in width, constructed of concrete or brick, shall be installed from parking areas to all apartment structures served by such parking areas.
4. The radii of cul-de-sac shall be at least fifty (50) feet. No more than twenty-five (25) dwelling units shall have sole principal access on any cul-de-sac.
5. Minimum parking space. There shall be two (2) off-street parking spaces for each unit. An off-street parking space shall be a minimum of ten by twenty (10 x 20) feet.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-219
F. Special regulations for apartment developments of one (1) acre and over. For apartment developments of one (1) acre or more, the following regulations shall apply in addition to those previously noted:
1. Parking areas shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from property lines of the development.
2. There shall be provided twenty-five hundredths (0.25) square feet of usable open space (not including parking or driveway areas) devoted to recreational use for every one (1) square foot of gross residential floor area. This space shall take the form of parks or play areas, etc.
3. Management of open space:
a. All open space shall be preserved for its intended purpose as expressed in the final site plan.
b. Should the units be for rental purposes, the developer or rental agent shall be responsible for maintenance and management of open space.
c. Should the units be for sale, there shall be an establishment of a nonprofit association, corporation, trust or foundation of all individuals or corporations owning residential property within the planned development to ensure the maintenance of open spaces.
d. When the development is to administer open space through an association, nonprofit corporation, trust or foundation, said organization shall conform to the following requirements:
[1] The developer must establish the organization prior to the sale of any lots.
[2] Membership in the organization shall be mandatory for all residential property owners, present or future, within the planned community, and said organization shall not discriminate in its members or shareholders.
[3] The organization shall manage all open space and recreational and cultural facilities, shall provide for the maintenance, administration and operation of said land and improvements and any other common land within the planned community and shall secure adequate liability insurance on the land.
[4] The organization shall conform to the Condominium Act, Code of Virginia 1950, as amended.
4. The horizontal distance between apartment structures shall be:
a. Two (2) times the average height of the two (2) groups of apartments for front or rear walls facing front or rear walls;
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-220
b. One and one-half (1 1/2) times the average height for front or rear walls facing side walls; and
c. Equal to the height of the highest building for side walls facing side walls.
5. Parking may be provided in a joint parking facility for a group of apartments with such deed restrictions as are necessary to determine ownership and maintenance of common parking facilities and methods of assigning charges for maintenance, snow removal and repairs.
6. Usable open space devoted to recreational use as herein required shall be designed for use by tenants of the development and shall be improved and equipped by the developer in accordance with plans submitted and approved by the Town Planning Commission and Town Council.
7. Screening shall be provided of sufficient height and density to screen the site from adjoining residential districts whether R-1 or R-2. A planting plan specifying type, size and location of existing and proposed planting material shall be submitted with the application for the permit. Screening shall be at least six (6) feet in height.
8. Parking facilities:
a. Number of spaces. Off-street parking, whether garage or on lot, shall be provided on the premises at the rate of two (2) spaces for each apartment unit.
b. Location. Required parking spaces shall be provided on the same lot as the building served.
c. All access drives shall be at least fifteen (15) feet from any building on the lot and from exterior lot lines.
d. Parking areas shall not be designed or located so as to require or encourage cars to back into a public street in order to leave the lot.
e. Entrance and exit ways to parking areas shall have a minimum width of twelve (12) feet for each lane of traffic entering or leaving the site, but shall at no time exceed thirty (30) feet in width at the street line.
f. All dead-end parking lots shall be designed to provide sufficient back-up area for the end stalls of the parking area.
g. All access ways and parking areas shall be paved with a hard-surface, double-surface treatment or concrete covering.
h. Entrance and exit ways and interior access ways shall be designed so as to prevent the blocking of vehicles.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-221
i. Any other requirements deemed necessary by the Planning Commission or Town Council for the public health and safety shall be complied with.
9. Drainage:
a. A storm runoff and drainage system shall be installed by the developer in accordance with sound engineering practice so as to adequately drain the project site, to adequately dispose of all runoff and drainage away from the project site and so as not to permit excess flow of water across streets or adjoining properties. Plans for such drainage system shall be submitted with the application for the permit and shall be subject to approval by the Town Engineer, who may seek assistance from other agencies.
b. All provisions of existing Town ordinances and regulations regarding storm drainage shall be complied with.
10. Lighting: Lighting for buildings, access ways and parking areas shall be so arranged as not to reflect toward public streets or cause any annoyance to building occupants or surrounding property owners or residents.
11. Storage of trash and rubbish: Exterior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall be well screened on three (3) sides with evergreen plantings and contained in vermin-proof containers. Interior storage areas for trash and rubbish shall at all times be kept in an orderly and sanitary fashion.
12. Site plan review and approval: Site plans for new apartment buildings shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission and approved or rejected by the Town Council. Such plan shall be drawn in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 148.
(Amended “12” by adding “for new apartment buildings” 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
175-114 – 122 (RESERVED)
174-123 MANUFACTURED HOMES
Manufactured homes shall not be permitted within the Town of Front Roya, except where authorized in the A-1 District, and for temporary trailer parks, as specified under this Chapter. New or replacement mobile homes, as defined, are not permitted in the Town.
(Amended by changing to “MANUFACTURED” 7-23-12-Effective Upon Passage)
NONCONFORMITY
(Amended 3-25-13-Effective Upon Passage)
175-124 CONTINUATION
A. Any legal use that was in operation, or any building or structure that legally existed prior to the effective adoption date of this chapter, that no longer conforms to the requirements of this chapter
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-222
at the effective adoption date, may be continued so long as the use, building and/or structure remains otherwise lawful. Such legally nonconforming uses, buildings and structures shall conform to all applicable laws in effect at the time when the use, building and/or structure was established.
B. If there is any change of ownership, possession, or lease, of any legally nonconforming use, building or structure, it may continue according to the requirements of this chapter.
C. When the boundaries of a district are changed, any uses, buildings, and/or structures, which become nonconforming as a result of such change, shall be subject to the provisions of this Chapter.
175-125 VESTED RIGHTS
Pursuant to §15.2-2307 of the Virginia Code, plans for the establishment of new uses, buildings and/or structure may proceed, despite if the requirements of this chapter are not complied with, if a vested right is determined by the Zoning Administrator, after concurrence with the Town Attorney.
175-126 DISCONTINUANCE
If any legally nonconforming use is discontinued for a period exceeding two (2) years after the enactment of this chapter, it shall be deemed abandoned, and any use thereafter shall conform to the use requirements of this chapter.
175-127 PARKING EXEMPTION FOR THE REUSE OF EXISTING PROPERTIES
Regardless of Section 175-126, the reuse of properties with existing parking areas and/or loading spaces shall be exempt from the requirement to comply with the current parking area and loading space requirements of this Chapter, or Chapter 148; provided that, the following conditions are met.
1. A zoning permit was previously issued by the Town on the property for a business (commercial) or industrial use.
2. Town Council may require site improvements when a special use permit is required.
3. The number of existing parking spaces shall not be reduced for display or other purposes.
4. When the existing parking area and/or loading spaces are in disrepair, the Zoning Administrator may require the following types of maintenance improvements at the time of issuance of a zoning permit:
a. Additional landscaping.
b. The demarcation of existing parking spaces by striping, restriping, wheel stops, or signage.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-223
c. The resurfacing of the existing surface material.
175-128 NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD
A. Except as hereinafter provided, the minimum lot width and lot area shall be required for the establishment of any new lot, or use of a lot, in the R-1 Residential District. Wherever possible, the consolidation of existing nonconforming lots is encouraged to meet the minimum lot size requirements. All new construction shall conform to the yard dimensions and all other regulations for the R-1 Residential District.
1. The Administrator may issue an administrative variance of up to twenty percent (20%) of the required lot width and/or area, where it is found that the proposed new construction is consistent with the structure size, orientation and pattern of development on the street and in the immediate neighborhood.
2. On lots with an area or lot width of less than eighty percent (80%) of the minimum required, approval for construction may be granted by special permit by the Town Council, where the Council finds the application meets the following conditions:
a. The proposed structure has a finished floor area of not less than ninety percent (90%) of the amount of finished floor area prevalent in comparative homes. Finished floor areas do not include basement areas.
b. The proposed structure is compatible with comparative homes in terms of building orientation, scale, proportion and site layout.
c. The site grading provides for adequate drainage on and off the site, without any adverse impact onto adjoining properties.
3. For the purpose of this section, comparative homes shall mean characteristics that are present in at least sixty percent (60%) of the homes located on both sides of the street in the immediate block where the proposed structure is located.
4. The Council may approve a reduction of the side yard requirement, by not more than forty percent (40%), where necessary, to achieve increased compatibility with other structures in the immediate block.
(Amended “A” 1-10-2000-Effective Upon Passage)
B. In any other residential district, a single dwelling may be erected on any single lot of record, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this chapter. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for lot area and/or lot width, that are generally applicable in the district, provided that yard dimensions shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. All other uses, except a single dwelling, are required to meet the minimum lot area requirements for the district in which it is located.
C. In any commercial or industrial district, a permitted structure may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, notwithstanding
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-224
limitations imposed by other provisions of this chapter. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for lot area and/or lot width, that are generally applicable in the district, provided that yard dimensions shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located.
D. In any nonconforming lot of record contains a conforming use and/or structure, such use and/or structure may be replaced in the area of the preexisting use and/or structure should damage or destruction occur. Expansion of said use and/or structure may occur within the limits of this chapter.
E. Except as otherwise noted herein, a variance of yard requirements may be obtained only through action of the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(Amended Section 7-26-99-Effective Upon Passage ; Amended “E” 1-10-2000-Effective Upon Passage)
175-129 CHANGES OF USE
A nonconforming use, if changed to a conforming use, shall not thereafter be changed back to any nonconforming use. A nonconforming use may, by special permit, be changed to another nonconforming use, provided that the Town Council shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate in the zoning district than the existing nonconforming use.
(Amended Entire Section/Title and Removed (A-D) 3-25-13-Effective Upon Passage)
175-130 EXPANSIONS AND OTHER TYPES OF ALTERATIONS
A. Except by approval of a special use permit by Town Council, a nonconforming use, building or structure shall not be enlarged, increased or extended to occupy a greater area of land area than was occupied at the effective date of adoption of this chapter unless such expansion conforms to the requirements of this chapter.
B. New nonconforming structures or buildings shall not be erected in connection with a nonconforming use of land.
C. A nonconforming building or structure may be enlarged if the expansion does not create a new nonconformity, and does not increase the degree or intensity of the existing nonconformity, as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
D. A nonconforming structure or building shall not be moved, for any distance or reason, unless it shall thereafter conform to the zoning district regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved.
(Amended Section/Title and Added “D” 3-25-13-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-225
175-131 REPLACEMENT, REMOVAL, REPAIR AND RECONSTRUCTION
A. If a nonconforming use of land is damaged or destroyed, such use may be replaced to the extent to which it existed prior to said damage or destruction. Removal or destruction of a building or structure in which a nonconforming use was located shall eliminate the use which the structure or building was used for (a nonconforming use).
B. Nonconforming buildings and structures that are damaged by a natural event or man-made accident may be repaired and/or reconstructed to their previous condition and size if the work does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the replacement value.
C. Town Council may approve a special use permit for the repair and/or reconstruction of a building or structure beyond 50% of the market value, provided that the special use permit application is submitted within twelve (12) months of said damage or destruction. Otherwise, when the repair and/or reconstruction work to a nonconforming building or structure exceeds 50% of the market value, it may only be repaired and/or reconstructed to the requirements of this chapter, as applicable for new construction.
D. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any structure or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official
(Amended Section/Title and Added “D” 3-25-13-Effective Upon Passage)
175-132 PERCENT OF DAMAGE
The cost of land or any factors other than the cost of the structure are excluded in the determination of fair market value for the purpose of calculating the percent of damage. Such percentage shall be determined by the Building Official.
(Amended Section 3-25-13-Effective Upon Passage)
175-133 USES UNDER SPECIAL PERMIT PROVISIONS
Any use which is permitted by a special permit in a zoning district under the terms of this chapter (other than a change through the Town Council action from one nonconforming use to another nonconforming use) shall not be deemed a nonconforming use in such zoning district, but shall without further action be considered a conforming use.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
175-134 ZONING PERMITS
A. No buildings, structures or uses shall be started, reconstructed, enlarged or substantially altered until after a zoning permit has been obtained from the Administrator. Zoning permits may be waived by the Zoning Administrator for minor repairs and alterations of existing structures.
(Amended “A” 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-226
B. Each application for a zoning permit shall be accompanied by three (3) copies of an adequately dimensioned drawing unless as otherwise specified. The drawing shall show the size, shape and dimensions of the parcel of land on which the building is to be constructed, as surveyed and prepared by a licensed surveyor or registered architect, the nature of the proposed use of the building or land, the location and arrangement of off-street parking, the location of such building or use with respect to the property line of said parcel of land and to the right-of-way of any street or highway adjoining said parcel of land, the developers drainage plan for properly distributing surface water and additional information as required by this chapter. Such dimensional drawing shall be prepared by a licensed surveyor or a registered engineer or architect for new main building. Any other information which the Administrator may deem necessary for the consideration of the application may be required. If the proposed building or use is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, a permit shall be issued to the applicant by the Administrator. One (1) copy of the drawing shall be returned to the applicant with the permit. The required dimensional drawing is not required for applicants who have submitted site plans in accordance with Chapter 148. (Amended “B” 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
175-134.1 FOUNDATION LOCATION INSPECTIONS
A. For the purpose of this section, a "foundation" shall be defined as that portion of the building consisting of the footers, slab, block, concrete or other building materials constructed under and upon the ground and rising no more than three (3) feet above grade.
B. No building or structure shall be constructed beyond the foundation stage until such time as the foundation location has been inspected and approved by the Administrator. Upon construction of a foundation, the builder shall submit to the Zoning Administrator and the Building Inspector a plat prepared by a certified land surveyor certifying the location of the foundation and all structural projections therefrom upon the property. The Zoning Administrator shall respond within ten (10) days. In the event that the foundation is in its proper location as shown on the zoning permit and all building setbacks and area requirements have been met, the Zoning Administrator shall mark the plat approved. If the plat is rejected, the Zoning Administrator shall give to the builder a written basis for the rejection.
C. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued without a foundation location survey plat marked approved by the Zoning Administrator.
D. The provisions of this section shall not apply to accessory buildings, as defined in Section 175-3, with an area of two hundred (200) square feet or less. Furthermore, the Zoning Administrator may waive the foundation location survey where previous surveys adequately demonstrate that the new building or addition, as proposed by the zoning permit application, will comply with the required setbacks.
(Added Section 12-10-90-Effective Upon Passage ; Amended “D” 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
175-135 CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY
Land may be used or occupied and buildings structurally altered or erected may be used or changed in use only after certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Administrator. Such a permit shall state that the building or the proposed use or the use of the land complies with the provisions
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-227
of this chapter. A similar certificate shall be issued for the purpose of maintaining, renewing, changing or extending a nonconforming use. A certificate of occupancy either for the whole or a part of a building shall be applied for simultaneously with the application for a zoning permit. The permit shall be issued within ten (10) days after the erection or structural alteration of such building or part has conformed with the provisions of this chapter.
175-136 SPECIAL USE PERMITS
A. Where uses are permitted by special permit, the location and beginning of operation of such uses shall require, in addition to the zoning permit and certificate of occupancy, a special use permit. The issuance of these permits shall be subject to such conditions as are required in this chapter and such conditions as are deemed necessary by the Front Royal Town Council, after recommendations of the Front Royal Planning Commission. At a minimum, a special use permit may only be permitted, when Town Council determines that the use (i) is not detrimental to the overall health, safety and general welfare of the public, (ii) does not conflict with the Comprehensive Plan, (iii) is substantially compatible with surrounding land uses, and (iv) complies with laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia. Application for a special use permit shall be made to the Zoning Administrator, and a public hearing shall be held in accordance with the provisions of Virginia Code §15.2-2204 or §15.2-2286. Special use permits are not transferable to another party. In the event that a special use request is denied, the same special use request, or substantially the same special use request, shall not be considered by the Town Council or the Board of Zoning Appeals for a period of one (1) year from the date on which the special use permit request was denied.
B. New special use permit applications shall include the submission of a preliminary site development plan to be reviewed in concurrence with the special use permit application. No special use permit application may be authorized to operate until a final site development plan is approved.
(Amended Section 11-13-89, 2-22-99, 7-23-12-Effective Upon Passage)
(Added “B” 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
175-137 FEES, CHARGES AND EXPENSES
A. The Town Council hereby establishes the following schedule of fees, charges, and expenses for zoning permits, certificates of use, special permits, variances, appeals, amendments and other matters pertaining to this chapter.
For processing an Administrative Variance - $100.00
For processing a Board of Architectural Review request –
- Administrative Review: $50.00
- Board of Architectural Review: $100.00
- Demolition of Historically Significant Structure: $200.00
For processing a Board of Zoning Appeals application - $400.00
For issuing a Certificate of Compliance - $25.00
For processing an application to amend the Comprehensive Plan - $400.00
For processing an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance - $400.00
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-228
For processing a Rezoning application –
- 1 acre or less: $500.00
- Over 1 acre: $500.00 + $100.00 per acre over 1st acre
- Downzoning: $400.00
Proffer amendment or Concept Plan/Master Land Use Plan Revision - $400.00
For processing an application for a Sign Permit –
- Permanent: $50.00
- Permanent (Entrance Corridor): $75.00
- Temporary: $25.00
- Relocation of previously approved sign: no charge for review
Requested Re-advertisement - $200.00 per meeting
For processing an application for a Special Use Permit - $400.00
For a Zoning Permit, Commercial Accessories/Additions - $100.00
For a Zoning Permit, Residential Accessories/Additions - $25.00
For a Zoning Permit, Multi-Family Residential Dwelling - $50.00 per unit
For a Zoning Permit, New Commercial - $100.00
For a Zoning Permit, New Single-Family Residential Dwelling - $75.00
For a Zoning Permit, Portable Storage Container (Residential or Commercial) - $25.00 each
For a Zoning Permit, Fences (for all uses) - $25.00
Construction or Land Disturbance Activity without a Permit – double zoning permit regular fee
Requested Copies –
- Letter Paper Size: $0.15 per sheet (b&w) or $2.00 per sheet (color)
- Legal Paper Size: $0.50 per sheet (b&w) or $2.50 per sheet (color)
- 11” x 17” Paper Size: $0.75 per sheet (b&w) or $3.50 per sheet (color)
- Bond Paper for over 11” x 17” Sizes: $0.50 per s.f. (b&w) or $3.00 per s.f. (color)
- Copy of Zoning Ordinance: $15.00
- Copy of the Comprehensive Plan (each): $20.00
(Amended “A” 6-11-12-Effective 7-1-12 ; Added “Fences” 4-22-19-Effective 7-1-19)
(Removed “Business License Zoning Clearance” 6-8-20-Effective 7-1-20)
B. Until all application fees, charges and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal.
C. Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests for available information shall be submitted to the appropriate department that maintains the records sought for processing. Any request for records or documents from the Town is considered a FOIA request. All FOIA requests shall be communicated by the Department of the Town Manager and Town Attorney. FOIA regulations allow the Town to assess a reasonable charge for the costs to access, search, duplicate, and supply the requested materials if they exist. The Town shall not assess fees if staff time is less than thirty (30) minutes and ten pages of 8 ½ x 11 paper. An individual requesting materials through a FOIA request will be notified as soon as practicably possible. The Town shall conform to all FOIA regulations established by the Commonwealth of Virginia to ensure access to all available Town documents.
(Amended Section 7-28-08-Effective Upon Passage)
(Added “C” 6-11-12-Effective 7-1-12 ; Amended “C” 1-28-13-Effective Upon Passage
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-229
175-138 MEMBERSHIP AND TERMS OF OFFICE OF BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
A. A Board consisting of five (5) Town residents shall be appointed by the Circuit Court of the county. Members of the Board shall each be compensated in an amount determined by the Town Council. Members shall be removable malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance, upon written charges and after public hearing. Appointments for vacancies occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall in all cases be for the unexpired term.
(Amended 7-13-98-Effective Upon Passage)
B. The term of office shall be for five (5) years, except that, of the first five (5) members appointed, one (1) shall serve for five (5) years, one for four (4) years, one for three (3) years, one for two (2) years and one for one (1) year. One (1) of the five (5) appointed members may be an active member of the Planning Commission.
C. Members may be removed for cause by the appointing authority upon written charges and after a public hearing held after at least fifteen (15) days notice.
D. Any member of the Board shall be disqualified to act upon a matter before the Board with respect to property in which the member has an interest.
E. The Board shall choose annually, from its own membership, its own Chairman, Vice Chairman, who shall act in the absence of the Chairman, and Secretary.
175-139 POWERS OF BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the following powers and duties:
A. To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision and determination made by an administrative officer in the administration or enforcement of this chapter.
B. To authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, such variance from the terms of the chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest when, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions will result in unnecessary hardship, provided that the spirit of the chapter shall be observed and substantial justice done, as follows:
1. When a property owner can show that his property was acquired in good faith and where, by reason of the exceptional narrowness, shallowness, size or shape of a specific piece of property at the time of the effective date of the chapter, or where, by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary situation or condition of the piece of property, or of the condition, situation, or development of property immediately adjacent thereto, the strict application of the terms of the chapter would effectively prohibit or unreasonably restrict the use of the property, or where the Board is satisfied, upon the evidence heard by it, that the granting of such variance will alleviate a clearly demonstrable hardship, as distinguished from a special privilege or convenience sought by the applicant, provided that all variances shall be in harmony with the intended spirit and purpose of the chapter.
(Amended “1” 9-25-00-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-230
(Amended by removing “approaching confiscation” 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
2. No such variance shall be authorized by the Board, unless it finds:
a. That the strict application of the chapter would produce undue hardship.
b. That such hardship is not shared generally by other properties in the same zoning district and the same vicinity.
c. That the authorization of such variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property and that the character of the district will not be changed by the granting of the variance.
3. No such variance shall be authorized except after notice and hearing as required by Section 15. 2-2204 of the Code of Virginia as amended.
(Amended Va Code References 9-25-00-Effective Upon Passage)
4. No variance shall be authorized unless the Board finds that the condition or situation of the property concerned or the intended use of the property is not of so general or recurring a nature as to make reasonably practicable the formulation of a general regulation to be adopted as an amendment to the chapter.
5. In authorizing a variance, the Board may impose such conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed structure or use as it may deem necessary in the public interest and may require a guaranty or bond to insure that the conditions imposed are being and will continue to be complied with.
6. In the event that a variance is not granted, the same variance application, or a variance application that is substantially the same, may not be submitted to the Board for consideration for a period of one (1) year from the date on which the variance request was denied.
(Added “6” 11-13-89-Effective Upon Passage)
C. To hear and decide appeals from the decision of the Zoning Administrator.
D. To hear and decide applications for interpretation of the district map where there is any uncertainty as to the location of a district boundary. Public hearings after appropriate notice must be held prior to such adjustments. The Board shall not have the power to change substantially the locations of district boundaries as established by this chapter. The Board shall not have the power to rezone property.
175-140 RULES AND REGULATIONS OF THE BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
A. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall adopt such rules and regulations as it may consider necessary.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-231
B. The meeting of the Board shall be held at the call of its Chairman or at such time as a quorum of the Board may determine.
C. The Chairman or, in his absence, the Acting Chairman may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
D. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact. It shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Board and shall be a public record.
E. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public.
F. A quorum shall be at least three (3) members.
G. A favorable vote of three (3) members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any administrative official or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which the Board is required to pass.
175-141 APPEALS TO BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
A. An appeal to the Board may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the county or municipality affected by any decision of the Zoning Administrator. Such appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) days after the decision appealed from by filing with the Zoning Administrator and with the Board a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Board that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order granted by the Board or by a court of record, on application and on notice to the Zoning Administrator, and for good cause shown.
B. From notices of violation for temporary or seasonal commercial uses, parking of commercial trucks in residential districts or similar short-term, recurring violations, as determined by the Zoning Administrator, an appeal shall be filed within ten (10) days of the date of receipt of such notice of violation.
(Amended Section/Added “B” 9-25-00-Effective Upon Passage)
175-142 APPEAL PROCEDURE
Appeals shall be mailed to the Board of Zoning Appeals in care of the Zoning Administrator, and a copy of the appeal shall be mailed to the Secretary of the Planning Commission. A third copy shall be mailed to the individual, official, department or agency concerned, if any.
175-143 PUBLIC HEARING OF APPLICATION FOR APPEAL
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-232
The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an application or appeal, give public notice thereof as well as due notice to the parties in interest and decide the same within sixty (60) days. In exercising its powers, the Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify an order, requirement, decision or determination of an administrative officer or decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this chapter or effect any variance from the chapter. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings and other official actions, which shall be filed in the office of the Board and shall be public records. The Chairman of the Board or, in his absence, the Acting Chairman may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
175-144 APPEAL OF DECISION OF BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
A. Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals, or any taxpayer or any officer, department, board or bureau of the municipality, may present to the Circuit Court of the county a petition specifying the grounds on which aggrieved within thirty (30) days after the filing of the decision in the office of the Board.
B. Upon the presentation of such petition, the Court shall allow a writ of certiorari to review the decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals and shall prescribe therein the time within which a return thereto must be made and served upon the relator's attorney, which shall not be less than ten (10) days and may be extended by the Court. The allowance of the writ shall not stay proceedings upon the decision appealed from; but, the Court may, on application, on notice to the Board and on due cause shown, grant a restraining order.
C. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall not be required to return the original papers acted upon by it, but shall be sufficient to return certified or sworn copies thereof or of such portions thereof as may be called for by such writ. The return shall concisely set forth such other facts as may be pertinent and material to show the grounds of the decision appealed from and shall be verified.
D. If, upon the hearing, it shall appear to the Court that testimony is necessary for the proper disposition of the matter, it may take evidence or appoint a Commissioner to take such evidence as it may direct and report the same to the Court with his findings of fact and conclusions of law, which shall constitute a part of the proceedings upon which the determination of the Court shall be made. The Court may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision brought up for review.
E. Costs shall not be allowed against the Board, unless it shall appear to the Court that it acted in bad faith or with malice in making the decision appealed from.
175-145 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
A. All departments, officials and public employees of this jurisdiction which are vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall conform to the provisions of this chapter. They shall issue permits for uses, buildings or purposes only when they are in harmony with the provisions of this chapter. Any such permit, if issued in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, shall be null and void.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-233
B. Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employed or otherwise, violating, causing or permitting the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, may be fined up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.). Such person, firm or corporation shall be deemed to be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during which any portion of any violation of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm or corporation and shall be punishable as herein provided.
175-146 AMENDMENTS
The regulations, restrictions and boundaries established in this chapter may, from time to time, be amended, supplemented, changed, modified or repealed by a favorable majority of votes of the Town Council, provided that:
A. A public hearing shall be held in relation thereto at which the parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard.
B. Notices shall be given of the time and place of such hearings by publication in at least two (2) issues of some newspaper having a general circulation in the jurisdiction. Such notice shall be presented in accordance with Section 15.2-2204, Code of Virginia, as amended. After enactment of any such amendment, further publication shall not be required.
(Amended VA Code References 9-25-00-Effective Upon Passage)
C. When a proposed amendment of the Zoning Ordinance involves a change in the zoning classification of twenty-five (25)or less parcels of land, then, in addition to the advertising as above required, written notice shall be given by the Commission at least five (5) days before the hearing to the owner or owners, their agent or the occupant of each parcel involved and to the owners, their agent or the occupant of all abutting property and property immediately across the street or road from the property affected. In any county or municipality where notice is required under the provisions of this section, notice shall be given to the owner, their agent or the occupant of all abutting property and property immediately across the street from the property affected which lies in an adjoining county or municipality of the commonwealth. Notice sent by registered or certified mail to the last known address of such owner as shown on the current real estate tax assessment books shall be deemed adequate compliance with this requirement. If the hearing is continued, notice shall be remailed. Whenever the notices required hereby are sent by an agency, department or division of the local governing body, such notices may be sent by first class mail; provided, however, that a representative of such agency, department or division shall make affidavit that such mailings have been made and file such affidavit with the papers in the case. Costs of any notice required under this section shall be taxed to the applicant.
D. Changes shall be made by the governing body in the Zoning Ordinance or the Zoning Map only after such changes have been referred to the Planning Commission for its recommendations. Action shall be taken by the governing body only after a report has been received from the Planning Commission, unless a period of ninety (90) days has elapsed after the date of the first regular meeting of the Commission after the proposed amendment has been referred to the Commission, after which time it may be assumed the Commission has approved the
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-234
change or amendment. No land may be zoned to a more intensive use classification than was contained in the public notice without an additional public hearing after notice as required herein.
(Amended “D” 1-8-07-Effective Upon Passage)
E. Individual property owners may petition the governing body to have their property rezoned by submitting their request in writing to the Administrator. The application for rezoning shall be accompanied by a Phase I environmental site assessment based on the anticipated use of the property proposed for rezoning that meets generally accepted national standards for such assessments, such as those developed by the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM), and Phase II environmental site assessments, that also meet accepted national standards, such as, but not limited to, those developed by ASTM, if the Town deems such to be reasonably necessary, based on the findings of the Phase I assessment, and in accordance with the regulations of the United States Environmental Protection Agency and ASTM; provided, however, that where the applicant clearly demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Director of Planning and Zoning that there will be no land disturbing activity as a consequence of the proposed rezoning, the requirement for a Phase I environmental site assessment may be waived in writing of such absence of land disturbing activity. An applicant shall disclose and remediate any contamination and other adverse environmental conditions of property revealed by such environmental assessment, prior to the approval of subdivision and development plans.
After proper public hearing, the Planning Commission shall make its recommendation to the Town Council, who will then act upon the applicant's request. If the Planning Commission makes no recommendation within ninety (90) days from the date of referral, the Council may assume that the Commission concurs with the applicant.
175-147 ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL
The Director of Planning shall be designated as the Zoning Administrator, and have all necessary authority for the enforcement and administration of the zoning, ordinance. The Zoning Officer, or other individual as appointed by the Town Manager, shall serve as the deputy of the Zoning Administrator.
(Amended Section 4-19-99-Effective Upon Passage)
175-147.1 ADMINISTRATIVE VARIANCES
The Zoning Administrator is authorized to grant a variance from the requirements contained in Subsections 175-15(C), 175-18.5(E), 175-24(C) and 175-34(C), if the Zoning Administrator finds in writing that:
A. The strict application of the ordinance would produce undue hardship or prove impractical due to topographic, architectural or other unusual conditions;
B. Such hardship is not shared generally by other properties in the same zoning district and the same vicinity; and
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-235
C. The authorization of the variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property and the character of the zoning district will not be changed by the granting of the variance.
(Added Section 2-26-01-Effective Upon Passage)
175-148 EFFECT ON PERMITS ISSUED PRIOR TO ADOPTION
Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the plans or construction of any building or structure for which a permit was granted prior to the effective date of this chapter. However, such construction must commence within thirty (30) days after this chapter becomes effective and be completed within a period of one (1) year after construction is initiated. If construction is discontinued for a period of six (6) months or more, further construction shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter for the district in which the operation is located.
175-149 CONDITIONAL ZONING PROFFERS IN REZONING APPLICATIONS
A. Owners of land making applications to the Town of Front Royal for a zoning reclassification of their land in the Town of Front Royal may voluntarily proffer in writing, as part of the rezoning petition, certain conditions related to the future physical development and/or physical operation of the land to be rezoned, subject to the following requirements:
1. The rezoning of the land must itself give rise for the need for the conditions.
2. The conditions must have a reasonable relation to the rezoning of the land.
3. The conditions shall not include a cash contribution to the Town of Front Royal.
4. The conditions shall not include a mandatory dedication of real or personal property for open space, parks, schools, fire departments or other public facilities which are not otherwise provided for in Virginia Code 15.2-2241.
(Amended VA Code Reference 9-25-00-Effective Upon Passage)
5. The conditions shall not include payment for or construction of off-site improvements, except those provided for in Virginia Code Section 15.2-2241.
(Amended VA Code Reference 9-25-00-Effective Upon Passage)
6. No conditions shall be proffered that are not related to the physical development or physical operation of the property to be rezoned.
7. All conditions shall be in conformity with the Comprehensive Plan of the Town of Front Royal.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-236
8. All conditions shall be in writing and shall be submitted to the Town of Front Royal as part of the rezoning petition prior to public hearing before the governing body.
(Amended “8” by adding “governing body” 9-25-00-Effective Upon Passage)
B. Once proffered and accepted as part of an amendment to this chapter, the conditions shall continue in full force and effect until a subsequent amendment changes the zoning on the property covered by the conditions; provided, however, that such conditions shall continue if the subsequent amendment is part of a comprehensive implementation of a new or substantially revised Zoning Ordinance.
C. The Zoning Administrator shall administer and enforce the conditions attached to a rezoning or amendment to the Zoning Map, * including:
1. The ordering in writing of the remedy of any noncompliance with the conditions.
2. The bringing of legal action to ensure compliance with such conditions, including injunction, abatement or other appropriate action or proceeding.
3. Requiring a guaranty, satisfactory to the governing body, in an amount sufficient for and conditioned upon the construction of any physical improvements required by the conditions, or a contract for the construction of such improvements and the contractor's guaranty, in like amount and so conditioned, which guaranty shall be reduced or released by the governing body, or agent thereof, upon the submission of satisfactory evidence that construction of such improvements has been completed in whole or in part.
D. The failure to meet all conditions shall constitute cause to deny the issuance of any of the required use, occupancy or building permits as may be appropriate.
E. The Zoning Map shall show by an appropriate symbol on the map the existence of conditions attached to zoning. The Zoning Administrator shall keep in his office and make available for public inspection a conditional zoning index. The index shall provide ready access to the ordinance creating conditions in addition to the regulations provided for in a particular zoning district or zone.
(Added Section 9-9-85-Effective Upon Passage)
175-150 CONDITIONAL ZONING PROFFERS IN REZONING APPLICATIONS; HIGH GROWTH PERIODS
As provided in Virginia Code Section 15.2-2298, notwithstanding any contrary provisions in Front Royal Town Code Section 175-149, the provisions of this section shall apply during periods wherein the Town and/or County of Warren has had a population growth of ten percent (10%) or more from the next-to-latest decennial census year, based on population reported by the United States Bureau of the Census, or during periods when Warren County is contiguous with at least three (3) counties which have experienced ten-percent population growth or more as described herein.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-237
(Amended VA Code Reference and Other Amendments 9-25-00-Effective Upon Passage)
(Amended by Adding “Town and/or” 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
A. Owners of land making application to the Town of Front Royal for a zoning reclassification of their land in the Town of Front Royal may voluntarily proffer in writing, as part of the rezoning petition, certain conditions, subject to the following requirements:
1. The rezoning of the land must itself give rise to the need for the conditions.
2. The conditions must have a reasonable relation to the rezoning of the land.
3. All conditions shall be in conformity with the Comprehensive Plan for the Town of Front Royal.
4. The conditions may include a cash contribution to the Town of Front Royal or contributions of personal property and services.
5. The conditions may include dedication of real property for open space, parks, schools, fire departments or their public facilities.
6. The conditions may include payment for or construction of off-site improvements.
7. All conditions shall be in writing and shall be submitted to the Town of Front Royal as part of the rezoning application prior to public hearing before the governing body.
(Amended “7” by adding “governing body” 9-25-00-Effective Upon Passage)
8. All applicable requirements of the Virginia Code shall be complied with, including, but not limited to, the requirements of §15.2-2298.
(Amended by adding “8” 6-22-15-Effective Upon Passage)
B. No proffer shall be accepted under this section unless and until the Town has adopted a capital improvement program. In the event that the proffered conditions include a dedication of real property or payment of cash, such property shall not transfer and such payment of cash shall not be made until the facilities for which such property is dedicated or such cash is tendered are included in the capital improvement program. However, the Town may accept proffered conditions which are not normally included in the capital improvement program. Proffered conditions shall provide for the disposition of dedicated property or cash payments in the event that said property or cash payments are not used for the purposes for which they are proffered.
C. Once preferred and accepted as part of an amendment to this chapter, the conditions shall continue in full force and effect until a subsequent amendment changes zoning of the property covered by the conditions; provided, however, that such conditions shall continue if the subsequent amendment is part of a comprehensive implementation of a new or substantially revised Zoning Ordinance.
Chapter 175 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 175
175-238
D. The Zoning Administrator shall administer and enforce the conditions attached to a rezoning or amendment to the Zoning Map, including:
1. Ordering by written notice the remedy of any noncompliance with zoning conditions.
2. Bringing legal action to ensure compliance with such conditions, including injunction, abatement or other appropriate action or proceeding.
3. Requiring a guaranty satisfactory to the governing body in an amount sufficient for and conditioned upon the construction of any physical improvements required by the zoning conditions or a contract for the construction of such improvements and the contractor's guaranty in like amount and so conditioned, which guaranty shall be reduced or released by the governing body or agent thereof upon the submission of satisfactory evidence that the construction of such improvements has been completed, in whole or in part.
E. The failure to meet all conditions shall constitute cause to deny the issuance of any required use, occupancy or building permit as may be appropriate.
F. The Zoning Map shall show by an appropriate symbol on the map the existence of conditions attached to zoning. The Zoning Administrator shall keep in his office and make available for public inspection a Conditional zoning index. This index shall provide ready access to the ordinance creating conditions in addition to the regulations provided for in a particular zoning district or zone.
G. The Zoning Administrator shall record in the deed book records of the Office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Warren County a certificate with the name of the property owner and a description of the property and indicating that the property is subject to conditional zoning as shown on the Town of Front Royal Zoning Map.
(Added Entire Section 8-28-89-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-1
Chapter 180
CABLE TELEVISION
(Adopted 4-8-63 as Television Antenna Cable, Inc. aka TELACO, Inc.-Effective Upon Passage)
(Renewed 11-10-75 as TELACO, Inc.-Effective Upon Passage)
(Renewed 9-30-85 as TELACO, Inc.-Effective Upon Passage)
(Renewed as Adelphia Cable Communication 5-12-03-Effective Upon Passage)
(Renewed 10-28-19 as Comcast of California/Maryland/Pennsylvania/Virginia/West Virginia, LLC-Retro-Effective May 13, 2018)
180-181 COMCAST CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE AGREEMENT
(Comcast of California/Maryland/Pennsylvania/Virginia/West Virginia LLC)
This nonexclusive Cable Franchise Agreement (hereinafter, the "Agreement" or "Franchise Agreement") is made between the Town of Front Royal, VA, a political subdivision of the Commonwealth of Virginia (hereinafter, "Town") and Comcast of California/Maryland/Pennsylvania/ Virginia/West Virginia, LLC (hereinafter, "Franchisee").
The Town, having determined that the financial, legal and technical ability of the Franchisee is reasonably sufficient to provide the services, facilities and equipment necessary to meet the future cable-related needs of the community, desires to enter into this negotiated Franchise Agreement with the Franchisee for the construction, operation and maintenance of a Cable System on the terms and conditions set forth herein. In furtherance thereof, at its Regular Meeting of October 28, 2019, the Town, after proper notice and public hearing, enacted an ordinance authorizing this Franchise Agreement.
SECTION 1 - DEFINITION OF TERMS
For the purpose of this Franchise Agreement, capitalized terms, phrases, words, and abbreviations shall have the following meanings:
"ACT" means the Communications Act of 1934.
"AFFILIATE", in relation to any Person, means another Person who owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with, such Person, but, in relation to Franchisee, does not include affiliated entities that are not involved with the use, management, operation, construction, repair and/or maintenance of Cable Systems.
"BASIC SERVICE TIER" means the service tier that includes (i) the retransmission of local television broadcast channels and (ii) public, educational, and governmental channels as required by applicable law to be carried in the basic tier.
“CABLE ACT” shall mean the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended from time to time, 47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq,
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-2
"CABLE OPERATOR" means any Person or group of Persons that (A) provides Cable Service over a Cable System and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such Cable System or (B) otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of a Cable System. Cable Operator does not include a provider of wireless or direct-to-home satellite transmission service, unless that provider otherwise qualifies as a Cable Operator.
"CABLE SERVICE" means the one-way transmission to Subscribers of (i) video programming or (ii) other programming service, and Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service. Cable service does not include any video programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 U.S.C.§ 332(d).
"CABLE SYSTEM" or "SYSTEM” means any facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is designed to provide Cable Service that includes video programming and that is provided to multiple Subscribers within a community, except that such definition shall not include (i) a system that serves fewer than 20 Subscribers; (ii) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; (iii) a facility that serves only Subscribers without using any public right-of-way; (iv) a facility of a common carrier that is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, 47 USC§ 201 et seq., except that such facility shall be considered a Cable System to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to Subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; (v) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric systems; (vi) or any portion of a System that serves fewer than 50 Subscribers in any locality, where such portion is part of a larger System franchised in an adjacent locality; or (vii) an open video system that complies with§ 653 of Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, 47 U.S.C. § 573.
"CUSTOMER" or "SUBSCRIBER" means a Person or user of the Cable System who lawfully receives Cable Service therefrom with the Franchisee's express permission.
"EFFECTIVE DATE" means May 13th, 2018.
"FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission or successor governmental entity thereto.
"FORCE MAJEURE" means an event or events reasonably beyond the ability of Franchisee to anticipate and control. "Force majeure" includes, but is not limited to, acts of God, incidences of terrorism, war or riots, labor strikes or civil disturbances, floods, earthquakes, fire, explosions, epidemics, hurricanes, tornadoes, governmental actions and restrictions, work delays caused by waiting for utility providers to service or monitor or provide access to utility poles to which Franchisee's facilities are attached or to be attached or conduits in which Franchisee's facilities are located or to be located, and unavailability of materials or qualified labor to perform the work necessary.
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-3
"FRANCHISE" means the initial, nonexclusive, authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the Franchising Authority, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, agreement, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, ordinance or otherwise, which authorizes the construction and operation of the Cable System in the public rights-of-way and compatible easements, pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 541.
"FRANCHISE AGREEMENT" or "AGREEMENT" shall mean this nonexclusive Cable Franchise Agreement and any amendments or modifications hereto.
"FRANCHISE AREA" means the present legal boundaries of the Town as of the Effective Date, and shall also include any additions thereto, by annexation or other legal means, as per the requirements set forth herein.
"FRANCHISEE" shall mean Comcast of California/Maryland/Pennsylvania/Virginia/West Virginia, LLC.
"FRANCHISING AUTHORITY" means the Town or the lawful successor, transferee, designee, or assignee thereof.
"GROSS REVENUE" means all revenue, as determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP), that is actually received by the cable operator and derived from the operation of the Cable System to provide Cable Services in the Franchise Area; however, "gross revenue" shall not include: (i) refunds or rebates made to Subscribers or other third parties; (ii) any revenue which is received from the sale of merchandise over home shopping channels carried on the Cable System, but not including revenue received from home shopping channels for the use of the Cable Service to sell merchandise; (iii) any tax, fee, or charge collected by the Cable Operator and remitted to a governmental entity or its agent or designee, including without limitation a local public access or education group; (iv) program launch fees; (v) directory or advertising revenue including, but not limited to, yellow page, white page, banner advertisement, and electronic publishing; (vi) refundable deposits; (vii) late fees; (viii) investment income; (ix) a sale of Cable Service for resale or for use as a component part of or for the integration into Cable Services to be resold in the ordinary course of business, when the reseller is required to pay or collect franchise fees or similar fees on the resale of the Cable Service; (x) revenues received by any Affiliate or any other person in exchange for supplying goods or services used by the Cable Operator to provide Cable Service; and (xi) revenue, or the pro-rata portion of multi-service fees, derived from services classified as non-Cable Services under federal law, including, without limitation, revenue derived from telecommunications services and information services, and any other revenues attributed by the Cable Operator to non-Cable services in accordance with GAAP rules, regulations, standards, or orders of the Federal Communications Commission. Gross Revenues shall not include actual bad debt that is written off, consistent with generally accepted accounting principles, provided however, that all or any part of any such actual bad debt that is written off, but subsequently collected, shall be included in the Gross Revenues in the period so collected.
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-4
"INTERACTIVE ON-DEMAND SERVICE" means a service providing video programming to Subscribers over switched networks on an on-demand, point-to-point basis, but does not include services providing video programming the programming provider preschedules.
"ORDINANCE" includes a resolution.
“PEG” means public, educational and/or governmental access to the Cable System to provide video programming.
"PERSON" means any natural person or any association, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or other legally recognized entity, whether for-profit or not-for profit, but shall not mean the Franchising Authority.
"PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY" (PROW or Public Way) means the surface, the air space above the surface, and the area below the surface of any public street, highway, lane, path, alley, sidewalk, boulevard, drive, bridge, tunnel, park, parkway, waterway, easement, or similar property in which the Town now or hereafter holds any property interest, which, consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purpose of installing and maintaining a Cable System. No reference herein, or in any franchise, to a "public right-of-way" shall be deemed to be a representation or guarantee by the Town that its interest or other right to control the use of such property is sufficient to permit its use for such purposes, and Franchisee shall be deemed to gain only those rights to use as are properly in the Town and as the Town may have the undisputed right and power to give. For purposes of this Franchise, the term "public right-of-way" shall also include any other parcels of property that the Town owns.
“SERVICE INTERRUPTION" means a Service Outage affecting less than five subscribers, or a loss of either video or audio for one or more channels for one or more subscribers.
"SERVICE OUTAGE" means the complete loss of Cable Service to five or more subscribers served by the same trunk, node, or feeder line for a period of fifteen (15) minutes or more.
"TRANSFER" means any transaction in which (i) an ownership or other interest in the Franchisee is transferred, directly or indirectly, from one Person or group of Persons to another Person or group of Persons, so that majority control of the Franchisee is transferred; or (ii) the rights and obligations the Franchisee holds under the Franchise granted under this Franchise Agreement are transferred or assigned to another Person or group of Persons. However, notwithstanding clauses (i) and (ii) of the preceding sentence, a transfer of the Franchise shall not include (a) transfer of an ownership or other interest in the Franchisee to the parent of the Franchisee or to another Affiliate of the Franchisee; (b) transfer of an interest in the Franchise granted under this Franchise Agreement or the rights held by the Franchisee under the Franchise granted under this Franchise Agreement to the parent of the Franchisee or to another Affiliate of the Franchisee; (c) any action that is the result of a merger of the Franchisee’s parent; (d) any action that is the result of a merger of another Affiliate of the Franchisee; (e) a transfer in trust, by mortgage, or by assignment of any rights, title, or interest of the Franchisee in the Franchise or the System used to provide Cable Service in order to secure indebtedness; or (f) the sale,
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-5
conveyance, transfer, exchange, or release of fifty percent (50%) or less of its equitable ownership.
"VIDEO PROGRAMMING" means programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to, programming provided by a television broadcast station.
All terms used herein, unless otherwise defined, shall have the same meaning as set forth in Sections 15.2-2108.19 et seq. of the Code of Virginia; and if not defined therein, then as set forth in Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq.; and if not defined therein, their common and ordinary meaning. In addition, references in this Ordinance to any federal or state law shall include amendments thereto as are enacted from time-to-time.
SECTION 2 - GRANT OF AUTHORITY
2.1 The Franchising Authority hereby grants to the Franchisee under the Code of Virginia and the Cable Act a nonexclusive Franchise authorizing the Franchisee to construct and operate a Cable System in the Public Ways within the Franchise Area, and for that purpose to erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain, or retain in any Public Way such poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, pedestals, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other related property or equipment as may be necessary or appurtenant to the Cable System and to provide such Cable Services over the Cable System as may be lawfully allowed. This agreement neither authorizes the Franchisee to use the PROW for purposes of providing any service other than Cable Service, nor prohibits the Franchisee from doing so. The Franchisee's authority to provide non-Cable Services shall be subject to applicable law.
2.2 Term of Franchise. The term of the Franchise granted hereunder shall be fifteen (15) years, beginning on the Effective Date, unless the Franchise is renewed or is lawfully terminated in accordance with the terms of this Franchise Agreement and the Code of Virginia, and the Cable Act.
2.3 Renewal. Any Franchise renewal shall be governed by and comply with the provisions of Article 1.2 of Chapter 21 of Title 15.2 of the Code of Virginia and the Cable Act, as amended.
2.4 Reservation of Authority. Nothing in this Franchise Agreement shall be construed as a waiver of any codes or ordinances of general applicability promulgated by the Franchising Authority.
SECTION 3 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF THE CABLE SYSTEM
3.1 Permits and General Obligations. The Franchisee shall be responsible for obtaining, at its own cost and expense, all generally applicable permits, licenses, or other forms of approval or authorization necessary to construct, operate, maintain or repair the Cable System, or any part thereof, prior to the commencement of any such activity. The issuance of such permits shall not be unreasonably withheld, conditioned, or delayed. Construction, installation, and maintenance of the Cable System shall be performed in a safe, thorough and reliable manner using materials of good and durable quality. Notwithstanding the requirements herein, Franchisee shall not be
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-6
required to obtain a permit for individual drop connections to Subscribers, servicing or installing pedestals or other similar facilities, or other instances of routine maintenance or repair to its Cable System. All transmission and distribution structures, poles, other lines, and equipment the Franchisee installs for use in the Cable System in accordance with the terms and conditions of this Franchise Agreement shall be located so as to minimize the interference with the proper use of the Public Ways and the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who own property that adjoins any such Public Way.
3.2 Conditions of Street Occupancy.
(A) Relocation at request of Third Party. The Franchisee shall, upon reasonable prior written request of any Person holding a permit issued by the Franchising Authority to move any structure, temporarily move its wires to permit the moving of such structure; provided (i) the Franchisee may impose a reasonable charge on any Person for the movement of its wires, and such charge may be required to be paid in advance of the movement of its wires; and (ii) the Franchisee is given not less than thirty (30) business days advance written notice to arrange for such temporary relocation. Any service disruption provisions of this Franchise shall not apply in the event that the removal of Franchisee’s wires, cables, poles or other facilities pursuant to the above results in temporary service disruptions.
(B) Restoration of Public Ways. If in connection with the construction, operation, maintenance, or repair of the Cable System, the Franchisee disturbs, alters, or damages any Public Way, the Franchisee agrees that it shall at its own cost and expense replace and restore any such Public Way to a condition reasonably comparable to the condition of the Public Way existing immediately prior to the disturbance. The Town may make the final determination as to the reasonable acceptability of repair and/or replacement of damaged facilities.
(C) Safety Requirements. The Franchisee shall, at its own cost and expense, undertake all necessary and appropriate efforts to maintain its work sites in a safe manner in order to prevent failures and accidents that may cause damage, injuries or nuisances. All work undertaken on the Cable System shall be performed in substantial accordance with applicable FCC or other federal and state regulations and with applicable provisions of the National Electrical Safety Code and the National Electrical Code. The Cable System shall not endanger or interfere with the safety of Persons or property in the Franchise Area.
(D) Trimming of Trees and Shrubbery. The Franchisee shall have the authority to trim trees or other natural growth overhanging any of its Cable System in the Franchise Area so as to prevent contact with the Franchisee's wires, cables, or other equipment. All such trimming shall be done at the Franchisee's sole cost and expense. For all planned trimming, the Franchisee shall provide the Town at least five (5) business days’ notice of the work to be performed and a description of such work. For trimming of an emergency nature, including responding to storm damage, advance notice is not required. The Franchisee shall be responsible for any damage and all clean up of debris the trimming causes. The foregoing notwithstanding, any tree trimming by Franchisee must comply with any separately negotiated pole attachment agreement in effect between the Town and the Franchisee.
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-7
(E) Aerial and Underground Construction. At the time of Cable System construction, if all of the transmission and distribution facilities of all of the respective public or Town utilities in any area of the Franchise Area are underground, the Franchisee shall place its Cable System's transmission and distribution facilities underground; provided that such underground locations are actually capable of accommodating the Franchisee's cable and other equipment without technical degradation of the Cable System's signal quality. In any region(s) of the Franchise Area where the transmission or distribution facilities of the respective public or Town utilities are both aerial and underground, the Franchisee shall have the discretion to construct, operate, and maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities, or any part thereof, aerially or underground. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to require the Franchisee to construct, operate, or maintain underground any ground-mounted appurtenances such as customer taps, line extenders, system passive devices, amplifiers, power supplies, pedestals, or other related equipment. To avoid overburdening the Public Way, and in furtherance of the health, safety and welfare of the public, Franchisee will use commercially reasonable efforts to utilize existing utility poles and conduits when and where available for the construction, repairs and maintenance of the Cable System pursuant to separately negotiated pole attachment and conduit utilization agreements. Franchisee shall not erect, for any reason, any pole on or along any Public Right-of-Way or on public property without the advance written approval of the Town. The foregoing notwithstanding, the terms of any separately negotiated pole attachment agreement in effect between the Town and the Franchisee shall govern.
(F) All excavation and reconstruction work by Franchisee in the Public Rights-of-Way must be in compliance with the generally applicable requirements of Town Code, including all of the standards referenced therein, and all applicable VDOT standards. It shall be the Franchisee’s responsibility to obtain any required permits, to review all applicable excavation, reconstruction, restoration, repair and permitting requirements, and to become familiar with such requirements before beginning any excavation, reconstruction, restoration or repair work in the Public Rights-of-Way or private property.
(G) Any equipment or facilities the Franchisee installs in the Public Rights-of-Way shall be installed, located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, replaced, restored, removed, repaired, maintained and operated in accordance with good engineering practices, performed by experienced maintenance and construction personnel so as not (1) to endanger or interfere in any manner with improvements the Town or VDOT may deem appropriate to make; or (2) to interfere with the rights of any private property owner; or (3) to hinder or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
(H) Whenever the Town shall determine that it is necessary in connection with the repair, relocation, or improvement of the Public Rights-of-Way, the Town may require by written notification that any properties or facilities of the Franchisee be removed or relocated. Within sixty (60) days after receipt of notification, unless the Town extends such period for good cause shown, the Franchisee shall remove or relocate its facilities to such place and under such terms and conditions as the Town specifies. The Franchisee shall bear all expenses associated with the removal and relocation except that the Town will issue,
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-8
without charge to the Franchisee, whatever local permits are required for the relocation of Franchisee's facilities. If the Franchisee does not complete its removal or relocation within sixty (60) days or such other period as authorized by the Town, the Town may take such actions as necessary to effectuate such removal or relocation at the Franchisee's expense. The Town shall use reasonable efforts to minimize the impact on Franchisee’s facilities related to any removal or relocation. Franchisee shall follow all applicable VDOT standards and regulations in connection with the repair, relocation, or improvement of the Public Rights-of-Way. Franchisee shall be entitled to reimbursement of its relocation costs from public or private funds, if any, raised for the project and made available to other users of the Public Way.
(i) Nothing in this Franchise Agreement shall be construed to prevent the Town from constructing, maintaining, repairing, improving, grading, paving, relocating and/or altering any Public Right-of-Way; constructing, installing, repairing, maintaining, or relocating any water or sewer mains; or constructing, maintaining, relocating or repairing any sidewalk or other public work. All such work shall be done, to the extent possible, in such a manner as not to obstruct, injure or prevent the free use and operation of the poles, wires, conduits, conductors, pipes or appurtenances of the Franchisee.
(ii) Nothing contained in this Franchise Agreement shall relieve any Person from liability arising out of the failure to exercise reasonable care to avoid injuring Franchisee’s facilities while performing any work in any Public Right-of-Way or on public property.
(I) Undergrounding and Beautification Projects. In the event all users of the Public Way relocate aerial facilities underground as part of an undergrounding or neighborhood beautification project, Franchisee shall participate in the planning for relocation of its aerial facilities contemporaneously with other utilities. Franchisee's relocation costs shall be included in any computation of necessary project funding by the Town or private parties. Franchisee shall be entitled to reimbursement of its relocation costs from public or private funds raised for the project and made available to other users of the Public Way. It is understood that the Franchising Authority does not guarantee that any public or private funds will be available to help defray the cost of such undergrounding or beautification projects. In the event that public and/or private funds are not available or do not cover the entire cost of the relocation, Franchisee reserves the right to pass its costs, or in the case of partial reimbursement from public and/or private funds its incremental cost, through to its Subscribers in accordance with applicable law.
SECTION 4 -SERVICE OBLIGATIONS
4.1 General Service Obligations.
(A) The Franchisee shall make Cable Service available to every residential dwelling unit within the Franchise Area where the minimum density is at least (30) thirty dwelling units per mile when measured in strand footage from the nearest point of the existing Cable System from which a usable signal can be obtained. For purposes of this section, a home
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-9
shall only be counted as a “dwelling unit” if such home is within two hundred seventy-five (275) feet of the public right-of-way. Subject to the density requirement, Franchisee shall offer Cable Service to all new homes or previously unserved homes located within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the Franchisee's distribution cable. Should an area within the Franchise Area meet the density requirements, Franchisee shall provide Cable Service to such area within six (6) months after it confirms that the density requirements have been met through actual knowledge or following notice from the Franchising Authority that one or more residents has requested service.
(B) The Franchisee may elect to provide Cable Service to areas not meeting the above density and distance standards. The Franchisee may impose an additional charge in excess of its regular installation charge for any service installation requiring a drop or line extension in excess of the above standards. Any such additional charge related to an extended drop shall be computed on a time plus materials basis to be calculated on that portion of the installation that exceeds the standards set forth above. Such additional charge shall be paid in advance by the developer, landowner, or customer requesting Cable Service in an area that does not meet the density and distance standards.
4.2 New Developments. Franchisee agrees to use commercially reasonable efforts to inform itself of all newly planned developments within the Town and to work with developers to cooperate in pre-installation of facilities to support Cable Service.
4.3 Programming. The Franchisee shall offer to all Customers a diversity of video programming services.
4.4 No Discrimination. The Franchisee shall not discriminate or permit discrimination between or among any Persons in the availability of Cable Services or other services provided in connection with the Cable System in the Franchise Area. It shall be the right of all Persons to receive all available services provided on the Cable System so long as such Person's financial or other obligations to the Franchisee are satisfied; unless such Person has engaged in inappropriate activity including, but not limited to, theft of Franchisee's cable services, vandalism of its property, or abuse or harassment of its representatives. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the Franchisee from offering bulk discounts, promotional discounts, package discounts, or other such pricing strategies as part of its business practice.
(A) Franchisee shall assure that access to Cable Services is not denied to any group of potential residential cable subscribers because of the residents’ income.
4.5 Availability of Maps to the Town. Upon the Town giving two (2) weeks written request, but no more often than annually, the Franchisee shall make available for the Town’s viewing, at the Franchisee's nearest business office, updated maps of the Franchise Area which shall clearly delineate all areas within the Franchise Area where Cable Service is available to Subscribers.
4.6 Changes in Service. Franchisee agrees to give the Town Manager thirty (30) days prior written notice of changes in rates, programming services or channel positions, provided that such changes are within the control of Franchisee.
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-10
SECTION 5 – PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL AND GOVERNMENT ACCESS CHANNELS
5.1 Franchisee shall make available one (1) Standard Definition (SD) channel for Public, Educational and/or Governmental ("PEG") Access video programming provided by the Franchising Authority or its designee, such as a public access organization or educational institution. All PEG Access Programming shall be modulated, then transmitted from the origination site location at 220 North Commerce Avenue, Front Royal, VA 22630 to Franchisee’s headend or hub site on a Franchisee owned upstream (“return line”). Any construction or upgrades of return lines or origination sites shall be paid for by the Franchising Authority. Said payment shall be made in advance to the Franchisee subject to the Franchisee providing the Franchising Authority with a detailed estimate of said construction cost. Use of a channel position for PEG access shall be provided on the most basic tier of service offered by the Franchisee and in accordance with the Cable Act and the Code of Virginia, and as further set forth below. "Channel position" means a number designation on the Franchisee's channel lineup regardless of the transmission format (analog or digital). Franchisee does not relinquish its ownership of or ultimate right of control over a channel by designating it for PEG use. In the event any access channel is reassigned, the Franchisee shall provide the Town with at least thirty (30) days’ notice before reassigning the channel. A PEG access user- whether an individual, educational or governmental user- acquires no property or other interest by virtue of the use of a channel so designated, and may not rely on the continued use of a particular channel number, no matter how long the same channel may have been designated for such use. Franchisee shall not exercise editorial control over any public, educational, or governmental use of a channel position, except Franchisee may refuse to transmit any public access program or portion of a public access program that contains obscenity, indecency, or nudity. The Franchising Authority shall be responsible for developing, implementing, interpreting and enforcing rules for PEG Access Channel use.
(A) Franchisee shall continue to make available to Subscribers the Warren County Public Schools PEG Channel within the Town subject to the authorization of Warren County and so long as Warren County, VA continues to produce said PEG programming and Franchisee continues to carry said programming in Warren County, VA.
5.2 Public Access. A "Public Access Channel" is a channel position designated for noncommercial use by the public on a first-come, first-served, nondiscriminatory basis. A Public Access Channel may not be used to cablecast programs for profit, or for political or commercial fundraising in any fashion.
5.3 Educational Access. An "Educational Access Channel" is a channel position designated for noncommercial use by educational institutions such as public or private schools (but not "home schools"), community colleges, and universities.
5.4 Government Access. A "Governmental Access Channel" is a channel position designated for noncommercial use by the Franchising Authority for the purpose of showing the public local government at work.
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-11
5.5 Franchisee shall ensure that all PEG access channel signals carried on its system, regardless of the method used to acquire the PEG channels, comply with all applicable FCC signal quality and technical standards except that Franchisee shall not be responsible for the technical signal quality of programming produced by any PEG Channel programmer. The technical and signal quality of all PEG access channel signals shall be preserved and shall be of comparable quality as other channels.
5.6 High Definition (HD) PEG Access Channel. Within one hundred and eighty (180) days of receipt of the Town’s written request, which is deemed received by Franchisee upon execution hereof, Franchisee shall make the PEG Access Channel discussed in Section 5.1 available in HD format. Franchisee shall continue to carry the SD PEG Access Channel simultaneously until SD channels are no longer provided over the Cable System. The Franchisee shall be responsible for providing the PEG Access signal to Subscribers over its Cable System in a SD format until no longer required. The Franchising Authority shall be responsible for providing the PEG Access signal in a HD format acceptable to Franchisee to the PEG Access origination location demarcation point, at 220 North Commerce Avenue, Front Royal, VA 22630. The Franchising Authority acknowledges that the HD PEG Access Channel may require Subscribers to buy or lease special equipment, available to all Subscribers, and subscribe to those tiers of Cable Service upon which HD channels are made available. Franchisee is not required to provide free HD equipment to Subscribers or the Town.
5.7 Capital Support for PEG Access.
(A) Franchisee shall pay to Town an initial lump sum capital grant of thirty-one thousand dollars ($31,000) as capital support for PEG access equipment, payable within ninety (90) days from the execution of this Franchise Agreement. If the capital support grant payment is not made within one hundred twenty (120) days from the date of execution of this Franchise Agreement, this Franchise Agreement shall become null and void, ab initio, without notice. The Franchising Authority will distribute these funds for capital purposes and/or procure equipment in support of the PEG access programming needs of the community.
(B) At the Town’s option, Franchisee shall collect a monthly fee from each Subscriber to provide additional capital support for PEG access. The maximum fee that shall be imposed is 0.5% of Franchisee’s gross revenues, and the fee collected shall be remitted to the Town no later than thirty (30) days following the end of each calendar quarter. Comcast shall not impose a fee to provide capital support for PEG access unless and until the Town directs Franchisee to impose a fee. The Town shall give Franchisee at least ninety (90) days’ written notice before Franchisee shall begin collecting the fee. The Town shall allocate such amount to PEG capital uses exclusively. If such fee is imposed and used exclusively for PEG capital purposes, it shall not be deemed to be "franchise fees" within the meaning of 47 U.S.C. Section 542 and such payments shall not be deemed to be (i) "payments-in-kind" or any involuntary payments chargeable against the compensation the Franchisee is to pay the Town pursuant to Section 6 hereof, or (ii) part of the compensation the Franchisee is to pay to the Town pursuant to Section 6 hereof.
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-12
5.8 Indemnification. The Franchising Authority shall indemnify Franchisee, to the extent authorized by the Virginia Constitution and general laws, for any liability, loss, or damage it may suffer due to violation of the intellectual property rights of third parties or arising out of the content of programming shown on any PEG channel and from claims arising out of the Franchising Authority’s rules for or administration of PEG Access.
SECTION 6 – COMMUNICATION TAX AND FRANCHISE FEES
6.1 Communications Tax. Franchisee shall comply with the provisions of Sections 58.1-645 et seq. of the Code of Virginia, pertaining to the Virginia Communications Sales and Use Tax, as amended (the "Communications Tax"), and Sections 6.2 through 6.6 of the Agreement shall not have any effect, for so long as the Communications Tax or a successor state or local tax that would constitute a franchise fee for purposes of 47 U.S.C. § 542 is imposed on the sale of Cable Services by the Franchisee to the Town’s Subscribers.
6.2 Payment of Franchise Fee to Town. In the event that the Communications Tax is repealed, and no successor state or local tax is enacted that would constitute a franchise fee for purposes of 47 U.S.C. § 542, Franchisee shall pay to the Town a Franchise fee of five percent (5%) of annual Gross Revenue, beginning thirty (30) days from the effective date of the repeal of such tax (the "Repeal Date"). Beginning on the Repeal Date, the terms of Section 6.2 through 6.6 of this Agreement shall take effect. In accordance with the Cable Act, the twelve (12) month period applicable under the Franchise for the computation of the Franchise fee shall be a calendar year. Such payments shall be made no later than thirty (30) days following the end of each calendar quarter. Should Franchisee submit an incorrect amount, Franchisee shall be allowed to add or subtract that amount in a subsequent quarter, but no later than ninety (90) days following the close of the calendar year for which such amounts were applicable; such correction shall be documented in the supporting information required under Section 6.3 below.
6.3 Supporting Information. Each Franchise fee payment shall be accompanied by a brief report prepared by a representative of Franchisee showing the basis for the computation and a breakdown by major revenue categories (such as Basic Service, premium service, etc.). The Town shall have the right to reasonably request further supporting information for each Franchise fee payment, subject to the proprietary information provisions of Section 8.7.
6.4 Bundled Services. If Cable Services subject to a franchise fee, or any other fee determined by a percentage of the Cable Operator's gross revenues in a locality, are provided to Subscribers in conjunction with other services: the fee shall be applied only to the value of the Cable Services, as reflected on the books and records of the Cable Operator in accordance with rules, regulations, standards, or orders of the Federal Communications Commission, the State Corporation Commission, or generally accepted accounting principles. Any discounts resulting from purchasing the services as a bundle shall be reasonably allocated between the respective services that constitute the bundled transaction.
6.5 Books and Records Regarding Franchise Fees. In the event that the Communications Tax is repealed, and subject to the confidentiality requirements of Section 8.7 of this Agreement, the Town, or such Person or Persons the Town designates, shall have the right to inspect and copy
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-13
records and the right to audit and to re-compute any amounts determined to be payable under this Franchise, regardless of who holds the records. If an audit discloses an overpayment or underpayment of franchise fees, the Town shall notify the Franchisee in writing of such overpayment or underpayment within ninety (90) days of the date the audit was completed. The Franchisee shall have thirty (30) days from receipt of such notice to provide the Town with a written response agreeing to or refuting the results of the audit, including any substantiating documentation. Based on these notices, the parties shall agree upon a final settled amount. The Town, in its sole discretion, shall determine the completion date for any audit conducted hereunder. Audit completion is not to be unreasonably delayed by either party. Subject to the confidentiality requirements of Section 8.7 of this Franchise, the Franchisee shall be responsible for providing to the Town, within forty-five (45) days of a written request, all records necessary to confirm the accurate payment of franchise fees. The Franchisee shall maintain such records for the current year plus three (3) years. The Town shall bear its audit expenses. If re-computation results in additional revenue to be paid by Franchisee to the Town, such amount shall be subject to an interest charge in accordance with the prime rate of interest charged by the Town's primary depository bank.
(A) Any final settled amounts due to the Franchising Authority as a result of such audit shall be paid to the Franchising Authority within forty-five (45) days from the date the parties agree upon the final settled amount. Once the parties agree upon a final settled amount and such amount is paid by the Franchisee, the Franchising Authority shall have no further rights to audit or challenge the payment for that period.
(B) The period of limitation for recovery of any Franchise fee payable hereunder shall be three (3) years from the date on which payment by Franchisee is due.
SECTION 7 – CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS; CUSTOMER BILLS AND PRIVACY PROTECTION
7.1 Customer Service Standards. The Franchisee shall comply in all respects with the customer service requirements established by the FCC (47 CFR §76.309). Franchisee shall be subject to the following customer service standards consistent with federal law:
(A) Franchisee will maintain a local or toll-free telephone access line which will be available to its Subscribers twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week. Additionally, for at least the first twenty-four (24) months from the Effective Date, Franchisee will maintain at least one customer service center within the Town for Subscribers to make payments and exchange equipment. In addition, Franchisee may, when a Subscriber consents, provide for an employee to pick up or drop off equipment in either of the following ways: (i) by having a Franchise representative to go to the Subscriber’s residence, or (ii) by using a prepaid mailer. Franchisee also has the option to provide alternative payment drop off locations within the Franchise Area.
(B) Under Normal Operating Conditions, telephone answer time by a customer representative or automated answering device, including wait time, shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds when the connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-14
shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds. These standards shall be met no less than ninety (90) percent of the time under Normal Operating Conditions as measured on a quarterly basis.
(C) Under Normal Operating Conditions, the customer will receive a busy signal less than three percent (3%) of the time.
(D) Franchisee shall accurately collect and maintain data to measure its compliance with the telephone answering standards in paragraphs 7.1(B) and 7.1(C).
(E) Local customer service centers and bill payment locations will be open for sales, service complaints and scheduling, equipment exchange, and bill payment with customer account history access at no cost to customers, including assisting walk-in customers, at least during normal business hours, which are understood as approximately 8:00am to 5:00pm Monday through Friday.
(F) Installations, Outages, and Service Calls. Under normal operating conditions, each of the following standards will be met no less than ninety five percent (95%) of the time as measured on a quarterly basis.
(i) Standard installations will be performed within seven (7) business days after an order has been placed, unless the customer requests a longer period. "Standard" installations are those that are within one hundred seventy-five (175) feet of the existing distribution system.
(ii) Excluding conditions beyond the control of the Franchisee, the Franchisee will begin repairs on Service Outages and Service Interruptions promptly and in no event later than twelve (12) hours after the outage or interruption becomes known.
(iii) The Franchisee must begin working to correct Service Interruptions within 8 hours, including weekends, of receiving a subscriber call for a Service Interruption. “Service Interruption” shall mean the loss of any service provided to customer by Franchisee.
(G) Franchisee shall accurately collect and maintain data to measure its compliance with subparagraph 7.1.(F).
(H) The "appointment window" alternatives for installations, service calls and other installation activities will either be at a specific time or, at maximum, a four-hour time block during Normal Business Hours. Franchisee may schedule service calls and other installation activities outside of Normal Business Hours for the express convenience of the customer.
(I) Franchisee may not cancel an appointment with a customer after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment. If Franchisee representative is running late for an appointment with a customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the customer will be contacted. The appointment will be rescheduled as necessary, at a time which is convenient for the customer.
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-15
(J) Franchisee shall provide information, in accordance with applicable law, on each of the following areas at the time of installation of service, at least annually to all Subscribers, and at any time upon request:
(i) Products and services offered;
(ii) Prices and options for programming services and conditions of subscription to programming and other services;
(iii) Installation and service maintenance policies;
(iv) Instructions on how to use the Cable Service;
(v) Channel positions of programming carried on the System; and
(vi) Billing and complaint procedures, including where to locate the Franchisee's office hours, telephone number, and address of the local cable office.
7.2 Customer Bills. Customer bills shall be designed in such a way as to present the information contained therein clearly and comprehensibly to Customers, and in a way that (i) is not misleading and (ii) does not omit material information. The Franchisee may, in its sole discretion, consolidate costs on Customer bills as may otherwise be permitted by the Cable Act.
7.3 Notification. Franchisee shall notify Subscribers of any changes in rates, programming services or channel positions as soon as possible in writing. Notice must be given to Subscribers a minimum of thirty (30) days in advance of such changes if the change is within the control of the Franchisee. In addition, Franchisee shall notify subscribers thirty (30) days in advance of any significant changes in the other information that paragraph 7.1(J) requires.
7.4 Billing Disputes. In case of a billing dispute, Franchisee must respond to a Subscriber’s written complaint within thirty (30) days.
7.5 Refunds. Refund checks will be issued promptly, and no later than thirty (30) days from the date of the good faith determination that a refund is warranted.
7.6 Credits. Credits for service will be issued promptly, and no later than the Subscribers next available billing statement after a good faith determination that a credit is warranted.
7.7 Parental Control. Franchisee shall make available parental control devices to all Subscribers who wish to be able to block out any objectionable channel(s) of programming from the Cable Service.
7.8 Privacy Protection. The Franchisee shall comply with all applicable federal and state privacy laws.
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-16
SECTION 8 – OVERSIGHT AND REGULATION BY FRANCHISING AUTHORITY
8.1 Oversight of Franchise. In accordance with applicable law, the Franchising Authority at its sole cost and expense, shall have the right to oversee, regulate and, on reasonable prior written notice and in the presence of Franchisee's employee, periodically inspect the construction, operation and maintenance of the Cable System in the Franchise Area, and all parts thereof, as necessary to monitor Franchisee's compliance with the provisions of this Franchise Agreement.
(A) The Franchisee shall perform all required tests necessary to demonstrate compliance with applicable FCC standards.
(B) Upon a showing of a pattern of unresolved Subscriber complaints regarding signal quality, upon written request, the Franchisee shall conduct applicable tests to determine compliance with applicable FCC standards., Franchisee shall make the results of such test available to the Town to verify compliance. If any such test indicates that any part or component of the System fails to meet applicable requirements, the Franchisee shall take corrective action, retest locations, and advise the Town of the action taken and results achieved.
8.2 Technical Standards. The Franchisee shall comply with all applicable technical standards of the FCC. The Franchising Authority shall have, upon written request, the right to obtain a copy records required to be maintained pursuant to the FCC's rules.
8.3 Operational Records. Upon no less than thirty (30) business days' written notice to the Franchisee, the Town shall have the right to inspect Franchisee's books and records, including electronic books and records, pertaining to Franchisee's provision of Cable Service in the franchise area at any time during normal business hours and on a nondisruptive basis, as are reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of this Franchise Agreement. Such notice shall specifically reference the Franchisee’s section or subsection which is under review, so that Franchisee may organize the necessary books and records for appropriate access by the Town. Franchisee shall not be required to maintain any books and records for franchise compliance purposes longer than the current year plus three (3) years. The Franchisee shall maintain the records required to compute all operational and customer service compliance measures outlined in this Franchise to demonstrate that the measures are being met for at least four (4) consecutive quarters.
8.4 Records Required. Franchisee shall at all times maintain:
(A) Records of all written complaints for a period of one (1) year after receipt by Franchisee. The term "complaint" as used herein refers to complaints about any aspect of the Cable System or Franchisee's cable operations, including, without limitation, complaints about employee courtesy. Complaints recorded will not be limited to complaints requiring an employee service call.
(B) Records of Service Outages and Service Interruptions for a period of one (1) year after occurrence, or until the applicable compliance measures described in this Franchise are met
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-17
for four (4) consecutive quarters, indicating date, duration, area, and the number of Subscribers affected, type of outage, and cause.
(C) Records of service calls for repair and maintenance for a period of one (1) year after resolution by Franchisee, indicating the date and time service was required, the date and time service was provided, and (if different) the date and time the problem was resolved.
(D) Records of installation/reconnection for a period of one (1) year after the request was fulfilled by Franchisee, or until the applicable compliance measures described in this Franchise are met for four (4) consecutive quarters, indicating the date of request and the date and time service was extended.
8.5 Federal Communications Commission (FCC) Testing. Within fourteen (14) days of the Town’s written request, a written report of test results of required FCC performance testing will be provided to the Town Manager or his designee.
8.6 File for Public Inspection. Throughout the term of this Franchise Agreement, the Franchisee shall maintain for public, those documents required pursuant to the FCC's Public Inspection File rules and regulations.
8.7 Proprietary Information.
(A) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth herein, Franchisee shall not be required to submit information to the Town that it reasonably deems to be proprietary or confidential in nature, nor submit to the Town any of its or an Affiliate's books and records not relating to the provision of Cable Service in the Franchise Area, except as provided herein. Such confidential information shall be made available to the Town subject to terms of a nondisclosure agreement that is reasonably acceptable to the parties and to the following, to be applied as is most practicable for the purposes of this Agreement:
i. To the extent an exemption under the Virginia Freedom of Information Act permits the Town to maintain the confidentiality of submitted information and the Franchisee submits such information to the Town, the Town shall maintain the confidentiality of such information and not disclose it to any public request;
ii. To the extent the information provided to an accountant, attorney, consultant, or any other agent of the Town ("Town Consultant") would not be subject to public disclosure under the Virginia Freedom of Information Act, and the Town instructs the Franchisee to provide such information to the Town Consultant as may be required by this Agreement, the Franchisee shall provide such information to the Town Consultant and the Town shall not take possession of the information nor engage in any act that would jeopardize the information’s confidentiality.
(B) At all times, the Town shall take reasonable steps to protect the proprietary and confidential nature of any books, records, maps, plans, or other Town requested documents that are provided pursuant to the Agreement to the extent they are designated as such by the
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-18
Franchisee. Nothing in this Section shall be read to require the Franchisee to violate federal or state law protecting Subscriber privacy.
8.8 Reports.
(A) No later than ninety (90) days from the end of the calendar year, within ninety (90) days after receipt of the Town’s written request, Franchisee shall submit a written year-end report to the Town. Such report may address, if the Town so desires: major cable-related projects undertaken in the past year and planned for the current year, including construction and upgrade schedules for any new, relocated, or upgraded aerial or underground facilities.
(B) Upon written request of the Town, no later than thirty (30) days after the end of each calendar quarter, the Franchisee shall submit a written report to the Town regarding complaints the Franchisee received from Customers in the Franchise Area concerning Franchisee's customer service performance.
SECTION 9 – TRANSFER OR CHANGE OF CONTROL OF CABLE TELEVISION OR FRANCHISE
9.1 No Transfer of this Franchise shall occur without the prior written consent of the Franchising Authority, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld, delayed or conditioned. No Transfer shall be made to a Person, group of Persons or Affiliate that is not legally, technically and financially qualified to operate the Cable System and satisfy the obligations hereunder.
SECTION 10 – INSURANCE AND INDEMNITY
10.1 The Franchisee shall indemnify hold harmless and defend the Town, its officers, employees, and agents (hereinafter referred to as "indemnitees"), from and against:
(A) Any and all third-party claims for liabilities, obligations, damages, penalties, liens, costs, charges, losses and expenses (including, without limitation, fees and expenses of attorneys, expert witnesses and consultants), which may be imposed upon, incurred by or asserted against the indemnitees by reason of any act or omission of the Franchisee, its personnel, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors, resulting in personal injury, bodily injury, sickness, disease or death to any person or damage to, loss of or destruction of tangible or intangible property, libel, slander, invasion of privacy and unauthorized use of any trademark, trade name, copyright, patent, service mark or any other right of any person, firm or corporation, which may arise out of or be in any way connected with the construction, installation, operation, maintenance, use or condition of the Franchisee's Cable System caused by Franchisee, its contractors, subcontractors or agents or the Franchisee's failure to comply with any federal, state or local statute, ordinance or regulation.
(B) Any and all third-party claims for liabilities, obligations, damages, penalties, liens, costs, charges, losses and expenses (including, without limitation, fees and expenses of attorneys, expert witnesses and consultants), which are imposed upon, incurred by or
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-19
asserted against the indemnitees by reason of any claim or lien arising out of work, labor, materials or supplies provided or supplied to the Franchisee, its contractors or subcontractors, for the installation, construction, operation or maintenance of the Franchisee's Cable System in the Town.
10.2 Damages shall include, but not be limited to, penalties arising out of copyright infringements and damages arising out of any failure by the Franchisee to secure consents from the owners, authorized distributors or licensees, or programs to be delivered by the Franchisee's Cable System.
10.3 The Franchisee undertakes and assumes for its officers, agents, contractors, subcontractors, and employees all risk of dangerous conditions, if any, on or about any Town owned or controlled property, including streets and public rights-of-ways, except for any claim asserted or liability imposed that arises or is related to gross negligence or intentional misconduct by such indemnitees or any loss or claims related to PEG access Channels in which the Franchising Authority or its designee participates.
10.4 In the event any action or proceeding shall be brought against the indemnitees by reason of any matter for which the indemnitees are indemnified hereunder, the Franchisee shall, upon notice from any of the indemnitees, and at the Franchisee's sole cost and expense, resist and defend the same; provided further, however, that the Franchisee shall not admit liability in any such matter on behalf of the indemnitees without the written consent of the Town Attorney or his designee. If the Town determines that it is necessary for it to employ separate counsel, the costs for such separate counsel shall be the responsibility of the Town.
10.5 The Town shall give the Franchisee timely written notice within twenty (20) business days of the Town receiving notice of a written claim, or the commencement of any action, suit or other proceeding covered by the provisions of this section. The Town will cooperate with the Franchisee while the Franchisee defends any claim or action under this section.
10.6 Nothing in this Franchise Agreement is intended to, or shall be construed or applied to, express or imply the Town’s waiver of statutory provisions, privileges or immunities of any kind or nature as set forth in the Code of Virginia, including the Town’s limits of liability as exists presently or as the legislature may increase from time to time. Nothing in a franchise or this ordinance shall constitute a waiver of the Town's statutory provisions, privileges or immunities, including the Town's sovereign immunity, of any kind or nature.
10.7 The Franchisee shall maintain, and by its acceptance of a franchise hereunder specifically agrees that it will maintain throughout the term of the Franchise Agreement, general commercial liability insurance insuring the Franchisee. All liability insurance shall include an endorsement in a specific form which names as joint and several insured's the Town and the Town's officials, and employees, under such commercial liability policy, with respect to all claims arising out of the operation and maintenance of the Franchisee's Cable System in the Town. Such policy shall be in the minimum amounts of Five Million Dollars ($5,000,000) combined single limit per occurrence for bodily injury, property damage, or personal & advertising injury, which limit may be met through any combination of primary and excess liability policies.
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-20
(A) The Franchisee shall provide Workers Compensation Insurance as required by the Commonwealth of Virginia;
(B) Franchisee shall carry and maintain in its own name automobile liability insurance with a limit of $1,000,000 for each person and $1,000,000 combined single limit per occurrence for each accident for property damage with respect to owned and non-owned automobiles for the operation of which the Franchisee is responsible; and
10.8 The inclusion of more than one (1) insured shall not operate to increase the limit of the Franchisee's liability, and the insurer waives any right on contribution with insurance which the Town may have.
10.9 All policies of insurance this section requires shall be placed with companies which are qualified to write insurance in the Commonwealth of Virginia and which maintain throughout the policy term a General Rating of "A- " as determined by Best Insurance Rating Services.
10.10 Upon the Town’s written request, the Franchisee shall provide the Town with Certificates of Insurance for the coverages this section mandates.
10.11 Should the Town find an insurance document to be non-compliant, then it shall notify the Franchisee; and the Franchisee shall promptly cure the defect in accordance with this Agreement.
10.12 Neither this section’s provisions, nor any damages recovered by the Town thereunder, shall be construed to nor limit the Franchisee’s liability under this Franchise Agreement or for damages, except that nothing herein shall be interpreted to permit the Town to exercise rights and remedies in a manner that permits duplicative recovery from or payments by the Franchisee or its surety.
10.13 The commercial general liability insurance policy provided for herein shall name the Town, its officers, and employees as additional insureds, and shall be primary to any insurance or self-insurance the Town carries, but only with respect to the losses for which the Franchisee is responsible hereunder. The insurance policies this section requires shall be carried and maintained by the Franchisee throughout the term of the Franchise Agreement and such other period of time during which the Franchisee operates or is engaged in the removal of its Cable System. Each policy shall provide for notice of cancellation in accordance with policy provisions
10.14 Nothing in this section shall require Franchisee to indemnify, hold harmless or defend the Town, its officials, employees or agents, from any claims or lawsuits arising out of the Town's award of a franchise to another person.
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-21
SECTION 11 – SYSTEM DESCRIPTION AND SERVICE
11.1 System Characteristics. Franchisee's Cable System shall meet or exceed the following requirements:
(A) The System shall be capable of providing Video Programming to its Customers in the Franchise Area in accordance with the Cable Act.
(B) The System shall be designed to be an active two-way plant for Subscriber interaction, if any, required for selection or use of Cable Service.
(C) The Cable Service shall be operated in a manner such that it is in compliance with FCC standards and requirements with respect to interference. The Cable System shall be operated in such a manner as to minimize interference with a Subscriber’s reception of off-the-air signals. The Franchisee shall insure that signals carried by the Cable System, or originating outside the Cable System wires, cable, fibers, electronics and facilities, do not ingress or egress into or out of the Cable System in excess of FCC standards. In particular, the Franchise shall not operate the Cable System in such a manner as to pose unwarranted interference with emergency radio services, aeronautical navigational frequencies or an airborne navigational reception in normal flight patterns, or any other type of wireless communications, pursuant to FCC regulations.
11.2 Interconnection. The Franchise shall design its Cable System so that it may be interconnected with other cable systems and open video systems in the Franchise Area.
11.3 Standby Power. The Franchisee shall provide standby power generating capacity at the headend and at all hubs. The Franchisee shall maintain standby power capable of at least twenty-four (24) hours duration at the headend and all hubs, with automatic response systems to alert the local management center when commercial power is interrupted.
11.4 Technical Standards. The Cable System shall meet or exceed the applicable FCC technical performance standards.
11.5 Leased Access Channels. The Franchisee shall provide Leased Access Channels in accordance with federal law.
11.6 Emergency Powers. In the event of an emergency, or where Franchisee's Cable System creates or is contributing to an imminent danger to health, safety, or property, or an unauthorized use of property, the Franchisee shall remove or relocate any or all parts of Franchisee's Cable System at the Town’s request. If the Franchisee fails to comply with the Town's request, the Town may remove or relocate any or all parts of the Franchisee's Cable System upon reasonable notice to the Franchisee. The Town shall use reasonable efforts to minimize the impact on Franchisee’s facilities related to any emergency removal or relocation. Franchisee shall be entitled to compensation for expenses incurred for removal or relocation in the event of an emergency to the extent other users of the Public Way are compensated. It is understood that the
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-22
Franchising Authority does not guarantee that funds will be available to compensate users of the Public Ways for emergency removal or relocation.
11.7 Emergency Alert System. Franchisee shall install and thereafter maintain an Emergency Alert System (EAS) that shall at all times be operated in accordance with FCC rules and the Virginia EAS Plan.
SECTION 12 – ENFORCEMENT OF FRANCHISE
12.1 Performance Bond. Within thirty (30) days after the award of a Franchise Agreement, the Franchisee shall deposit with the Town a performance bond from a financial institution running to the Town in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). The bond shall be used to insure the Franchisee’s faithful performance of all its franchise provisions or defaults under this Franchise Agreement or the payment by Franchisee of any penalties, liquidated damages, claims, liens, and taxes due the Town which arise by reason of the construction, operation, or maintenance of Franchisee's Cable System in the Town, including restoration of the public rights-of-way and the cost of removal or abandonment of any property of Franchisee. Following notice and opportunity to cure in accordance with Section 12.2, the Franchising Authority shall give Franchisee twenty (20) business days’ notice of its intent to draw from the performance bond. The Franchising Authority may not draw from the performance bond while any action, appeal or other process has been instituted by Franchisee to challenge the amount owed.
(A) Any bond obtained by Franchisee must be placed with a company which is qualified to write bonds in the Commonwealth of Virginia. The bond may not be cancelled, and not renewed or replaced, without the Town’s consent until thirty (30) days after the Town’s receipt by registered mail, return receipt requested, of Franchisee’s written notice of intent to cancel.
(B) Any bond shall be recoverable by the Town for all damages and costs, whether direct or indirect, resulting from the Franchisee’s failure to well and faithfully observe and perform any provision of this Agreement.
(C) The bond shall be maintained at the amount established herein for the entire term of the Franchise Agreement, even if amounts have to be withdrawn pursuant to this Agreement. The Franchisee shall promptly replace any amounts withdrawn from the bond unless an action, appeal or other process has been instituted by Franchisee to challenge the amount withdrawn, and no replacement of funds shall be required until any such action, appeal or other process has been resolved.
12.2 Non-compliance procedures.
(A) Should the Franchising Authority believe that the Franchisee has not complied with any of the provisions of this Franchise Agreement, it shall: (i) informally discuss the matter with the Franchisee and (ii) notify the Franchisee in writing of the exact nature of the alleged noncompliance if the discussions described in the foregoing clause (i) do not
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-23
lead to resolution of the alleged noncompliance. The Franchisee shall have thirty (30) days from receipt of this written notice to: (a) respond to the Franchising Authority, if the Franchisee contests, in whole or in part, the assertion of noncompliance; (b) cure such default; or (c) in the event that, by the nature of default, such default cannot be cured within the 30-day period, initiate reasonable steps to remedy such default and notify the Franchising Authority of the steps being taken and the projected date that they will be completed. The Franchising Authority shall schedule a public hearing in the event that the Franchisee fails to respond to the written notice pursuant to these procedures or in the event that the alleged default is not remedied within thirty (30) days of the date projected above if the Franchising Authority intends to continue its investigation into the default. The Franchising Authority shall provide the Franchisee at least thirty (30) business days prior written notice of such hearing, which will specify the time, place, and purpose. The Franchising Authority shall provide the Franchisee with a reasonable opportunity to be heard at any such hearing.
(B) The Town shall, within a reasonable time after the closure of the public hearing, issue findings and conclusions in writing, setting forth the basis for the findings; the proposed cure plan; and the time line for curing the violation if the violation can be cured; and the penalties, damages and applicable interest owed, if any.
(C) Subject to applicable federal and Virginia law and the provisions of this Agreement, if the Town determines pursuant to a public hearing that Franchisee is in violation of any provision of this Agreement the Town may apply one or a combination of the following remedies: (i) seek specific performance or other equitable relief; (ii) commence an action at law; (iii) apply liquidated damages in accordance with Section 12.3, if applicable; or (iv) in the case of substantial default of material provisions of the Agreement, initiate revocation proceedings in accordance with Section 12.4.
(D) The Town may designate its cable administrator or other person to conduct the hearings and issue findings and conclusions under this subsection, in which case Franchisee may appeal the determination of the cable administrator or other Town designee to the Town Council. Such an appeal shall be heard at a lawfully noticed public hearing. The Franchising Authority shall provide the Franchisee with a reasonable opportunity to be heard at any such hearing.
12.3 Penalties and Liquidated Damages. Because it may be difficult to calculate the harm to the Franchising Authority in the event of Franchisee’s breach of this Franchise Agreement, the parties agree to liquidated damages as a reasonable estimation of the actual damages. To the extent that the Franchising Authority elects to assess liquidated damages as provided in this Agreement and such liquidated damages have been paid, such damages shall be the Franchising Authority's sole and exclusive remedy. Nothing in this Section shall preclude the Franchising Authority from exercising any other right or remedy with respect to a breach that continues past the time the Franchising Authority stops assessing liquidated damages for such breach. Liquidated damages shall not be assessed until the Franchising Authority has completed the procedures set forth in Section 12.2 hereof, including holding a public hearing, and notifying the Franchisee by certified or registered mail of the proposed liquidated damages, specifying the
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-24
violation. The Franchisee shall have thirty (30) days from the date of receipt of the written notice to submit payment. If the Franchisee does not make payment within that period, the Franchising Authority may obtain the amount assessed from the Franchisee's performance bond.
(A) The first day for which liquidated damages may be assessed, if there has been no cure, shall be the day after the end of the applicable cure period, including any extension of the cure period the Franchising Authority has granted.
(B) Franchisee may appeal (by pursuing judicial relief) any assessment of liquidated damages within thirty (30) days of receiving written notice of the assessment. Franchisee's obligation to pay the liquidated damages assessed shall be stayed pending resolution of the appeal.
(C) The Franchising Authority may assess liquidated damages for the following violations of this Franchise Agreement, in the following amounts:
(i) Failure to comply with PEG access requirements: $100 per violation for each day the violation continues.
(ii) Failure to render payments due to the Franchising Authority: $100 per violation for each day the violation continues, in addition to any monetary payment due.
(iii) Failure to supply information, reports, or filings lawfully required: $100 per violation for each day the violation continues.
(iv) Failure to comply with customer service standards: $100 per each violation for each day the violation continues, except where compliance is measured quarterly, in which case damages shall be as specified in Section 12.4(C)(v) below.
(v) Failure to comply with customer service standards with which compliance is measured on a quarterly basis: $300 for the first violation in which such standards were not met; $500 for any violation within 18 months after the first; and $750 for any violation within 18 months after the second or any subsequent violation.
(D) The Franchisee shall not be charged with multiple violations for a single act or event affecting a single subscriber or for a single act or event affecting multiple subscribers on the same day.
(E) The parties agree that such liquidated damages are reasonable.
(F) The Town may reduce or waive any of the above liquidated damages if it determines, in its sole discretion that such waiver is in the public interest.
(G) The amount of all liquidated damages assessed per annum shall not exceed twenty thousand dollars ($20,000) in the aggregate.
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-25
(H) If after 120 days the Franchisee has not cured or commenced to cure the alleged breach to the satisfaction of the Franchising Authority, the Franchising Authority may pursue all other remedies aside from liquidated damages.
12.4 Revocation.
(A) Subject to applicable federal and state law, in the event the Franchising Authority, after a public hearing pursuant to Section 12.3 of this Agreement, determines that the Franchisee is in default of material provisions of the Franchise Agreement, the Franchising Authority may initiate revocation proceedings in accordance with the following:
(i) The Franchising Authority shall give written notice to the Franchisee of its intent to revoke the Franchise Agreement on the basis of a pattern of non-compliance by the Franchisee, including two or more instances of substantial non-compliance with a material provision of the Agreement. The notice shall set forth with specificity the exact nature of the non-compliance. The Franchisee shall have ninety (90) business days from the receipt of such notice to object in writing and to state its reasons for such objection. In the event the Franchising Authority has not received a response from the Franchisee or upon receipt of the response does not agree that the allegations of non-compliance have been or will be resolved, it may then seek revocation of the Franchise at a public hearing. The Franchising Authority shall cause to be served upon the Franchisee, at least thirty (30) days prior to such public hearing, a written notice specifying the time and place of such hearing and stating its intent to request revocation of the Franchise Agreement.
(ii) At the designated public hearing, the Franchising Authority shall give the Franchisee an opportunity to state its position on the matter, present evidence and question witnesses, in accordance with the standards of a fair hearing applicable to administrative hearings in the Commonwealth of Virginia, after which it shall determine whether or not the Franchise shall be terminated. The public hearing shall be on the record and a written transcript shall be made available to the Franchisee within ten (10) business days. The decision of the Franchising Authority shall be in writing and shall be delivered to the Franchisee by certified mail. The Franchisee may appeal such determination to an appropriate court.
12.5 Technical Violation. The Franchising Authority agrees that it is not its intention to subject the Franchisee to penalties, fines, forfeitures or revocation of the Franchise Agreement for so-called "technical" breach(es) or violation(s) of the Franchise Agreement, which shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(A) In instances or for matters in which the Franchisee’s violation or breach of the Franchise Agreement was a good faith error that resulted in no or minimal negative impact on the Customers within the Franchise Area; or
(B) Where there existed circumstances reasonably beyond the Franchisee’s control and which precipitated the Franchisee’s violation of the Franchise Agreement, or which
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-26
prevented the Franchisee from complying with a term or condition of the Franchise Agreement.
12.6 Removal of System. Franchisee shall remove its Cable System within six (6) months as a result of termination, revocation, denial of renewal, or any other lawful action to forbid or disallow Franchisee from providing Cable Service unless Franchisee has obtained other authority to occupy the rights-of-way in the Franchise Area.
SECTION 13 – INSPECTION OF FACILITIES
13.1 Franchisee shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and generally applicable local construction and engineering codes and regulations, currently in force or hereafter applicable, to the construction, operation or maintenance of its Cable System within the Town. After construction has been completed, the Town shall have the right to inspect all construction or installation work performed pursuant to the Franchise Agreement and all applicable federal, state and generally applicable local building and engineering codes. However, the Town shall not be required to review or approve construction plans and specifications or to make any inspections. The Franchisee shall be solely responsible for taking all steps necessary to assure compliance with applicable standards and to ensure that its Cable System is installed in a safe manner and pursuant to the terms of the Franchise Agreement and applicable law.
SECTION 14 – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
14.1 Force Majeure. The Franchisee shall not be held in default under, or in noncompliance with, the provisions of the Franchise, nor suffer any enforcement or penalty relating to noncompliance or default (including termination, cancellation or revocation of the Franchise), where such noncompliance or alleged defaults occurred or were caused by events which constitute a Force Majeure, as defined in this Agreement.
14.2 Notice. All notices shall be in writing and shall be served upon the other party by hand delivery; first class mail; registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid; or by reputable overnight courier service and addressed as follows:
To the Franchising Authority:
Town Manager
Town of Front Royal
P.O. Box 1560
102 E. Main Street
Front Royal, Virginia 22630
To the Franchisee:
Comcast of California/Maryland/Pennsylvania/Virginia/West Virginia, LLC
600 Hays Street
Staunton, VA 24401
Attn: Government Affairs Department/Paul Comes
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-27
With copies to:
Comcast Cable
7850 Walker Drive, 2nd Floor
Greenbelt, MD 20770
Attn.: Government Affairs Department
And to:
Comcast Cable Northeast Division
676 Island Pond Rd.
Manchester, NH 03109
Attention: Government Affairs Department
14.3 Entire Agreement. This Franchise Agreement embodies the entire understanding and agreement of the Franchising Authority and the Franchisee with respect to the subject matter hereof and supersedes all prior understandings, agreements and communications, whether written or oral. All ordinances or parts of ordinances that are in conflict with or otherwise impose obligations different from the provisions of this Franchise Agreement are superseded by the Franchise Agreement.
14.4 Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or other portion of this Franchise Agreement is, for any reason, declared invalid in whole or in part by any court, agency, commission, legislative body, or other authority of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent portion. Such declaration shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion, which shall continue in full force and effect.
14.5 Governing Law. This Franchise Agreement shall be deemed to be executed in the Commonwealth of Virginia and shall be governed in all respects, including validity, interpretation and effect, and construed in accordance with, the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia.
14.6 Modification. No provision of this Franchise Agreement shall be amended or otherwise modified, in whole or in part, except by an instrument in writing duly executed by the Franchising Authority and the Franchisee, which amendment shall be authorized on behalf of the Franchising Authority through the adoption of an appropriate resolution or order by the Franchising Authority, as required by applicable law.
14.7 No Third-Party Beneficiaries. Nothing in this Franchise Agreement shall confer third-party beneficiary status on any member of the public to enforce the terms of this Franchise Agreement.
14.8 No Waiver of Rights. Nothing in this Franchise Agreement shall be construed as a waiver of any rights, substantive or procedural, Franchisee may have under federal or state law unless such waiver is expressly stated herein.
14.9 Incorporation by Reference. Should the State, the federal government or the FCC require Franchisee to perform or refrain from performing any act the performance or non-performance
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-28
of which is inconsistent with any provisions herein, the Franchising Authority and Franchisee will thereupon, if they determine that a material provision herein is affected, modify any of the provisions herein to reflect such government action.
14.10 Annexation. Upon ninety (90) days written notice, any additions of territory to the Franchise Area, by annexation or other legal means, contiguous to the Franchise Area, shall thereafter be subject to all the terms of this Agreement as though it were an extension made hereunder related to the Cable System located or operated within said territory.
CABLE TELEVISION
(Added 10-28-19-Effective Upon Passage)
180-182 SHENANDOAH CABLE TELEVISION LLC FRANCHISE AGREEMENT
SECTION 1 - DEFINITION OF TERMS
For the purpose of this Franchise Agreement, capitalized terms, phrases, words, and abbreviations shall have the following meanings:
"ACT" means the Communications Act of 1934 as amended.
"AFFILIATE", in relation to any Person, means another Person who owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with, such Person.
"BASIC SERVICE TIER" means the service tier that includes (i) the retransmission of local television broadcast channels and (ii) public, educational, and governmental channels required to be carried in the basic tier.
“CABLE ACT” shall mean the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1934, as amended from time to time, 47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq,
"CABLE OPERATOR" means any Person or group of Persons that (A) provides Cable Service over a Cable System and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such Cable System or (B) otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of a Cable System. Cable Operator does not include a provider of wireless or direct-to-home satellite transmission service.
"CABLE SERVICE" means the one-way transmission to Subscribers of (i) video programming or (ii) other programming service, and Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service. Cable service does not include any video programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 U.S.C.§ 332(d).
"CABLE SYSTEM" or "SYSTEM” means any facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is designed to provide Cable Service that includes video programming and that is provided to
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-29
multiple Subscribers within a community, except that such definition shall not include (i) a system that serves fewer than 20 Subscribers; (ii) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; (iii) a facility that serves only Subscribers without using any public right-of-way; (iv) a facility of a common carrier that is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, 47 USC§ 201 et seq., except that such facility shall be considered a Cable System to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to Subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; (v) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric systems; (vi) or any portion of a System that serves fewer than 50 Subscribers in any locality, where such portion is part of a larger System franchised in an adjacent locality; or (vii) an open video system that complies with§ 653 of Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, 47 U.S.C. § 573, as amended.
"CUSTOMER" or "SUBSCRIBER" means a Person or user of the Cable System who lawfully receives Cable Service therefrom with the Franchisee's express permission.
"EFFECTIVE DATE" means the specific date on which this negotiated Franchise Agreement was approved by a duly enacted ordinance.
"FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission or successor governmental entity thereto.
"FORCE MAJEURE" means an event or events reasonably beyond the ability of Franchisee to anticipate and control. "Force majeure" includes, but is not limited to, acts of God, incidences of terrorism, war or riots, labor strikes or civil disturbances, floods, earthquakes, fire, explosions, epidemics, hurricanes, tornadoes, governmental actions and restrictions, work delays caused by waiting for utility providers to service or monitor or provide access to utility poles to which Franchisee's facilities are attached or to be attached or conduits in which Franchisee's facilities are located or to be located, and unavailability of materials or qualified labor to perform the work necessary.
"FRANCHISE" means the initial, nonexclusive, authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the Franchising Authority, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, agreement, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, ordinance or otherwise, which authorizes the construction and operation of the Cable System in the public rights-of- way.
"FRANCHISE AGREEMENT" or "AGREEMENT" shall mean this nonexclusive Cable Franchise Agreement and any amendments or modifications hereto.
"FRANCHISE AREA" means the present legal boundaries of the Town as of the Effective Date, and shall also include any additions thereto, by annexation or other legal means.
"FRANCHISEE" shall mean Shenandoah Cable Television, LLC.
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-30
"FRANCHISING AUTHORITY" means the Town or the lawful successor, transferee, designee, or assignee thereof.
"GROSS REVENUE" means all revenue, as determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, that is actually received by the cable operator and derived from the operation of the cable system to provide cable services in the franchise area; however, "gross revenue" shall not include: (i) refunds or rebates made to subscribers or other third parties; (ii) any revenue which is received from the sale of merchandise over home shopping channels carried on the cable system, but not including revenue received from home shopping channels for the use of the cable service to sell merchandise; (iii) any tax, fee, or charge collected by the cable operator and remitted to a governmental entity or its agent or designee, including without limitation a local public access or education group; (iv) program launch fees; (v) directory or Internet advertising revenue including, but not limited to, yellow page, white page, banner advertisement, and electronic publishing; (vi) a sale of cable service for resale or for use as a component part of or for the integration into cable services to be resold in the ordinary course of business, when the reseller is required to pay or collect franchise fees or similar fees on the resale of the cable service; (vii) revenues received by any affiliate or any other person in exchange for supplying goods or services used by the cable operator to provide cable service; and (viii) revenue derived from services classified as noncable services under federal law, including, without limitation, revenue derived from telecommunications services and information services, and any other revenues attributed by the cable operator to noncable services in accordance with rules, regulations, standards, or orders of the Federal Communications Commission.
“INSTITUTION NETWORK” means the Town’s communication network.
"INTERACTIVE ON-DEMAND SERVICE" means a service providing video programming to Subscribers over switched networks on an on-demand, point-to-point basis, but does not include services providing video programming the programming provider preschedules.
"ORDINANCE" includes a resolution.
“PEG” means public, educational and/or governmental access to the Cable System to provide video programming.
"PERSON" means any natural person or any association, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or other legally recognized entity, whether for-profit or not-for profit, but shall not mean the Franchising Authority.
"PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY" (PROW or Public Way) means the surface, the air space above the surface, and the area below the surface of any public street, highway, lane, path, alley, sidewalk, boulevard, drive, bridge, tunnel, park, parkway, waterway, easement, or similar property in which the Town now or hereafter holds any property interest, which, consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purpose of installing and maintaining a cable system. No reference herein, or in any franchise, to a "public right-of-way" shall be deemed to be a representation or guarantee by the Town that its interest or other right to control the use of such property is sufficient to permit its use for such purposes, and Franchisee
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-31
shall be deemed to gain only those rights to use as are properly in the Town and as the Town may have the undisputed right and power to give. For purposes of this Franchise, the term "public right-of-way" shall also include any other parcels of property that the Town owns.
“SERVICE INTERRUPTION" means a service outage affecting less than five subscribers, or a loss or degradation of either video or audio for one or more channels for one or more subscribers.
"SERVICE OUTAGE" means the complete loss of cable service to five or more subscribers served by the same trunk, node, or feeder line for a period of 24 hours or more.
"TRANSFER" means any transaction in which (i) an ownership or other interest in the Franchisee is transferred, directly or indirectly, from one Person or group of Persons to another Person or group of Persons, so that majority control of the Franchisee is transferred; or (ii) the rights and obligations the Franchisee holds under the Franchise granted under this Franchise Agreement are transferred or assigned to another Person or group of Persons. However, notwithstanding clauses (i) and (ii) of the preceding sentence, a transfer of the Franchise shall not include (a) transfer of an ownership or other interest in the Franchisee to the parent of the Franchisee or to another Affiliate of the Franchisee; (b) transfer of an interest in the Franchise granted under this Franchise Agreement or the rights held by the Franchisee under the Franchise granted under this Franchise Agreement to the parent of the Franchisee or to another Affiliate of the Franchisee; (c) any action that is the result of a merger of the Franchisee’s parent; (d) any action that is the result of a merger of another Affiliate of the Franchisee; (e) a transfer in trust, by mortgage, or by assignment of any rights, title, or interest of the Franchisee in the Franchise or the System used to provide Cable Service in order to secure indebtedness.
"VIDEO PROGRAMMING" means programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to, programming a television broadcast station provides.
All terms used herein, unless otherwise defined, shall have the same meaning as set forth in Sections 15.2-2108.19 et seq. of the Code of Virginia; and if not defined therein, then as set forth in Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq.; and if not defined therein, their common and ordinary meaning. In addition, references in this Ordinance to any federal or state law shall include amendments thereto as are enacted from time-to-time.
SECTION 2 - GRANT OF AUTHORITY
2.1 The Franchising Authority hereby grants to the Franchisee under the Code of Virginia and the Cable Act a nonexclusive Franchise authorizing the Franchisee to construct and operate a Cable System in the Public Ways within the Franchise Area, and for that purpose to erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain, or retain in any Public Way such poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, pedestals, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other related property or equipment as may be necessary or appurtenant to the Cable System and to provide such Cable Services over the Cable System as may be lawfully allowed. This agreement neither authorizes the Franchisee to use the PROW for purposes of
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-32
providing any service other than Cable Service, nor prohibits the Franchisee from doing so. The Franchisee's authority to provide non-Cable Services shall be subject to applicable law.
2.2 Term of Franchise. The term of the Franchise granted hereunder shall be fifteen (15) years, beginning on the Effective Date, unless the Franchise is renewed or is lawfully terminated in accordance with the terms of this Franchise Agreement and the Code of Virginia, and the Cable Act.
2.3 Renewal. Any Franchise renewal shall be governed by and comply with the provisions of Article 1.2 of Chapter 21 of Title 15.2 of the Code of Virginia and the Cable Act, as amended.
2.4 Reservation of Authority. Nothing in this Franchise Agreement shall be construed as a waiver of any codes or ordinances of general applicability promulgated by the Franchising Authority.
SECTION 3 - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF THE CABLE SYSTEM
3.1 Permits and General Obligations. The Franchisee shall be responsible for obtaining, at its own cost and expense, all generally applicable permits, licenses, or other forms of approval or authorization necessary to construct, operate, maintain or repair the Cable System, or any part thereof, prior to the commencement of any such activity. Construction, installation, and maintenance of the Cable System shall be performed in a safe, thorough and reliable manner using materials of good and durable quality. Notwithstanding the requirements herein, Franchisee shall not be required to obtain a permit for individual drop connections to Subscribers, servicing or installing pedestals or other similar facilities, or other instances of routine maintenance or repair to its Cable System. All transmission and distribution structures, poles, other lines, and equipment the Franchisee installs for use in the Cable System in accordance with the terms and conditions of this Franchise Agreement shall be located so as to minimize the interference with the proper use of the Public Ways and the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who own property that adjoins any such Public Way.
3.2 Conditions of Street Occupancy.
(A) New Grades or Lines. If the grades or lines of any Public Way
within the Franchise Area are lawfully changed at any time during the term of this Franchise Agreement, then the Franchisee shall, upon reasonable advance written notice from the Franchising Authority (which shall not be less than ten (10) business days) and at its own cost and expense, protect or promptly alter or relocate the Cable System, or any part thereof, so as to conform with any such new grades or lines. If public funds are available to any other user of the Public Way for the purpose of defraying the cost of any of the foregoing, the Franchising Authority shall notify the Franchisee of the availability of such funding and make such funds available to the Franchisee. It is understood that the Franchising Authority does not guarantee that any public funds will be available to help defray the cost of altering or relocating the Cable System to conform to new grades or lines.
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-33
(B) Relocation at request of Third Party. The Franchisee shall, upon reasonable prior written request of any Person holding a permit issued by the Franchising Authority to move any structure, temporarily move its wires to permit the moving of such structure; provided (i) the Franchisee may impose a reasonable charge on any Person for the movement of its wires, and such charge may be required to be paid in advance of the movement of its wires; and (ii) the Franchisee is given not less than thirty (30) business days advance written notice to arrange for such temporary relocation.
(C) Restoration of Public Ways. If in connection with the construction, operation, maintenance, or repair of the Cable System, the Franchisee disturbs, alters, or damages any Public Way, the Franchisee agrees that it shall at its own cost and expense replace and restore any such Public Way to a condition reasonably comparable to the condition of the Public Way existing immediately prior to the disturbance. The Town may make the final determination as to acceptability of repair and/or replacement of damaged facilities. In performing any excavation work in the public rights-of-way, the Franchisee will comply with all of the requirements of Town Code applicable to all users of the Public Rights of Way.
(D) Safety Requirements. The Franchisee shall, at its own cost and expense, undertake all necessary and appropriate efforts to maintain its work sites in a safe manner in order to prevent failures and accidents that may cause damage, injuries or nuisances. All work undertaken on the Cable System shall be performed in substantial accordance with applicable FCC or other federal and state regulations and with the National Electrical Safety Code (National Bureau of Standards) and the National Electrical Code (National Bureau of Fire Underwriters). The Cable System shall not endanger or interfere with the safety of Persons or property in the Franchise Area.
(E) Trimming of Trees and Shrubbery. The Franchisee shall have the authority to trim trees or other natural growth overhanging any of its Cable System in the Franchise Area so as to prevent contact with the Franchisee's wires, cables, or other equipment. All such trimming shall be done at the Franchisee's sole cost and expense. For all planned trimming, the Franchisee shall provide the Town at least five (5) business days’ notice of the work to be performed and a description of such work. For trimming of an emergency nature, including responding to storm damage, advance notice is not required. The Franchisee shall be responsible for any damage and all clean up of debris the trimming causes. The foregoing notwithstanding, any tree trimming by Franchisee must at all times comply with any tree trimming provision contained in any separately negotiated pole attachment agreement in effect between the Town and the Franchisee.
(F) Aerial and Underground Construction. At the time of Cable System construction, if all of the transmission and distribution facilities of all of the respective Town utilities in any area of the Franchise Area are underground, the Franchisee shall place its Cable System's transmission and distribution facilities underground; provided that such underground locations are actually capable of accommodating the Franchisee's cable and other equipment without technical degradation of the Cable System's signal quality. In any region(s) of the Franchise Area where the transmission or distribution facilities of the respective Town
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-34
utilities are both aerial and underground, the Franchisee shall have the discretion to construct, operate, and maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities, or any part thereof, aerially or underground. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to require the Franchisee to construct, operate, or maintain underground any ground- mounted appurtenances such as customer taps, line extenders, system passive devices, amplifiers, power supplies, pedestals, or other related equipment. To avoid overburdening the Public Way, and in furtherance of the health, safety and welfare of the public, Franchisee will at all times utilize Town owned utility poles and conduit when and where available for the construction, repairs and maintenance of the Cable System pursuant to separately negotiated pole attachment and conduit utilization agreements in effect with the Town. The Cable System will be constructed and maintained in such a way as to maximize the use of Town poles and conduit.
(G) All excavation and reconstruction work by Franchisee in the Public Rights-of-Way must be in compliance with the requirements of Town Code applicable to users of the Public Rights of Way, including all of the standards referenced therein, and all applicable VDOT standards. It shall be the Franchisee’s responsibility to obtain any required permits, to review all applicable excavation, reconstruction, restoration, repair and permitting requirements, and to become familiar with such requirements before beginning any excavation, reconstruction, restoration or repair work in the Public Rights-of-Way or private property.
(H) Any equipment or facilities the Franchisee installs in the Public Rights-of-Way shall be installed, located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, replaced, restored, removed, repaired, maintained and operated in accordance with good engineering practices, performed by experienced maintenance and construction personnel so as not (1) to endanger or interfere in any manner with improvements the Town or VDOT may deem appropriate to make; or (2) to interfere with the rights of any private property owner; or (3) to hinder or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic. Franchisee shall not erect, for any reason, any pole on or along any Public Right-of-Way or on public property without the advance written approval of the Town.
(I) Whenever the Town shall determine that it is necessary in connection with the repair, relocation, or improvement of the Public Rights-of-Way, the Town may require by written notification that any properties or facilities of the Franchisee be removed or relocated. Within sixty (60) days after receipt of notification, unless the Town extends such period for good cause shown, the Franchisee shall remove or relocate its facilities to such place and under such terms and conditions as the Town specifies. The Franchisee shall bear all expenses associated with the removal and relocation except that the Town will issue, without charge to the Franchisee, whatever local permits are required for the relocation of Franchisee's facilities. If the Franchisee does not complete its removal or relocation within 60 days or such other period as authorized by the Town, the Town may take such actions as necessary to effectuate such removal or relocation at the Franchisee's expense. The Town shall use reasonable efforts to minimize the impact on Franchisee’s facilities related to any removal or relocation. Franchisee shall follow all applicable VDOT standards and
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-35
regulations in connection with the repair, relocation, or improvement of the Public Rights-of-Way. Franchisee shall be entitled to reimbursement of its relocation costs from public or private funds, if any, raised for the project and made available to other users of the Public Way.
Nothing in this Franchise Agreement shall be construed to prevent the Town from constructing, maintaining, repairing, improving, grading, paving, relocating and/or altering any Public Right-of-Way; constructing, installing, repairing, maintaining, or relocating any water or sewer mains; or constructing, maintaining, relocating or repairing any sidewalk or other public work. All such work shall be done, to the extent possible, in such a manner as not to obstruct, injure or prevent the free use and operation of the poles, wires, conduits, conductors, pipes or appurtenances of the Franchisee.
Nothing contained in this Franchise Agreement shall relieve any Person from liability arising out of the failure to exercise reasonable care to avoid injuring Franchisee’s facilities while performing any work in any Public Right-of-Way or on public property.
(J) Movement of Facilities. In the event it is necessary to move or remove any of Franchisee’s wires, cables, poles or other facilities placed pursuant to this Franchise, in order to lawfully move a large object, vehicle, building or other structure over the Public Right-of-Ways or public property of the Town, upon 30-day notice by the Town to Franchisee, Franchisee shall move at the expense, which may be required to paid in advance, of the Person requesting the temporary removal such of its facilities as may be required to facilitate such movements.
Any service disruption provisions of this Franchise shall not apply in the event that the removal of Franchisee’s wires, cables, poles or other facilities pursuant to the preceding paragraph results in temporary service disruptions.
(K) Undergrounding and Beautification Projects. In the event all users of the Public Way relocate aerial facilities underground as part of an undergrounding or neighborhood beautification project, Franchisee shall participate in the planning for relocation of its aerial facilities contemporaneously with other utilities. Franchisee's relocation costs shall be included in any computation of necessary project funding by the Town or private parties. Franchisee shall be entitled to reimbursement of its relocation costs from public or private funds raised for the project and made available to other users of the Public Way. It is understood that the Franchising Authority does not guarantee that any public or private funds will be available to help defray the cost of such undergrounding or beautification projects. In the event that public and/or private funds are not available or do not cover the entire cost of the relocation, Franchisee reserves the right to pass its costs, or in the case of partial reimbursement from public and/or private funds its incremental cost, through to its Subscribers in accordance with applicable law.
(L) Inspection. The Town shall have the right to inspect all construction or installation work performed pursuant to the provisions of this Franchise to ensure compliance with the terms of the Franchise and applicable laws.
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-36
(M) Quality Control. Upon request, the Franchisee will provide information to the Town regarding items of quality control for installation and maintenance activities performed by the Franchisee or its authorized subcontractors.
SECTION 4 -SERVICE OBLIGATIONS
4.1 General Service Obligations. The Franchisee shall make Cable Service generally available to businesses and residential dwelling units within the Franchise Area. The Franchisee initially shall build out its Cable System to make Cable Service generally available to those business and residential units located within the red ovals shown on the map attached to this Franchise Agreement as Exhibit A. The Franchisee shall use commercially reasonable efforts (considering build out costs, geographical and geological conditions, and business conditions) to complete such initial build out by January 1, 2022. Franchisee shall complete its Cable System within the remainder of the Franchise area within a commercially reasonable time (considering build out costs, geographical and geological conditions, and business conditions). In addition to the obligations and considerations set forth above, Franchisee shall offer Cable Service to all new or previously unserved business and residential units within 150 feet of the Franchisee’s distribution cable.
(A) The Franchisee may elect to provide Cable Service to areas not meeting the above distance standards. The Franchisee may impose an additional charge in excess of its regular installation charge for any service installation requiring a drop in or line extension in excess of the above standards. Any such additional charge shall be computed on a time plus materials basis to be calculated on that portion of the installation that exceeds the standards set forth above. Such additional charge shall be paid in advance by the developer, landowner, or customer requesting Cable Service in an area that does not meet the density and distance standards.
4.2 New Developments. Franchisee agrees to use commercially reasonable efforts to inform itself of all newly planned developments within the Town and to work with developers to cooperate in pre-installation of facilities to support Cable Service.
4.3 Programming. The Franchisee shall offer to all Customers a diversity of video programming services.
4.4 No Discrimination. The Franchisee shall not discriminate or permit discrimination between or among any Persons in the availability of Cable Services or other services provided in connection with the Cable System in the Franchise Area. It shall be the right of all Persons to receive all available services provided on the Cable System so long as such Person's financial or other obligations to the Franchisee are satisfied; unless such Person has engaged in inappropriate activity including, but not limited to, theft of Franchisee's cable services, vandalism of its property, or harassment of its representatives. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the Franchisee from offering bulk discounts, promotional discounts, package discounts, or other such pricing strategies as part of its business practice.
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-37
Franchisee shall assure that access to Cable Services is not denied to any group of potential residential cable subscribers because of the residents’ income.
4.5 Availability of Maps to the Town: Upon the Town giving two (2) weeks written request, but no more often than annually, the Franchisee shall make available for the Town’s viewing, at the Franchisee's nearest business office, or at Town Hall updated maps of the Franchise Area which shall clearly delineate all areas within the Franchise Area where Cable Service is available to Subscribers.
4.6 Changes in Service: Franchisee agrees to give the Town Manager thirty (30) days prior written notice of changes in the mix or nature of the Cable Services.
SECTION 5 – PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL AND GOVERNMENT ACCESS CHANNELS
5.1 Franchisee shall designate capacity on up to five (5) channels for public, educational and/or governmental ("PEG") access video programming provided by the Franchising Authority or its designee, such as a public access organization or educational institution. Within one hundred and twenty (120) days of receipt of a written request from the Town to activate an access channel, Franchisee will make such channel(s) available for the Town’s use or its designee’s use; and such channel(s) shall be carried in HD digital format. Use of a channel position for PEG access shall be provided on the most basic tier of service offered by the Franchisee and in accordance with the Cable Act and the Code of Virginia, and as further set forth below. "Channel position" means a number designation on the Franchisee's channel lineup regardless of the transmission format (analog or digital). Franchisee does not relinquish its ownership of or ultimate right of control over a channel by designating it for PEG use. In the event any access channel is reassigned, the Franchisee shall provide the Town with at least thirty (30) days’ notice before reassigning the channel and shall pay the verified reasonable costs of any advertising and promotional materials required due to the channel reassignment, not to exceed $5,000. A PEG access user- whether an individual, educational or governmental user- acquires no property or other interest by virtue of the use of a channel so designated, and may not rely on the continued use of a particular channel number, no matter how long the same channel may have been designated for such use. Franchisee shall not exercise editorial control over any public, educational, or governmental use of a channel position, except Franchisee may refuse to transmit any public access program or portion of a public access program that contains obscenity, indecency, or nudity. The Franchising Authority shall be responsible for developing, implementing, interpreting and enforcing rules for Educational and Governmental Access Channel use.
5.2 Public Access. A "Public Access Channel" is a channel position designated for noncommercial use by the public on a first-come, first-served, nondiscriminatory basis. A Public Access Channel may not be used to cablecast programs for profit, or for political or commercial fundraising in any fashion.
5.3 Educational Access. An "Educational Access Channel" is a channel position designated for noncommercial use by educational institutions such as public or private schools (but not "home schools"), community colleges, and universities.
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-38
5.4 Government Access. A "Governmental Access Channel" is a channel position designated for noncommercial use by the Franchising Authority for the purpose of showing the public local government at work.
5.5 Franchisee shall ensure that all PEG access channel signals carried on its system, regardless of the method used to acquire the PEG channels, comply with all applicable FCC signal quality and technical standards. The technical and signal quality of all PEG access channel signals shall be preserved and shall be of comparable quality as other channels.
Within one hundred and twenty (120) days of receipt of the Town’s written request to activate an access channel discussed in Section 5.1, Franchisee will provide a connection between a location the Town designates and Franchisee's headend for each new channel to be activated for PEG use, at no charge to the Town if the connection between the new location and the nearest usable signal insertion point in Franchisee's cable system is five hundred (500) feet or less.
5.6 Capital support for PEG access. At the Town’s option, Franchisee shall collect a monthly fee from each subscriber to provide additional capital support for PEG access. The maximum fee that shall be imposed is 0.5% of Franchisee’s revenues from basic and expanded cable service, and the fee collected shall be remitted to the Town no later than thirty (30) days following the end of each calendar quarter. Franchisee shall not impose a fee to provide capital support for PEG access unless and until the Town directs Franchisee to impose a fee. The Town shall give Franchisee at least ninety (90) days’ notice before Franchisee shall begin collecting the fee. The Town shall allocate such amount to PEG capital uses exclusively. If such fee is imposed, it shall not be deemed to be "franchise fees" within the meaning of 47 U.S.C. Section 542 and such payments shall not be deemed to be (i) "payments-in-kind" or any involuntary payments chargeable against the compensation the Franchisee is to pay the Town pursuant to Section 6 hereof, or (ii) part of the compensation the Franchisee is to pay to the Town pursuant to Section 6 hereof.
SECTION 6 – COMMUNICATION TAX AND FRANCHISE FEES
6.1 Communications Tax: Franchisee shall comply with the provisions of Sections 58.1-645 et seq. of the Code of Virginia, pertaining to the Virginia Communications Sales and Use Tax, as amended (the "Communications Tax"), and Sections 6.2 through 6.6 of the Agreement shall not have any effect, for so long as the Communications Tax or a successor state or local tax that would constitute a franchise fee for purposes of 47 U.S.C. § 542 is imposed on the sale of cable services by the Franchisee to the Town’s subscribers.
6.2 Payment of Franchise Fee to Town: In the event that the Communications Tax is repealed and no successor state or local tax is enacted that would constitute a franchise fee for purposes of 47 U.S.C. § 542 Franchisee shall pay to the Town a Franchise fee of five percent (5%) of annual Gross Revenue, beginning 30 days from the effective date of the repeal of such tax (the "Repeal Date"). Beginning on the Repeal Date, the terms of Section 6.2 through 6.6 of this Agreement
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-39
shall take effect. In accordance with the Cable Act, the twelve (12) month period applicable under the Franchise for the computation of the Franchise fee shall be a calendar year. Such payments shall be made no later than thirty (30) days following the end of each calendar quarter. Should Franchisee submit an incorrect amount, Franchisee shall be allowed to add or subtract that amount in a subsequent quarter, but no later than ninety (90) days following the close of the calendar year for which such amounts were applicable; such correction shall be documented in the supporting information required under Section 6.3 below.
6.3 Supporting Information: Each Franchise fee payment shall be accompanied by a brief report prepared by a representative of Franchisee showing the basis for the computation and a breakdown by major revenue categories (such as Basic Service, premium service, etc.). The Town shall have the right to reasonably request further supporting information for each Franchise fee payment, subject to the proprietary information provisions of Section 8.7.
6.4 Limitation on Franchise Fee Actions: The period of limitation for recovery of any Franchise fee payable hereunder shall be three (3) years from the date on which payment by Franchisee is due.
6.5 Bundled Services: If cable services subject to a franchise fee, or any other fee determined by a percentage of the cable operator's gross revenues in a locality, are provided to subscribers in conjunction with other services: the fee shall be applied only to the value of these cable services, as reflected on the books and records of the cable operator in accordance with rules, regulations, standards, or orders of the Federal Communications Commission, the State Corporation Commission, or generally accepted accounting principles. Any discounts resulting from purchasing the services as a bundle shall be reasonably allocated between the respective services that constitute the bundled transaction.
6.6 Books and Records Regarding Franchise Fees. Subject to the confidentiality requirements of Section 8.7 of this Agreement, the Town, or such Person or Persons the Town designates, shall have the right to inspect and copy records and the right to audit and to re-compute any amounts determined to be payable under this Franchise, regardless of who holds the records. If an audit discloses an overpayment or underpayment of franchise fees, the Town shall notify the Franchisee in writing of such overpayment or underpayment within ninety (90) days of the date the audit was completed. The Franchisee shall have thirty (30) days from receipt of such notice to provide the Town with a written response agreeing to or refuting the results of the audit, including any substantiating documentation. Based on these notices, the parties shall agree upon a final settled amount. The Town, in its sole discretion, shall determine the completion date for any audit conducted hereunder. Audit completion is not to be unreasonably delayed by either party. Subject to the confidentiality requirements of Section 8.7 of this Franchise, the Franchisee shall be responsible for providing to the Town all records necessary to confirm the accurate payment of franchise fees. The Franchisee shall maintain such records for the current year plus three (3) years. The Town shall bear its audit expenses unless the audit determines the payment to the Town should be increased by more than five percent (5%) in the audited period, in which case the Franchisee shall pay reasonable and verifiable costs of the audit, but in no event more than $20,000, to the Town within thirty (30) days following the Town’s written notice to the
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-40
Franchisee of the underpayment, which notice shall include a copy of the audit report. If re-computation results in additional revenue to be paid by Franchisee to the Town, such amount shall be subject to an interest charge in accordance with the prime rate of interest charged by the Town's primary depository bank.
SECTION 7 – CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS; CUSTOMER BILLS AND PRIVACY PROTECTION
7.1 Customer Service Standards. The Franchisee shall comply in all respects with the customer service requirements established by the FCC (47 CFR §76.309) unless modified herein. Franchisee shall be subject to the following customer service standards consistent with federal law:
(A) Franchisee will maintain a local or toll-free telephone access line which will be available to its subscribers 24 hours a day, seven days a week. Additionally, Franchisee and the Town agree that it is appropriate that Franchisee will also maintain at least one bill payment location and equipment return location within the Town. In addition, Franchisee will provide for an employee to pick up or drop off equipment free of charge in either of the following ways: (i) by having a Franchise representative to go to the subscriber’s residence, or (ii) by using a prepaid mailer. Franchisee also has the option to provide alternative payment drop off locations within the Franchise Area.
(B) Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by a customer representative or automated answering device, including wait time, shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds when the connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds. These standards shall be met no less than ninety-five (95) percent of the time under normal operating conditions as measured on a quarterly basis.
(C) Under normal operating conditions, the customer will receive a busy signal less than three percent (3%) of the time.
(D) Franchisee shall accurately collect and maintain data to measure its compliance with the telephone answering standards in paragraphs 7.1(B) and 7.1(C).
(E) Local bill payment location will be open to customers, including assisting walk-in customers, at least during the hours of 8:30 a.m. – 5:30 p.m. Monday through Friday.
(F) Installations, Outages, and Service Calls. Under normal operating conditions, each of the following standards will be met no less than ninety five percent (95%) of the time as measured on a quarterly basis.
i. Standard installations will be performed within seven business days after an order has been placed, unless the customer requests a longer period. "Standard" installations are those that are within 150 feet of the existing distribution system.
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-41
ii Excluding conditions beyond the control of the Franchisee, the Franchisee will begin repairs on Service Outages promptly and in no event later than eight (8) hours after the outage becomes known.
iii The Franchisee must begin working to correct Service Interruptions within 8 hours, including weekends, of receiving a subscriber call for a Service Interruption. “Service Interruption” shall mean the loss of any service provided to customer by Franchisee.
(G) Franchisee shall accurately collect and maintain data to measure its compliance with subparagraph 7.1.(F).
(H) The "appointment window" alternatives for installations, service calls and other installation activities will either be at a specific time or, at maximum, a two-hour time block during normal business hours. Franchisee may schedule service calls and other installation activities outside of normal business hours for the express convenience of the customer.
(I) Franchisee may not cancel an appointment with a customer after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment. If Franchisee representative is running late for an appointment with a customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the customer will be contacted. The appointment will be rescheduled as necessary, at a time which is convenient for the customer.
(J) Franchisee shall provide written information on each of the following areas at the time of installation of service, at least annually to all subscribers, and at any time upon request:
i. Products and services offered;
ii. Prices and options for programming services and conditions of subscription to programming and other services;
iii. Installation and service maintenance policies;
iv. Instructions on how to use the cable service;
v. Channel positions of programming carried on the system;
vi. Refund policy; and
vii. Billing and complaint procedures, including the Franchisee's office hours, telephone number, and address of the local cable office.
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-42
7.2 Customer Bills. Customer bills shall be designed in such a way as to present the information contained therein clearly and comprehensibly to Customers, and in a way that (i) is not misleading and (ii) does not omit material information. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in Section 7.1 above, the Franchisee may, in its sole discretion, consolidate costs on Customer bills as may otherwise be permitted by the Cable Act.
7.3 Franchisee shall notify subscribers of any changes in rates, programming services or channel positions as soon as possible in writing. Notice must be given to subscribers a minimum of thirty (30) days in advance of such changes if the change is within the control of the Franchisee. In addition, Franchisee shall notify subscribers thirty (30) days in advance of any significant changes in the other information that paragraph 7.1.(J) requires.
7.4 In case of a billing dispute, Franchisee must respond to a subscriber’s written complaint within fifteen (15) days.
7.5 Refund checks will be issued promptly by the customer’s next billing cycle following resolution of the request, or thirty (30) days, whichever is earlier.
7.6 Credits for service will be issued promptly by the customer’s next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted.)
7.7 Franchisee shall make available parental control devices to all subscribers who wish to be able to block out any objectionable channel(s) of programming from the cable service entering the subscriber's home.
7.8 Privacy Protection. The Franchisee shall comply with all applicable federal and state privacy laws.
SECTION 8 – OVERSIGHT AND REGULATION BY FRANCHISING AUTHORITY
8.1 Oversight of Franchise. In accordance with applicable law, the Franchising Authority at its sole cost and expense, shall have the right to oversee, regulate and, on reasonable prior written notice and in the presence of Franchisee's employee, periodically inspect the construction, operation and maintenance of the Cable System in the Franchise Area, and all parts thereof, as necessary to monitor Franchisee's compliance with the provisions of this Franchise Agreement.
(A) The Franchisee shall perform all tests necessary to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of the Franchise and other performance standards established by law or regulation, and to ensure that the Cable System components are operating as expected.
(B) Upon pertinent and valid evidence demonstrating a probability of non-compliance, the Franchisee shall conduct additional FCC tests upon the Town’s requests to ensure that its Cable System is functioning in compliance with applicable laws and regulations and make the results of such test available to the Town to verify compliance. If any such test indicates
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-43
that any part or component of the System fails to meet applicable requirements, the Franchisee shall take corrective action, retest locations, and advise the Town of the action taken and results achieved.
8.2 Technical Standards. The Franchisee shall comply with all applicable technical standards of the FCC as published in Subpart K of 47 C.F.R. § 76. To the extent those standards are altered, modified, or amended during the term of this Franchise, the Franchisee shall comply with such altered, modified or amended standards within a reasonable period after such standards become effective. The Franchising Authority shall have, upon written request, the right to obtain a copy of tests and records required to be performed pursuant to the FCC's rules.
8.3 Operational Records. The Franchisee shall maintain the records required to compute all operational and customer service compliance measures outlined in this Franchise to demonstrate that the measures are being met for at least four consecutive quarters. Failure to maintain the records as required herein shall subject the Franchisee to the liquidated damages established in this Franchise Agreement
8.4 Records Required: Franchisee shall at all times maintain:
(A) Records of all written complaints for a period of one year after receipt by Franchisee or until the applicable compliance measures described in this Franchise are met for four consecutive quarters. The term "complaint" as used herein refers to complaints about any aspect of the Cable System or Franchisee's cable operations, including, without limitation, complaints about employee courtesy. Complaints recorded will not be limited to complaints requiring an employee service call.
(B) Records of Outages and Service Interruptions for a period of one year after occurrence, or until the applicable compliance measures described in this Franchise are met for four consecutive quarters, indicating date, duration, area, and the number of Subscribers affected, type of outage, and cause.
(C) Records of service calls for repair and maintenance for a period of one year after resolution by Franchisee, or until the applicable compliance measures described in this Franchise are met for four consecutive quarters, indicating the date and time service was required, the date of acknowledgment and date and time service was scheduled (if it was scheduled), and the date and time service was provided, and (if different) the date and time the problem was resolved.
(D) Records of installation/reconnection and requests for service extension for a period of one year after the request was fulfilled by Franchisee, or until the applicable compliance measures described in this Franchise are met for four consecutive quarters, indicating the date of request, date of acknowledgment, and the date and time service was extended.
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-44
8.5 Federal Communications (FCC) Testing: Within fourteen (14) days of the Town’s written request, a written report of test results of FCC performance testing will be provided to the Town Manager or his designee.
8.6 File for Public Inspection. Throughout the term of this Franchise Agreement, the Franchisee shall maintain, at a nearby business office or on-line, in a file available for public inspection during normal business hours, those documents required pursuant to the FCC's rules and regulations. Upon no less than thirty (30) business days' written notice to the Franchisee, the Town shall have the right to inspect Franchisee's books and records, including electronic books and records, pertaining to Franchisee's provision of Cable Service in the franchise area at any time during normal business hours and on a nondisruptive basis, as are reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of this franchise. Such notice shall specifically reference the Franchisee’s section or subsection which is under review, so that Franchisee may organize the necessary books and records for appropriate access by the Town. Franchisee shall not be required to maintain any books and records for franchise compliance purposes longer than the current year plus three (3) years.
8.7 Proprietary Information:
(A) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth herein, Franchisee shall not be required to submit information to the Town that it reasonably deems to be proprietary or confidential in nature, nor submit to the Town any of its or an affiliate's books and records not relating to the provision of Cable Service in the franchise area, except as provided herein. Such confidential information shall be subject to terms of a nondisclosure agreement that is acceptable to the parties and to the following, to be applied as is most practicable for the purposes of this Agreement:
i. To the extent an exemption under the Virginia Freedom of Information Act permits the Town to maintain the confidentiality of submitted information and the Franchisee submits such information to the Town, the Town shall maintain the confidentiality of such information and not disclose it to any public request;
ii. To the extent the information provided to an accountant, attorney, consultant, or any other agent of the Town ("Town Consultant") would not be subject to public disclosure under the Virginia Freedom of Information Act, and the Town instructs the Franchisee to provide such information to the Town Consultant as may be required by this Agreement, the Franchisee shall provide such information to the Town Consultant and the Town shall not take possession of the information nor engage in any act that would jeopardize the information’s confidentiality; or,
iii. Franchisee must provide the following documentation to the Town:
(a) specific identification of the information;
(b) statement attesting to the reason(s) the Franchisee believes the information is confidential; and
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-45
(c) statement that the documents are available at the Franchisee's designated offices for the Town’s inspection.
(B) At all times, the Town shall take reasonable steps to protect the proprietary and confidential nature of any books, records, maps, plans, or other Town requested documents that are provided pursuant to the Agreement to the extent they are designated as such by the Franchisee. Nothing in this Section shall be read to require the Franchisee to violate federal or state law protecting Subscriber privacy.
8.8 Reports. Within ninety (90) days after receipt of the Town’s written request, Franchisee shall submit a written year-end report to the Town. Such report may address, if the Town so desires: (I) major cable-related projects undertaken in the past year and planned for the current year, including construction and upgrade schedules for any new, relocated, or upgraded aerial or underground facilities. Upon written request of the Town, no later than thirty (30) days after the end of each quarter, the Franchisee shall submit a written report to the Town regarding complaints and service requests the Franchisee received from customers in the Franchise Area concerning Franchisee's customer service performance.
SECTION 9 – TRANSFER OR CHANGE OF CONTROL OF CABLE TELEVISION OR FRANCHISE
9.1 No transfer of this Franchise shall occur without the prior written consent of the Franchising Authority, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld, delayed or conditioned. No transfer shall be made to a Person, group of Persons or Affiliate that is not legally, technically and financially qualified to operate the Cable System and satisfy the obligations hereunder.
SECTION 10 – INSURANCE AND INDEMNITY
10.1 The Franchisee shall indemnify hold harmless and defend the Town, its officers, employees, and agents (hereinafter referred to as "indemnitees"), from and against:
(A) Any and all third-party claims for liabilities, obligations, damages, penalties, liens, costs, charges, losses and expenses (including, without limitation, fees and expenses of attorneys, expert witnesses and consultants), which may be imposed upon, incurred by or asserted against the indemnitees by reason of any act or omission of the Franchisee, its personnel, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors, resulting in personal injury, bodily injury, sickness, disease or death to any person or damage to, loss of or destruction of tangible or intangible property, libel, slander, invasion of privacy and unauthorized use of any trademark, trade name, copyright, patent, service mark or
any other right of any person, firm or corporation, which may arise out of or be in any way connected with the construction, installation, operation, maintenance, use or condition of the Franchisee's cable system caused by Franchisee, its contractors, subcontractors or agents or the Franchisee's failure to comply with any federal, state or local statute, ordinance or regulation.
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-46
(B) Any and all third-party claims for liabilities, obligations, damages, penalties, liens, costs, charges, losses and expenses (including, without limitation, fees and expenses of attorneys, expert witnesses and consultants), which are imposed upon, incurred by or asserted against the indemnitees by reason of any claim or lien arising out of work, labor, materials or supplies provided or supplied to the Franchisee, its contractors or subcontractors, for the installation, construction, operation or maintenance of the Franchisee's cable system in the Town.
10.2 Damages shall include, but not be limited to, penalties arising out of copyright infringements and damages arising out of any failure by the Franchisee to secure consents from the owners, authorized distributors or licensees, or programs to be delivered by the Franchisee's cable system.
10.3 The Franchisee undertakes and assumes for its officers, agents, contractors, subcontractors, and employees all risk of dangerous conditions, if any, on or about any Town owned or controlled property, including streets and public rights-of-ways, except for any claim asserted or liability imposed that arises or is related to gross negligence or intentional misconduct by the indemnities; and the Franchisee hereby agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the indemnitees against and from any claim asserted or liability imposed upon the indemnitees for personal injury or property damage to any person arising out of the installation, operation, maintenance or condition of the Franchisee's cable system or the Franchisee's failure to comply with any federal, state or local statute, ordinance or regulation, except for any claim asserted or liability imposed upon the indemnitees that arises or is related to gross negligence or intentional misconduct by the indemnitees.
10.4 In the event any action or proceeding shall be brought against the indemnitees by reason of any matter for which the indemnitees are indemnified hereunder, the Franchisee shall, upon notice from any of the indemnitees, and at the Franchisee's sole cost and expense, resist and defend the same; provided further, however, that the Franchisee shall not admit liability in any such matter on behalf of the indemnitees without the written consent of the Town Attorney or his designee. If the Town determines that it is necessary for it to employ separate counsel, the costs for such separate counsel shall be the responsibility of the Town.
10.5 The Town shall give the Franchisee notice within 10 business days of the Town receiving notice of a written claim, or the commencement of any action, suit or other proceeding covered by the provisions of this section. The Town will cooperate with the Franchisee while the Franchisee defends any claim or action under this section.
10.6 Nothing in this Franchise Agreement is intended to, or shall be construed or applied to, express or imply the Town’s waiver of statutory provisions, privileges or immunities of any kind or nature as set forth in the Code of Virginia, including the Town’s limits of liability as exists presently or as the legislature may increase from time to time. Nothing in a franchise or this ordinance shall constitute a waiver of the Town's statutory provisions, privileges or immunities, including the Town's sovereign immunity, of any kind or nature.
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-47
10.7 The Franchisee shall maintain, and by its acceptance of a franchise hereunder specifically agrees that it will maintain throughout the term of the franchise, general commercial liability insurance insuring the Franchisee. All liability insurance shall include an endorsement in a specific form which names as joint and several insured's the Town and the Town's officials, employees and agents, under such commercial liability policy, with respect to all claims arising out of the operation and maintenance of the Franchisee's cable system in the Town. Such policy shall be in the minimum amounts of Ten Million Dollars ($10,000,000) combined single limit per occurrence for bodily injury, property damage, or personal & advertising injury, which limit may be met through any combination of primary and excess liability policies.
(A) The Franchisee shall provide Workers Compensation Insurance as required by the Commonwealth of Virginia;
(B) Franchisee shall carry and maintain in its own name automobile liability insurance with a limit of $1,000,000 for each person and $1,000,000 for each accident for property damage with respect to owned and non-owned automobiles for the operation of which the Franchisee is responsible; and
10.8 The inclusion of more than one (1) insured shall not operate to increase the limit of the Franchisee's liability, and the insurer waives any right on contribution with insurance which the Town may have.
10.9 All policies of insurance this section requires shall be placed with companies which are qualified to write insurance in the Commonwealth of Virginia and which maintain throughout the policy term a General Rating of "A- " and a Financial Size Category of "VII " as determined by Best Insurance Rating Services.
10.10 Upon the Town’s written request, the Franchisee shall provide the Town with Certificates of Insurance for the coverages this section mandates. The Franchisee shall immediately advise the Town Attorney of any litigation that may develop that would affect the Town.
10.11 Should the Town find an insurance document to be non-compliant, then it shall notify the Franchisee; and the Franchisee shall promptly cure the defect in accordance with the requirements of this section 10.
10.12 Neither this section’s provisions, nor any damages recovered by the Town thereunder, shall be construed to nor limit the Franchisee’s liability under any franchise issued hereunder or for damages, except that nothing herein shall be interpreted to permit the Town to exercise rights and remedies in a manner that permits duplicative recovery from or payments by the Franchisee.
10.13 The commercial general liability insurance policy provided for herein shall name the Town, its officers, employees and agents as additional insureds, and shall be primary to any insurance or self-insurance the Town carries, but only with respect to the losses for which the Franchisee is responsible hereunder. The insurance policies this section requires shall be carried and maintained by the Franchisee throughout the term of the franchise and such other period of
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-48
time during which the Franchisee operates or is engaged in the removal of its cable system. Each policy shall provide for notice of cancellation in accordance with policy provisions
10.14 Nothing in this section shall require Franchisee to indemnify, hold harmless or defend the Town, its officials, employees or agents, from any claims or lawsuits arising out of the Town's award of a franchise to another person.
SECTION 11 – SYSTEM DESCRIPTION AND SERVICE
11.1 System Characteristics: Franchisee's Cable System shall meet or exceed the following requirements:
(A) The System shall be capable of providing Video Programming reception available to its customers in the Franchise Area in accordance with the Cable Act.
(B) The System shall be designed to be an active two-way plant for subscriber interaction, if any, required for selection or use of Cable Service.
(C) The Cable Service shall be operated in a manner such that it is in compliance with FCC standards and requirements with respect to interference. The Cable System shall be operated in such a manner as to minimize interference with a Subscriber’s reception of off-the-air signals. The Franchisee shall insure that signals carried by the Cable System, or originating outside the Cable System wires, cable, fibers, electronics and facilities, do not ingress or egress into or out of the Cable System in excess of FCC standards. In particular, the Franchise shall not operate the Cable System in such a manner as to pose unwarranted interference with emergency radio services, aeronautical navigational frequencies or an airborne navigational reception in normal flight patterns, or any other type of wireless communications, pursuant to FCC regulations.
11.2 Interconnection: The Franchise shall design its Cable System so that it may be interconnected with other cable systems and open video systems in the Franchise Area.
11.3 Standby Power: The Franchisee shall provide standby power generating capacity at the headend and at all hubs. The Franchisee shall maintain standby power capable of at least twenty-four (24) hours duration at the headend and all hubs, with automatic response systems to alert the local management center when commercial power is interrupted.
11.4 Technical Standards: The Cable System shall meet or exceed the applicable technical standards set forth in 47 C.F.R. § 76.601.
11.5 Leased Access Channels: The Franchisee shall provide Leased Access Channels that federal law requires.
11.6 Cable Service to School and Government Facilities.
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-49
Franchisee shall provide, without charge, at least one cable service outlet activated for basic cable service to each facility owned by Town government, and by the Warren County Public Schools located within the Town, as well as other such municipal buildings where service is requested in the future that are located within the Franchise Area within 150 feet of the Franchisee's distribution cable. The excess cost for extending service to buildings not within 150 feet of the Franchisee's distribution cable shall be paid by the entity requesting service.
11.7 Emergency Powers. In the event of an emergency, or where Franchisee's Cable System creates or is contributing to an imminent danger to health, safety, or property, or an unauthorized use of property, the Franchisee shall remove or relocate any or all parts of Franchisee's C a b l e System at the Town’s request. If the Franchisee fails to comply with the Town's request, the Town may remove or relocate any or all parts of the Franchisee's cable system upon reasonable notice to the Franchisee. The Town shall use reasonable efforts to minimize the impact on Franchisee’s facilities related to any emergency removal or relocation. Franchisee shall be entitled to compensation for expenses incurred for removal or relocation in the event of an emergency to the extent other users of the Public Way are compensated. It is understood that the Franchising Authority does not guarantee that funds will be available to compensate users of the Public Ways for emergency removal or relocation.
11.8 Emergency Alert System. Franchisee shall install and thereafter maintain an Emergency Alert System (EAS) that shall at all times be operated in accordance with FCC rules and the Virginia EAS Plan.
SECTION 12 – ENFORCEMENT OF FRANCHISE
12.1 If, pursuant to any required public hearing, the Town determines that the Franchisee has failed to materially comply with this franchise the Town may impose any penalty hereunder, including, without limitation, revocation of the franchise.
12.2 Within thirty (30) days after the award of a franchise, the Franchisee shall deposit with the Town a performance bond from a financial institution running to the Town in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00.). The bond shall be used to insure the Franchisee’s faithful performance of all its franchise provisions or defaults under a franchise or the payment by Franchisee of any penalties, liquidated damages, claims, liens, and taxes due the Town which arise by reason of the construction, operation, or maintenance of Franchisee's Cable System in the Town, including restoration of the public rights-of-way and the cost of removal or abandonment of any property of a cable operator.
12.3 Any bond obtained by Franchisee must be placed with a company which is qualified to write bonds in the Commonwealth of Virginia, and shall contain the following endorsement (or the substantive equivalent of such language as agreed upon by the Town):
"It is hereby understood and agreed that this bond may not be cancelled without the Town’s consent until sixty (60) days after the Town’s receipt by registered mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice of intent to cancel or not renew."
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-50
12.4 Any bond shall be recoverable by the Town for all damages and costs, whether direct or indirect, resulting from the Franchisee’s failure to well and faithfully observe and perform any provision of this Agreement.
12.5 The bond shall be maintained at the amount established herein for the entire term of the franchise, even if amounts have to be withdrawn pursuant to this ordinance. The Franchisee shall promptly replace any amounts withdrawn from the bond.
12.6 Non-compliance procedures.
(A) Should the Franchising Authority believe that the Franchisee has not complied with any of the provisions of this Franchise Agreement, it shall: (i) informally discuss the matter with the Franchisee and (ii) notify the Franchisee in writing of the exact nature of the alleged noncompliance if the discussions described in the foregoing clause (i) do not lead to resolution of the alleged noncompliance. The Franchisee shall have thirty (30) days from receipt of this written notice to: (a) respond to the Franchising Authority, if the Franchisee contests, in whole or in part, the assertion of noncompliance; (b) cure such default; or (c) in the event that, by the nature of default, such default cannot be cured within the 30-day period, initiate reasonable steps to remedy such default and notify the Franchising Authority of the steps being taken and the projected date that they will be completed. The Franchising Authority shall schedule a public hearing in the event that the Franchisee fails to respond to the written notice pursuant to these procedures or in the event that the alleged default is not remedied within thirty (30) days of the date projected above if the Franchising Authority intends to continue its investigation into the default. The Franchising Authority shall provide the Franchisee at least thirty (30) business days prior written notice of such hearing, which will specify the time, place, and purpose. The Franchising Authority shall provide the Franchisee with a reasonable opportunity to be heard at any such hearing.
(B) The Town shall, within a reasonable time after the closure of the public hearing, issue findings and conclusions in writing, setting forth the basis for the findings; the proposed cure plan; and the time line for curing the violation if the violation can be cured; and the penalties, damages and applicable interest owed, if any.
(C) Subject to applicable federal and Virginia law and the provisions of this Agreement, if the Town determines pursuant to a public hearing that Franchisee is in violation of any provision of this Agreement the Town may apply one or a combination of the following remedies: (i) seek specific performance or other equitable relief; (ii) commence an action at law; (iii) apply penalties in accordance with Section 12.8, if applicable; or (iv) apply liquidated damages in accordance with Section 12.8, if applicable.
(D) The Town may designate its cable administrator or other person to conduct the hearings and issue findings and conclusions under this subsection in which case the Franchisee may
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-51
appeal the determination of the cable administrator or other Town designee to the Town Council. Such an appeal shall be heard at a lawfully noticed public hearing. The Franchising Authority shall provide the Franchisee with a reasonable opportunity to be heard at any such hearing.
12.7 Penalties and Liquidated Damages. Because it may be difficult to calculate the harm to the Franchising Authority in the event of Franchisee’s breach of this Franchise Agreement, the parties agree to liquidated damages as a reasonable estimation of the actual damages. To the extent that the Franchising Authority elects to assess liquidated damages as provided in this Agreement and such liquidated damages have been paid, such damages shall be the Franchising Authority's sole and exclusive remedy. Nothing in this Section shall preclude the Franchising Authority from exercising any other right or remedy with respect to a breach that continues past the time the Franchising Authority stops assessing liquidated damages for such breach. Liquidated damages shall not be assessed until the Franchising Authority has completed the procedures set forth in Section 12.7 hereof, including holding a public hearing, and notifying the Franchisee by certified or registered mail of the proposed liquidated damages, specifying the violation. The Franchisee shall have thirty (30) days from the date of receipt of the written notice to submit payment. If the Franchisee does not make payment within that period, the Franchising Authority may obtain the amount assessed from the Franchisee's performance bond.
(A) The first day for which liquidated damages may be assessed, if there has been no cure, shall be the day after the end of the applicable cure period, including any extension of the cure period the Franchising Authority has granted.
(B) Franchisee may appeal (by pursuing judicial relief) any assessment of liquidated damages within thirty (30) days of receiving written notice of the assessment. Franchisee's obligation to pay the liquidated damages assessed shall be stayed pending resolution of the appeal.
(C) The Franchising Authority may assess liquidated damages for the following violations of this Franchise Agreement, in the following amounts:
i. Failure to comply with PEG access requirements: $200 per violation for each day the violation continues.
ii. Failure to render payments due to the Franchising Authority: Three-tenths of one percent (0.3%) of the unpaid amount for each day the violation continues, in addition to any monetary payment due and interest, computed at the Town's prime rate of interest charged by the Town's primary depository bank.
iii. Failure to supply information, reports, or filings lawfully required: $100 per violation for each day the violation continues.
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-52
iv. Failure to comply with customer service standards: $100 per each violation for each day the violation continues, except where compliance is measured quarterly, in which case damages shall be as specified in Section 12.8(C)v below.
v. Failure to comply with customer service standards with which compliance is measured on a quarterly basis: $300 for the first violation in which such standards were not met; $750 for any violation within 18 months after the first; and $1,500 for any violation within 18 months after the second or any subsequent violation.
vi. The Franchisee shall not be charged with multiple violations for a single act or event affecting a single subscriber or for a single act or event affecting multiple subscribers on the same day.
vii. The parties agree that such liquidated damages are reasonable.
viii. The Town may reduce or waive any of the above liquidated damages if it determines, in its sole discretion that such waiver is in the public interest.
ix. If a court of competent and binding jurisdiction determines that liquidated damages cannot be imposed by this Agreement, the foregoing liquidated damages shall be construed to be penalties to the full extent allowed and contemplated by paragraph 6 of Section 15.2-2108.22 of the Code of Virginia and shall apply via the liquidated damages procedures and limitations under this section.
(D) The amount of all liquidated damages assessed per annum shall not exceed twenty thousand dollars ($20,000) in the aggregate.
(E) If after 120 days the Franchisee has not cured or commenced to cure the alleged breach to the satisfaction of the Franchising Authority, the Franchising Authority may pursue all other remedies aside from liquidated damages.
12.8 Technical Violation. The Franchising Authority agrees that it is not its intention to subject the Franchisee to penalties, fines, forfeitures or revocation of the Franchise for so-called "technical" breach(es) or violation(s) of the Franchise, which shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(A) In instances or for matters in which the Franchisee’s violation or breach of the Franchise was a good faith error that resulted in no or minimal negative impact on the Customers within the Franchise Area; or
(B) Where there existed circumstances reasonably beyond the Franchisee’s control and which precipitated the Franchisee’s violation of the Franchise, or which prevented the Franchisee from complying with a term or condition of the Franchise.
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-53
SECTION 13 – INSPECTION OF FACILITIES
13.1 Franchisee shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and local construction and engineering codes and regulations, currently in force or hereafter applicable, to the construction, operation or maintenance of its Cable System within the Town. The Town shall have the right to review Franchisee's construction plans and specifications to assure compliance with the required standards. After construction has been completed, the Town shall have the right to inspect all construction or installation work performed pursuant to the franchise and all applicable federal, state and local building and engineering codes. However, the Town shall not be required to review or approve construction plans and specifications or to make any inspections. The Franchisee shall be solely responsible for taking all steps necessary to assure compliance with applicable standards and to ensure that its Cable System is installed in a safe manner and pursuant to the terms of the franchise and applicable law.
SECTION 14 – MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
14.1 Force Majeure. The Franchisee shall not be held in default under, or in noncompliance with, the provisions of the Franchise, nor suffer any enforcement or penalty relating to noncompliance or default (including termination, cancellation or revocation of the Franchise), where such noncompliance or alleged defaults occurred or were caused by events which constitute a Force Majeure, as defined in this Agreement.
14.2 Notice. All notices shall be in writing and shall be served upon the other party by hand delivery; first class mail; registered or certified mail, return receipt requested; or by reputable overnight courier service and addressed as follows:
To the Franchising Authority:
Town Manager
Town of Front Royal
P.O. Box 1560
102 E. Main Street
Front Royal, Virginia 22630
And to:
Town Attorney
Town of Front Royal
P.O. Box 1560
102 E. Main Street
Front Royal, Virginia 23834
To the Franchisee:
Chris Kyle
500 Shentel Way
Edinburg, VA 22824
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-54
14.3 Entire Agreement. This Franchise Agreement embodies the entire understanding and agreement of the Franchising Authority and the Franchisee with respect to the subject matter hereof and supersedes all prior understandings, agreements and communications, whether written or oral. All ordinances or parts of ordinances that are in conflict with or otherwise impose obligations different from the provisions of this Franchise Agreement are superseded by the Franchise Agreement.
14.4 Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or other portion of this Franchise Agreement is, for any reason, declared invalid in whole or in part by any court, agency, commission, legislative body, or other authority of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent portion. Such declaration shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion, which shall continue in full force and effect.
14.5 Governing Law. This Franchise Agreement shall be deemed to be executed in the Commonwealth of Virginia and shall be governed in all respects, including validity, interpretation and effect, and construed in accordance with, the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia.
14.6 Modification. No provision of this Franchise Agreement shall be amended or otherwise modified, in whole or in part, except by an instrument in writing duly executed by the Franchising Authority and the Franchisee, which amendment shall be authorized on behalf of the Franchising Authority through the adoption of an appropriate resolution or order by the Franchising Authority, as required by applicable law.
14.7 No Third-Party Beneficiaries. Nothing in this Franchise Agreement shall confer third-party beneficiary status on any member of the public to enforce the terms of this Franchise Agreement.
14.8 No Waiver of Rights. Nothing in this Franchise Agreement shall be construed as a waiver of any rights, substantive or procedural, Franchisee may have under federal or state law unless such waiver is expressly stated herein.
ELECTRIC COMPANY
(Adopted with Potomac Edison 5-2-86; Renewed with Allegheny 1-2-09; Amended with REC 8-28-14)
180-183 ELECTRIC COMPANY FRANCHISE
An Ordinance to grant to The Potomac Edison Company, d/b/a Allegheny Power, and its successors or assignees, the right for the term and upon the conditions herein stated, to occupy and use the streets, avenues, alleys, parks and other public places of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia and to acquire, erect, construct, reconstruct, maintain and use, and if now constructed to reconstruct, maintain and use, poles, towers, attachments, wires, fiber optic cable, CATV and telephone lines and appliances over and along, and to acquire, construct, reconstruct, maintain and use, and if now constructed to reconstruct, maintain and use, conduits or subways, including necessary manholes and to run cables and wires in, under and along the streets, avenues, alleys, parks and other public places of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia for the purposes of transmitting and distributing electric current for light, heat and power, and for transmitting and
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-55
distributing video or data for its own use, and to supply and sell electric current for light, heat and power to any point within or outside the corporate limits of the Town of Front Royal Virginia, as the same now exist, or may hereafter be extended or altered.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE
COUNCIL OF THE
TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL, VIRGINIA
Section 1. That the right is hereby granted unto The Potomac Edison Company, d/b/a Allegheny Power, hereinafter referred to as the "grantee," its successors and assignees, for the term and subject to the conditions and limitations hereinafter stated, to occupy and use the streets, avenues, alleys, parks and other public places of the Town of Front Royal and to acquire, erect, construct, reconstruct, maintain and use, and if now constructed, to reconstruct, maintain and use, poles, towers, attachments, wires, fiber optic cable, CATV and telephone lines and appliances over and along, and to acquire, construct, reconstruct, maintain and use, and if now constructed to reconstruct, maintain and use, conduits or subways, including necessary manholes, and to run cables and wires in and under and along the streets, avenues, alleys, parks and other public places of the Town of Front Royal, for the purposes of transmitting and distributing electric current for light, heat and power, and transmitting and distributing video or data for grantee’s own use, and to supply and sell electric current for light, heat and power to any point within or outside the corporate limits of the Town of Front Royal as the same now exists or may hereafter be extended or altered.
Section 2. From and after the date on which this ordinance shall become effective, the poles, towers, attachments, wires, cable, conduits and other structures in, under and along the streets, avenues, alleys, parks and other public places of the Town of Front Royal authorized by this ordinance to be located and constructed, shall be located at reasonably suitable and convenient points, and a permit for the location of said poles, towers, attachments, wires, cable, conduits and other structures as shall from time to time, on application of the grantee, be issued by the Mayor or other proper administrative officer of the Town of Front Royal. When plans showing the location of such poles, towers, attachments, wires, cable, conduits or structures as aforesaid shall have been presented to the Town of Front Royal and permits issued for the same, said plans shall be effective and binding to the same extent as if they were set out fully and at length in this ordinance. However, the Town of Front Royal will not unreasonably refuse to give the grantee a permit for some reasonable and practical location for each pole, tower, attachment, wire, cable, conduit and other structure that is required in order that the grantee may meet and discharge its duties to the public as a public service corporation.
Section 3. In the location and erection of the poles, towers, attachments, wires, cable, conduits and other structures and fixtures and in stringing the wires as herein authorized grantee shall have the right to trim, cut and keep clear of its wires and fixtures the trees in and along the streets, avenues, alleys, parks and other public places of the Town of Front Royal, but shall not cut or otherwise injure the trees to any greater extent than is reasonably necessary in the construction, reconstruction, maintenance and operation of the poles, towers, attachments, wires, cable, conduits, fixtures and other structures of the grantee as herein authorized and provided.
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-56
Section 4. Wires and cables are to be used for transmitting, distributing and selling electric current and CATV, and video, data and telephone communications for grantee’s own use under this franchise.
Section 5. In the event that grantee shall, in the construction or repair of its works under this franchise, injure any sewer, water or other pipe or works belonging to the town or other utility, it shall, upon notice thereof from the Mayor or other designated official, promptly repair the same at its own cost and expense. Any conduits, ducts, mains and pipes which shall be laid by the grantee, under this ordinance, shall be so laid as not to unnecessarily obstruct or interfere with public travel or do damage to public or private property.
Section 6. The grantee shall, when so requested by the Council of the Town of Front Royal, permit its poles, towers, conduits and other structures to be used without compensation (except for any applicable make-ready charges as determined by grantee) by Town of Front Royal, provided that such use by the Town of Front Royal shall not interfere with the proper use of the grantee’s poles, towers, conduits, structures and fixtures by the grantee, and that the location and character of the wires and fixtures of the Town of Front Royal shall be subject to the approval of the grantee, and provided further that the Town of Front Royal shall, and it hereby agrees to, indemnify and save harmless the grantee from any and all loss, damage, cost or expense to, or which may be incurred by grantee, to which it may be subjected by reason of or as a result of the use of the grantee’s poles, towers, conduits, structures and fixtures by the Town of Front Royal pursuant to this section.
Section 7. The grantee agrees and binds itself by the acceptance of this ordinance, to indemnify, keep and hold the Town of Front Royal free and harmless from liability on account of injury or damage to persons or property growing out of the construction, reconstruction, improvement, maintenance, repair and operation of its lines or works; but nothing herein contained shall be construed to render grantee liable for the negligence of the Town of Front Royal, its agents or employees, or of any other person or corporation.
Section 8. The rights and privileges herein set forth are granted and conferred upon the grantee, upon the express condition and understanding on the part of the grantee, that it will render to the public in the Town of Front Royal within the territory served by the grantee, at all times during the term of this ordinance, an efficient light and power service at reasonable rates, and that it will maintain its properties, works and structures located within the Town of Front Royal in good order throughout the term of this grant, and the grantee by accepting this ordinance expressly agrees that the Virginia State Corporation Commission shall have jurisdiction, to the full extent and in the manner now or hereafter during the life of this ordinance provided by law, to require the grantee to render efficient service at reasonable rates, and to maintain its property in good order throughout the term of this grant, and to otherwise enforce the provisions of this section to the full extent provided by law.
Section 9. Any person who maliciously or wrongfully tampers or interferes with, cuts, injures or destroys any of the poles, towers, wires, fixtures, or any property of the grantee, constructed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, within the corporate limits of the Town of Front Royal shall, upon conviction, be punished and fined in full accordance with law.
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-57
Section 10. All the rights and privileges granted herein to grantee may be exercised by any successor or successors, assignee or assignees of the grantee, but the successor or successors, assignee or assignees shall be subject to all the provisions, obligations, stipulations and penalties as prescribed herein.
Section 11. The right of the Town of Front Royal to impose any lawful franchise, license, property or any other tax upon the property and franchise granted shall not be deemed to be in any manner waived or abridged.
Section 12. The rights and privileges granted herein shall continue for four (4) consecutive periods of five (5) years each. All the terms and conditions granted herein shall renew automatically upon the conclusion of each term, unless either party provides notice in writing one year prior to the expiration of the current term of the party’s intent in good faith to conclude its obligations under this Agreement or its desire in good faith to re-negotiate the rights and privileges granted herein.
Section 13. In exchange for the rights granted herein, the grantee agrees to transfer the customers of Allegheny Power located on Kendrick Lane, Town of Front Royal, and the service facilities exclusively used to serve those customers. The grantee also agrees to provide space, where available, on its poles for the Town of Front Royal to construct the necessary primary facilities to serve those customers. The grantee and the Town of Front Royal agree to petition jointly for the State Corporation Commission’s approval of the transfer of these customers and facilities, as required by law. The grantee will bear the costs of the application for approval. Upon receipt of the Commission’s approval, the grantee shall transfer the customers and the assets to the Town of Front Royal at such time that the Town of Front Royal is prepared to provide service to those customers.
Section 14. Upon the expiration of the term of this grant and upon the termination of the rights hereby granted, by surrender, forfeiture or otherwise, all of the facilities of the grantee in the streets, alleys or public places of the Town of Front Royal shall remain the property of the grantee and may be removed from the streets, alleys and public places of Town at the expense of the grantee within a reasonable time after the expiration or termination of the rights and privileges.
Section 15. This ordinance and the rights and privileges herein granted and conferred shall not become effective unless and until the grantee shall file with the Clerk of the Council of the Town of Front Royal its written acceptance thereof, in form satisfactory to the Town of Front Royal, and shall have entered into a bond, in the sum of $100, with security satisfactory to the Council of the Town of Front Royal, conditioned to the effect that the grantee will construct and maintain or if constructed, maintain the property provided for and reasonably necessary for the exercise of the rights and privileges granted in and by this ordinance, and will maintain the same in good order throughout the term of this grant, and will comply in all respects with the terms, conditions and provisions of this ordinance.
Section 16. This ordinance shall be in force from its passage.
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-58
TELEPHONE COMPANY
Adopted (Central Telephone Company – Centel) 1-28-92
Renewed (Central Telephone Company - Centel) 6-27-05
180-184 TELEPHONE COMPANY FRANCHISE
Be it enacted by the Town Council of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia that an Ordinance to grant a telephone company franchise in accordance with the provisions of Virginia Code Section 56-460 and Virginia Code Section 15.2-2100, as amended, is hereby adopted and enacted as follows:
180-184.1 FRANCHISE GRANTED
The Central Telephone Company of Virginia, hereinafter known as "Centel", its lessees, successors and assigns, for the term and subject to the conditions and limitations hereinafter stated, is hereby granted a franchise to occupy and to use the streets, roads, avenues, alleys, turnpikes, waterways, parks and other public places of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia, and to acquire, erect, reconstruct, maintain and use thereon telephone lines and equipment, including poles, towers, wires, cable, conduit and any accessories used in connection with telephone lines and service, under, over and along the streets, avenues, roads, alleys, turnpikes, waterways, parks and other public places and upon and through the poles, towers, conduits and other facilities and structures used by the Town of Front Royal in its transmission and distribution of electrical service.
180-184.2 PURPOSE OF THE FRANCHISE
The purpose of the franchise is to permit Centel the right and privilege of erecting, maintaining and operating a telephone system to provide telecommunications services, including all necessary appurtenances, within the limits of the Town of Front Royal and to use the streets and public places of the Town of Front Royal and the property of the Town of Front Royal in its operations subject to the conditions and agreements as hereafter set forth.
180-184.3 TERM OF FRANCHISE
The term of the franchise shall be for a period of twenty (20) years from the effective date of this ordinance.
180-184.4 POLES AND CONDUITS
For the purpose of providing telephone service, Centel is authorized to erect and maintain telephone poles, towers, cables, wires, conduits and accessory structures and equipment upon, along, across, over and under the public streets, avenues, alleys, roads, parks, turnpikes, waterways and other places of the Town of Front Royal, but the Town reserves the right to refuse to permit the erection of poles and overhead cables on such streets and public ways as it deems necessary in accordance with the Town's plans for removal of poles and overhead lines from certain areas and for reasons of safety or for other legitimate reasons.
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-59
The location of such poles, towers, conduits and accessory equipment and structures shall be subject to the approval of the Town of Front Royal and shall be in accordance with the standards and requirements for location, construction and maintenance which are set forth by the Town Engineer.
180-184.5 REPAIRS
Centel shall promptly repair or replace any sidewalk, street or other property of the Town which may be damaged or displaced by Centel in the erection and operation and maintenance of its telephone system. Centel will exercise reasonable precautions to avoid damage to the facilities of the Town and to the facilities of any other use of the poles, towers, conduits and other property of the Town of Front Royal. In the event that Centel fails or refuses to repair any damage to the property of the Town of Front Royal upon ten (10) working or business days written notice to Centel, the Town may then undertake to repair or replace any damaged or displaced Town property, and the expense of such repairs or replacement shall be paid to the Town by Centel and may be recovered in any manner prescribed by law, including application of the performance bond imposed hereunder.
180-184.6 INDEMNIFICATION
To the extent permissible by Applicable Law, Centel agrees and bonds itself by the acceptance of this ordinance to indemnify, keep and hold the Town of Front Royal free and harmless from liability on account of injury to persons or property growing out of the negligence or willful misconduct of Centel, or its employees or agents in the construction, improvement, maintenance, repair and operation of its telephone lines, structures and equipment. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to render Centel liable for the negligence or willful misconduct of the Town of Front Royal, its agents or employees or the negligence of other persons or entities other than those set forth herein.
To the extent permissible by Applicable Law, the Town agrees and bonds itself, by the passage of this ordinance, to idemnify, keep and hold Centel free and harmless from liability on account of injury to person or property growing out of the negligence or willful misconduct of the Town, or its employees or agents in the construction, improvement, maintenance, repair and operation of its electric utility lines, structures and equipment. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to render the Town liable for the negligence or willful misconduct of Centel, its agents or employees or the negligence of other persons or entities other than those set forth herein.
180-184.7 MAINTENANCE
The rights and privileges set forth herein are granted to Centel upon the expressed condition and understanding that Centel will maintain its properties, works and structures located within the Town of Front Royal in good and safe repair and order at all times during the term of this franchise agreement.
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-60
180-184.8 INSPECTIONS
The Town of Front Royal and its employees or agents shall have the right at any time to make inspections, upon reasonable notice, of Centel's telephone system or any part thereof.
180-184.9 ANNUAL PAYMENT
Annual pole rental payments will be disbursed by the parties in accordance with the terms and conditions of the separate Pole Attachment Agreement entered by the Town and Sprint.
180-184.10 (RESERVED)
(Ord. No. 9-05 Repealed “Telephone Lines Supplied to the Town”6-27-05-Effective Upon Passage)
180-184.11 PERFORMANCE BOND
Centel, as a condition of franchise approval, shall execute a bond in the amount of $1,000.00 with security acceptable to the Town of Front Royal to ensure Centel's satisfactory performance of its obligations under this franchise.
180-184.12 EMERGENCIES
Town may remove any part of the system in the case of fire, disaster or other emergencies threatening life or property, as determined by Town. In such event, neither Town nor any agent, contractor or employee thereof, shall be liable to Centel or its customers or third parties for any damages caused them or the system, such as for, or in connection with, protecting, breaking through, moving, removal, altering, tearing down or relocating any part of the system.
(Ord. No. 9-05 Added 6-27-05-Effective Upon Passage)
180-184.13 NEW DEVELOPMENTS
Centel will use commercially reasonable efforts to install facilities underground in new subdivisions in accordance with Town Code Section 148-37 to the extent such code is consistent with Applicable Law. "Applicable Law", as used in this ordinance, shall mean all applicable laws, tariffs, government regulations and orders, including, but not limited to, the regulations and orders of the Federal Communications Commission and the Virginia State Corporation Commission.
(Ord. No. 9-05 Added 6-27-05-Effective Upon Passage)
180-184.14 TEMPORARY RELOCATION
Upon fifteen (15) business days notice Centel shall temporarily raise or lower its wires or other equipment upon the request of any person including without limitation, a person holding a building moving permit issued by Town. Centel may charge a reasonable rate for this service not to exceed its actual direct costs. (Ord. No. 9-05 Added 6-27-05-Effective Upon Passage)
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-61
180-184.15 VACATION OF STREET
If a street or public way where Centel has facilities is vacated, eliminated, discontinued or closed, Centel shall be notified of same and all rights of Centel under this Franchise Ordinance to use same shall terminate and Centel shall immediately remove its system from such street or public way unless Centel obtains all necessary easements from the affected property owners to use the former street or public way or a court order the provision of such easements. Where reasonably possible and to the extent consistent with the treatment of other utility facilities in the former street or public way, Town shall reserve easements for Centel to continue to use the former street or public way. Centel shall bear the cost of any removal or relocation of its system unless the vacation is primarily for the benefit of a private party, in which case the private party shall bear such costs. Centel shall be provided thirty (30) days notice of any proposed vacation proceedings involving its facilities.
(Ord. No. 9-05 Added 6-27-05-Effective Upon Passage)
180-184.16 UNDERGROUND STREET CROSSING
Whenever Centel must place its system or other facilities beneath the traveled or paved portion of the streets or public wasy, unless otherwise approved in advance by Town, Centel shall do so by boring and not by excavation of a trench in which to place cable conduit. Boring shall be done wherever possible, so that the excavations necessary for it are not in the paved portion of the right-of-way.
(Ord. No. 9-05 Added 6-27-05-Effective Upon Passage)
180-184.17 TREE TRIMMING
Centel may trim trees upon and overhanging the public ways pursuant to Town Code. Centel shall notify all adjacent property owners at least two (2) days in advance of its tree trimming; provided, however, in the event that the Town Manager has determined the existence of an emergency situation, such requirement of notice may be waived by the Town Manager.
(Ord. No. 9-05 Added 6-27-05-Effective Upon Passage)
180-184.18 CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS
Subject to Applicable Law. Centel shall comply with all applicable Customer Service standards as established and made applicable to Centel by the Virginia State Corporation Commission.
(Ord. No. 9-05 Added 6-27-05-Effective Upon Passage)
180-184.19 GOVERNING LAW
In any controversy or dispute concerning the terms of the franchise, the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia shall apply.
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-62
180-184.20 SEVERABILITY
In the event that any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or a portion of the Franchise Ordinance is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and will be severed from all other portions without affecting the validity of the remainder.
180-184.21 COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS
The validity of this ordinance, the construction and enforcement of its terms, and the interpretation of the rights and duties of the Franchisee, shall be governed by Applicable Law.
180-184.22 SUCCESSORS OR ASSIGNEES
All the rights and privileges hereby granted to Centel may be exercised by an successor or assignees of Centel, but said successor or assignee shall be subject to the provisions, obligations, stipulations and requirements hereby prescribed. The Town reserves the right to increase the required performance bond imposed hereunder for any successor or assignee.
180-184.23 FRANCHISE RIGHTS
The Town of Front Royal grants to Centel a franchise for local exchange telephone service, telecommunications service and related activities, and for no other purpose.
(Ord. No. 9-05 Removed “Equal Opportunity Required” Section 6-27-05-Effective Upon Passage)
PUBLIC PASSENGER BUS SERVICE
(Adopted 6-28-04-Effective 7-1-04)
(Renewed/Amended Name 8-24-09-Effective 10-1-09 ; Renewed 9-22-14-Effective 10-1-14)
(Renewed 11-25-19-Effective Upon Passage)
180-185.1 FRANCHISE GRANTED
The Virginia Regional Transit, hereinafter known as "VRT", its lessees, successors and assigns, for the term and subject to the conditions and limitations hereinafter stated, is hereby granted a Franchise to occupy and use the streets, roads, avenues, alleys and other public places of the Town of Front Royal, Virginia, and to designate, maintain and use adjacent sidewalks for the operation of public passenger bus transportation services to the people of Front Royal utilizing the FTA 5311 Rural Transit Program (Section 5311 of the Federal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act).
180-185.2 PURPOSE OF THE FRANCHISE
The purpose of the Franchise is to permit VRT the right and privilege of operating a public passenger bus transportation service consisting of one or more passenger buses or mini-buses, wheelchair lift equipped and ADA compliant, driven by VRT-employed drivers with commercial driver's licenses, within the Town of Front Royal, and such portions of Warren County as the
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-63
Town, the County, and VRT shall mutually agree, subject to the conditions and agreements as hereafter set forth.
180-185.3 TERM OF FRANCHISE
The term of the Franchise shall be for a period of five (5) years from the effective date of this Ordinance.
(Amended by removing reference to 3 months 11-25-19-Effective Upon Passage)
180-185.4 BUSES
For the purpose of providing public passenger bus service, VRT is authorized to operate buses capable of seating a minimum of thirteen (13) and a maximum of thirty-five (35) passengers along one or more routes to be determined by the Town following route surveys made by VRT. The buses shall be equipped with wheelchair lifts and shall be compliant with the Americans with Disabilities Act. The buses may bear such decorations, logos or insignias as shall be prescribed by Town Council. VRT shall perform such routine and appropriate maintenance of its bus(es) as shall be necessary to ensure uninterrupted, safe and effective service of this Franchise. VRT shall further employ drivers who have been appropriately trained and licensed for the operation of public passenger-buses, who have been familiar with the Town of Front Royal and the route(s) established therein, who have been submitted to a criminal background investigation, initial drug screening, and who are subject to periodic random drug testing pursuant to Federal regulations.
(Amended by adding “FRAT” reference-Effective 10-1-09)
(Ord. No. 10-10 Removed Reference to “FRAT” 11-22-10-Effective Upon Passage)
180-185.5 REPAIRS
VRT shall promptly repair or replace any sidewalk, street, or other property of the Town which may be damaged or displaced by VRT in the operation of its public bus system. In the event that VRT fails or refuses to repair any damage to the property of the Town of Front Royal upon ten (10) days written notice to VRT, the Town may then undertake to repair or replace any damaged or displaced Town property, and the expense of such repairs or replacement shall be paid to the Town by VRT, and may be recovered in any manner prescribed by law, including application of the performance bond imposed hereunder.
180-185.6 INDEMNIFICATION
VRT agrees and bonds itself, by the acceptance of this Ordinance, to indemnify, keep and hold the Town of Front Royal free and harmless from liability on account of injury to persons or property growing out of the negligence of VRT, or its employees, or agents in the operation of its public bus service. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to render VRT liable for the negligence of the Town of Front Royal, its agents or employees, or the negligence of other persons or entities.
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-64
180-185.7 MAINTENANCE
The rights and privileges set forth herein are granted to VRT upon the expressed condition and understanding that VRT will maintain its vehicles located within the Town of Front Royal in good and safe repair and order at all times during the terms of this Franchise Agreement.
180-185.8 INSPECTIONS
The Town of Front Royal, its employees or agents, shall have the right at any time to make inspections, upon reasonable notice, of VRT's buses or any part thereof.
180-185.9 ANNUAL PAYMENT AND OPERATION
VRT's operation under this Franchise Agreement shall be subject to an annual payment to the Town of Front Royal of ONE DOLLAR ($1.00). The cost of operation of the Franchise shall be borne as follows:
A. Beginning on or about (November 25, 2019 and ending November 25, 2024), sixty-eight percent (68%) of the hourly costs of the operation, as invoiced from VRT to the Town, shall be paid to VRT by Federal and State contributions under the FTA 5311 Program. Thirty-two percent (32%) of the hourly costs shall be paid to the VRT by the Town of Front Royal from such general funds as may be required to total the thirty-two percent (32%) local match.
(Amended Beginning/Ending Dates 9-22-14-Effective 10-1-14; 11-25-19-Effective Upon Passage)
B. VRT shall apply for capital asset grant assistance from the Virginia Department of Rail and Public Transportation to purchase an appropriate vehicle or vehicles for revenue service. The Town shall contribute the local match amount required to draw down such funding which traditionally has been and presently is 4%. The Town will be made aware of any such requirements or changes to the local match percentage prior to vehicle purchase commitment.
(Amended (B) 11-25-19-Effective Upon Passage)
C. VRT shall replace revenue vehicles used under this Franchise in accordance with the Federal Transit Administration Useful Life Criteria as described in FTA Circular 5010.1D; and as approved through VRT’s capital replacement grant requests through the Commonwealth of Virginia Department of Rail and Public Transportation.
(Amended (C)11-25-19-Effective Upon Passage)
D. In the event that VRT fails to receive funds for the cost operation of the Franchise in accordance with the payment schedule set forth above, and then VRT shall have the right to terminate the operation of the Franchise upon thirty (30) days prior written notice to the Town.
(Amended 8-24-09 Entire Section-Effective 10-1-09)
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-65
180-185.10 PASSENGER FARES
VRT drivers shall collect from each passenger a fare to be set and determined by the Town Council by resolution. In setting fares, the Town Council may establish separate rates for adults, senior citizens, persons with physical disabilities, students and children. Town Council may provide for the advance purchase of tickets or tokens to be used for the payment of fares by passengers.
180-185.11 SCHEDULES
VRT's bus(es) shall operate on such schedules(s) as shall be established and adopted by the Town Manager or his designee, pursuant to route surveys completed by VRT or by demand or both. Buses shall not operate on the following holidays: New Year’s Day; Memorial Day; Independence Day; Labor Day; Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
(Amended by adding holidays 11-25-19-Effective Upon Passage)
180-185.12 ROUTES AND STOPS
VRT's bus(es) shall operate on such route(s) and regularly make such scheduled stops at locations established by the Town Manager or his designee, pursuant to route surveys completed by VRT or by demand or both. VRT shall be responsible for the marking of regular bus stops by appropriate signage containing route name or number and schedule for stop, as shall be appropriate.
180-185.13 COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS
VRT and its drivers shall comply with all state and local traffic, registration, licensing and inspection laws, including, but not limited to, Sections 46.2-107, 46.2-694 and 46.2-695 of the Code of Virginia (1950), as amended.
180-185.14 INSURANCE
VRT, as a condition of Franchise approval, shall obtain and maintain throughout the term of the Franchise a General Liability insurance policy in the amount of not less than TEN MILLION DOLLARS ($10,000,000.00) from an insurance provider approved to do business within the Commonwealth of Virginia, and shall name the Town of Front Royal as an additional insured party.
180-185.15 BOND
VRT, as a condition of Franchise approval, shall execute a bond in the amount of ONE THOUSAND DOLLARS ($1,000.00) with security acceptable to the Town of Front Royal to ensure VRT's satisfactory performance of its obligation under this Franchise.
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-66
180-185.16 GOVERNING LAW
In any controversy or dispute concerning the terms of the Franchise, the laws of the State of Virginia shall apply.
180-185.17 SEVERABILITY
In the event that any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or a portion of the Franchise Ordinance is for any reasons held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and will be severed from all other portions without affecting the validity of the remainder.
180-185.18 EQUAL OPPORTUNITY REQUIRED
VRT shall not refuse to hire, or employ, nor bar, nor discharge from employment, nor discriminate against any person, because of sex, race, creed, religion, age or national origin.
180-185.19 SUCCESSORS OR ASSIGNEES
The rights, privileges and obligations hereby granted to VRT may not be assigned without express written consent of the Town Council.
All rights and privileges hereby granted to VRT may be exercised by any successor or assignee of VRT but said successor or assignee shall be subject to the provisions, obligations, stipulations and requirements hereby prescribed. The Town reserves the right to increase the required performance bond imposed hereunder for any successor or assignee.
180-185.20 FRANCHISE RIGHTS
The Town of Front Royal grants to VRT an exclusive Franchise for the operation of a public passenger bus service and for no other purpose.
180-185.21 REMEDIES
A. The sole remedy for any violation of this Franchise shall be limited to the following. Upon the occurrence of any uncured default in the obligations of the Franchise, Town shall have the right:
1. To compel the Franchisee by mandamus or injunction to cure and correct any violation or default of the terms and obligations of the Franchise;
2. To suspend or revoke the Franchise. Upon such revocation, the Franchise shall be automatically deemed null and void and have no force or effect, and Franchisee shall remove its equipment from Town as and when requested by Town.
B. In the event that the Town believes that grounds for suspension or revocation exist or have existed the Town may notify the Franchisee in writing set forth the nature and facts of such non-
Chapter 180 TOWN OF FRONT ROYAL MUNICIPAL CODE Chapter 180
180-67
compliance. If within thirty (30) days following such written notification that the Franchisee has not furnished reasonably satisfactory evidence that corrective action has been taken or is being actively and expeditiously pursued, or that the alleged violations did not occur, or that the alleged violations were beyond the Franchisee's control, the Town shall publish a notice setting forth the time, place, and general purpose of a public hearing to consider suspension or revocation of the Franchise notice of such hearing at least ten (10) days prior to such public hearing. The Franchisee and any interested person shall be entitled to be heard at such hearing. Upon a finding by the Town Council of uncorrected defaults in the terms and obligations under this Franchise, the Council shall have the option to suspend or revoke the Franchise.