THE CODE OF THE TOWN OF FARMVILLE, VIRGINIA 
____________ 
Published in 1991 by Order of the Council 
____________ 
Adopted: August 8, 1991 
Effective: August 8, 1991 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
TOWN OF 
FARMVILLE, VIRGINIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
J. David Crute 
Mayor 
____________ 
C. H. Lafoon 
A. D. Reid 
Sydnor C. Newman, Jr. 
John M. Osborn 
William B. Wall 
H. S. Whitaker 
Rudolf V. Doswell 
Council 
____________ 
Gerald J. Spates 
Town Manager 
____________ 
Donald C. Blessing 
Town Attorney 
____________ 
Robert M. Hazelwood 
Town Clerk and Treasurer 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the Town of Farmville, Virginia. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1973 Code, as supplemented through April 11, 1990, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1973 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Numbering System 
    The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of Chapter 4 is 4-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 3-1 and 3-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 3-1.5. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. 
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Milton E. Lefkoff, Supervising Editor, and Ronald McLaughlin, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Gerald J. Spates, Town Manager, and Mr. Robert M. Hazelwood, Town Clerk and Treasurer, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the town readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the town's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida  
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE TOWN OF FARMVILLE, VIRGINIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE TOWN OF FARMVILLE: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of the Town of Farmville, Virginia" published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 29, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before June 26, 1990, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished as provided in Code of Virginia, Section 15.1-901. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the town may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after June 26, 1990 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective August 8, 1991. 
    Passed and adopted by the council this 8th day of August, 1991. 
/s/ J. David Crute 
      Mayor   /s/ Robert M. Hazelwood 
      Clerk   Certificate of Adoption 
    I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the council of the Town of Farmville, Virginia held on the 8th day of August, 1991. 
/s/ Robert M. Hazelwood 
      Clerk   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date Adopted Includes/Omits Supp. No. 133 12- 8-2010 Include 34 134 Rescinded 34 135  3-11-2011 Include 34 136  4-22-2011 Include 35 137  6- 8-2011 Include 35 138  6-16-2011 Include 35 139  6-16-2011 Include 35 140  6-11-2008 Include 35 141  6-16-2011 Include 35 142  7-13-2011 Include 35 143  7-13-2011 Include 35 144  9-14-2011 Include 36 145  9-14-2011 Include 36 146  9-14-2011 Include 36 147 10-12-2011 Include 36 148 11- 9-2011 Include 36 149 11- 9-2011 Include 36 150 11- 9-2011 Include 36 151 11- 9-2011 Include 36 152  4-11-2012 Include 37 153  4-11-2012 Include 37 155  6-25-2012 Include 37 156  6-25-2012 Include 37 157  6-25-2012 Include 37 154  1- 9-2013 Include 38 158 10-10-2012 Include 38 159 10-10-2012 Include 38 160 12-12-2012 Include 38 161  3-13-2013 Include 38 162  7- 1-2013 Include 39 163  7- 1-2013 Include 39 164  7- 1-2013 Include 39 165 10- 1-2013 Include 39 166  6-12-2013 Include 39 167  3-12-2014 Include 40 168  5-14-2014 Include 40 169  2-11-2015 Include 41 170  3-11-2015 Include 41 2-2015  4- 8-2015 Include 42 3-2015  4- 8-2015 Include 42 4-2015  4- 8-2015 Include 42 Ord. of  8- 4-2004 Include 43 172  7- 9-2014 Include 43 171 11-12-2015 Include 43 173  1-13-2016 Include 43 174  4-13-2016 Include 44 175  6- 8-2016 Include 44 176  7-13-2016 Include 44 177  9-14-2016 Include 44 179  1-11-2017 Include 45 180  1-11-2017 Include 45 181  3- 8-2017 Include 45 183  5-10-2017 Include 46 184  7-12-2017 Include 46 185  8- 9-2017 Include 46 186 12- 6-2017 Include 47 188  6-13-2018 Include 47 190 10-10-2018 Include 48  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The charter is derived from an act of the General Assembly of Virginia (C. 315, page 368 et seq.) approved March 10, 1956. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation and material in brackets [ ] has been added for clarity. 

Sec. 1. - Body politic and corporate; name; perpetual succession; right to sue and contract, etc.; corporate seal. 
    The inhabitants of the territory comprised within the present corporate limits of the Town of Farmville, Virginia, as the same now are or may hereafter be established by law, are hereby declared to be a body politic and corporate under the name of Town of Farmville, and as such shall have perpetual succession, may sue and be sued, contract and be contracted with, and may have a corporate seal which it may alter, renew, or amend at its pleasure. 
Sec. 2. - Corporate boundaries. 
    The boundaries of the Town of Farmville shall contain 846 acres more or less, and shall coincide and be co-extensive with the boundaries of the Town of Farmville as they exist at this time and which are shown on a plat thereof made by R. C. Dodl, C. E., dated November 24, 1953, and recorded in current Plat Book 1 on page 66 thereof in the clerk's office of the circuit court of Prince Edward County, Virginia; and which said plat is referred to and directed to be recorded as a part of an annexation order entered in the circuit court of Prince Edward County, Virginia, on December 31, 1954, and recorded in Law Order Book 11 beginning at page 442, in the therein mentioned condemnation proceedings under the style of Town of Farmville, Virginia, a Municipal Corporation, Petitioner, V. Prince Edward County, Virginia, et als, Defendants; and to which said plat and law order reference is hereby expressly made for a metes and bounds description of the boundaries of the Town of Farmville, Virginia, the same as if such were copied herein verbatim, and in which said annexation proceedings such boundaries were thereby and therein determined and set out. 
Sec. 3. - Mayor and council-To govern and administer town; members to be electors; terms of office; election at large; establishment of wards; filling vacancies from wards. 
    The administration and government of the town is vested in the council composed of the mayor and seven councilmen, all of whom shall be electors of the town. The council and the mayor shall be elected in the manner provided by law as follows: 
The terms of the three members of the council who were elected in June 1952, shall expire on June 30, 1956. At the regular municipal election to be held on the second Tuesday in June 1956 and every four years thereafter three councilmen shall be elected for a term of four years each. The term of the present mayor and the four members of the council who were elected at the regular municipal election in June 1954 shall expire on June 30, 1958. At the regular municipal election to be held on the second Tuesday in June 1958, and every four years thereafter, the mayor and four councilmen shall be elected for a term of four years each. Terms of office shall begin on the first day of July next following their election. Each councilman and the mayor elected as hereinabove provided shall serve for the term stated or until his successor has been elected and qualified. 
    The councilmen shall be elected at large; provided, however, that the council may, after advertising in a newspaper published in said town for at least once a week for four consecutive weeks and by posting handbills in five or more conspicuous public places, giving notice to the public of its intention to consider the division of the town into wards, and after holding a public hearing pursuant to such notice, by resolution entered of record in its council minute book, divide the town into wards and direct that thereafter all future elections for membership on the town council shall be held in keeping with such resolution until the further direction of the council changing such method be entered of record in its minute book after a like notice and like public hearing. In the event that a division of the town may be entered of record as hereinbefore provided, future members of the town council may be elected partly at large and partly from wards, the ultimate method, division and determination thereof to be decided by resolution of the council adopted as aforesaid. Any vacancy in the office of any councilman elected from a ward must be filled by a qualified voter actually residing in the ward in which the vacancy shall have occurred. Each member of council may receive a salary to be fixed by the council, payable at such times and in such manner as the council may direct. The mayor may receive a salary to be fixed by the council, payable in such manner and at such times as the council may direct. 
(Acts 1968, ch. 508, § 1) 
Sec. 4. - Same-Corporate powers to be exercised by council or under its authority; exception. 
    All the corporate powers of the town shall be exercised by the council or under its authority except where otherwise specifically provided. 
Sec. 5. - Same-Elections and registration of voters to be conducted under state law. 
    The election of the mayor and councilmen and the registration of electors of said town shall be held and conducted in the manner provided by the laws of Virginia then existing. 
Sec. 6. - Same-Oaths; election, term of office and duties generally of manager, attorney, treasurer and sergeant. 
    The mayor and councilmen shall each, before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, take the oath prescribed by section 49-1 of the Code of Virginia; but if any or either of them shall fail so to do for thirty days after the commencement of the term for which he or they are elected, his or their office shall be deemed vacant. They shall, as soon after July one, nineteen hundred fifty-six, as may be convenient, and each succeeding council shall at the beginning of the term of office of its members, or as soon thereafter as may be convenient, elect a town manager, town treasurer, town attorney and town sergeant, who shall hold office for a period of one year commencing July one of each year and until their successors are elected and have qualified, and all of who shall perform such duties, if any, hereinafter particularly set out and such other duties as may be prescribed from time to time by the council. 
Sec. 7. - Same-Filling of vacancies generally. 
    Whenever, from any cause, a vacancy shall occur in the office of the mayor or councilmen, the same shall be filled by the council at its next regular meeting from the qualified electors of said town and an entry of such election shall be made of record; provided, however, that should councilmen at any future time be elected from wards rather than from the town at large, then such vacancy shall be filled from the ward from which such vacancy occurs. 
Sec. 8. - Same-Quorum. 
    The mayor and four councilmen, or in the absence of the mayor, five councilmen, shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
Sec. 9. - Same-Reading, correction and signing of minutes of meeting; recordation of ayes and noes in journal. 
    At each meeting of the council the proceedings of the last meeting shall be read to the council and shall thereupon be corrected if erroneous and signed by the person presiding. Upon the call of any member the ayes and noes on any question shall be recorded in the journal. 
Sec. 10. - Corporate powers generally. 
    The council of said town shall have power to lay off, open, curb and pave streets, alleys, walks and gutters for the public use in the said town, and improve and light the same and have them kept in good condition free from obstructions of any kind; it shall regulate the width of sidewalks on the streets, and vacate and discontinue streets; to lay off public grounds, and provide and contract for, and take care of all buildings necessary for the use of said town; to establish and regulate markets of said town, and prevent injury or annoyance of the public or individual from anything dangerous, offensive or unwholesome; to protect places of divine worship; to abate or cause to be abated anything which in its opinion, by the recorded vote of the majority of the whole council, shall constitute a nuisance; to regulate the keeping of gunpowder and other combustibles; to provide in and near the town places for the burial of the dead, and regulate interments therein; to regulate building of houses or other structures, and the making of division fences, and for the drainage of lots by proper means; to make regulations for preventing danger or damage from fire; to provide for the poor of the town, and to appoint and publish the places for holding the town elections; to provide a revenue for the town and to appropriate the same to its expenses; to provide for and assess annual assessments of all taxable personal and real property in the town according to law; to establish rules for the transaction of its business, and for the government and regulation of its body; to provide for the appointment and the continuance of all committees thereof, together with the powers of authority of same; to promote the general welfare of the town, and to protect the property of persons therein; to preserve peace and good order thereof; to provide for a town guard; to appoint and order out a patrol for the town in like manner, and for like purposes within the same, as may be done by circuit courts, according to law; to require and take from all town officers bonds with such securities, and in such penalty, as it may deem necessary, for such officer to execute such bonds, such bonds to be made payable to the town in its corporate name and conditioned for the faithful discharge of the duties of the respective officers; all such bonds shall be held in custody of the mayor; to provide for the erection, control, regulation or prohibition of gas works, electric light works, waterworks, sewerage and other public utilities authorized by law; and to regulate, control and manage same; to prohibit the pollution of water used in said town; and to regulate transportation and parking upon the streets of said town, and off-street parking facilities under control of the town, and the town shall have and may exercise all powers which are now or may hereafter be conferred upon or delegated to towns under the Constitution and the laws of the commonwealth and all other powers pertinent to the conduct of a town government, the exercise of which is not expressly prohibited by said Constitution and laws and which in the opinion of the council are necessary or desirable to promote the general welfare of the town and the safety, health, peace, good order, comfort, convenience and morals of its inhabitants as fully and completely as though such powers were specifically enumerated in this Charter, and no enumeration of particular powers in this Charter shall be held to be exclusive but shall be held to be in addition to this general grant of powers. 
Sec. 11. - Method of assessment for street, sewer, etc., improvements. 
    The town shall have the power and authority to make and improve walkways upon existing and future streets and to improve and pave existing and future alleys, and for either the construction, or for the use of sewers, the council shall have the power to impose a tax or assessment upon the owners of the land abutting such improvements, or abutting the street along, or within which such improvements are constructed. But such assessment shall be not in excess of the peculiar benefits resulting to the property from such improvements. The method of establishing such assessment, including provisions for determination of the amount thereof, notice, hearing, judicial review, and creation and enforcement of the lien thereof, may be determined by ordinance. 
Sec. 12. - Acquisition of property; powers of condemnation. 
    The council of the town shall have the power to acquire by purchase, gift, devise, condemnation, or otherwise any real estate or interest therein, within or without the town, and such personal property as may be necessary for public recreation, parks, playgrounds, streets, boulevards, lands to be used for the burial of the dead, or for other public uses and to maintain, control, and dispose of the same in such manner to be determined by the council; provided, that two-thirds of the members elected to the said council shall have authorized the acquisition of any such public property acquired; provided, further, that no property of a railroad or other public service corporation shall be condemned without complying with the provisions of section 25-233 of the Code of Virginia. 
Sec. 13. - Taxation generally; power to make appropriations. 
    In addition to the powers granted by other sections of this Charter, the town shall have power to raise annually by taxes and assessments in the town such sums of money as the council shall deem necessary to pay the debts and defray the expenses of the town, in such manner as the council shall deem expedient, subject to the general law of the commonwealth. In addition to, but not as a limitation upon, this general grant of power, the town shall have power, subject to the general law of the commonwealth, to levy and collect ad valorem taxes on real estate and tangible personal property and machinery and tools; to levy and collect taxes for admission to or other charge for any public amusement, entertainment, performance, exhibition, sport, or athletic event in the town, which may be added to and collected with the price of such admission or other charge; to levy on and collect taxes from purchasers of any public utility service, which taxes may be added to and collected with the bills rendered purchasers of such service; to establish, impose and enforce water and sewerage rates and rates and charges for garbage and refuse collection and disposal, parking lots or other services, products or conveniences, operated, rendered or furnished by the town; to require licenses, prohibit the conduct of any business or profession without such a license, require taxes to be paid on such licenses in respect of all businesses and professions which cannot, in the opinion of the council, be reached by the ad valorem system. 
    To make appropriations, subject to the limitation imposed by this Charter, for the support of the town government and any other purposes authorized by this Charter and not prohibited by the laws of the commonwealth. 
Sec. 14. - Record of council proceedings, etc., to be kept in minute book and ordinance book. 
    The council shall cause to be kept a record of all its proceedings, bylaws, acts and orders, which shall be properly indexed and open to the inspection of anyone who is entitled to vote for members of the council, in a book called the "minute book." It shall also cause to be kept a separate book in which shall be recorded the Charter or general ordinances, bylaws and such contracts of the town, of a permanent nature, as shall be by it so directed to be recorded in a book called "ordinance book." 
Sec. 15. - Annual budget; annual levy generally. 
    The council shall cause to be make [made] annually and entered upon its journal an accurate estimate of all sums of money which shall or may become lawfully charged to said town and which ought to be paid within one year and it shall order an annual levy for so much of said money as in its discretion shall be sufficient to meet said demands; and in making said levy the council is authorized to include in such levy a charge for building and operating its sewer system and for the operation only of its water and light systems or such of them as the town may own. 
Sec. 16. - Persons and property subject to annual levy. 
    The levy so made may be laid on all persons who are residents of said town and over 21 years of age; upon dogs and all personal property and real estate within said town, except such personal property and real estate, as may be exempt from taxation under the laws of this state and also upon all other subjects within said town as may at the time be assessed with state taxes and upon such other subjects of taxation, subject to the general law of the commonwealth. 
Sec. 17. - Power of council to license. 
    The town council shall have power, when not prohibited by general law, to require a license to be taken out by any person, or corporation, engaged in the pursuit of any business, trade, occupation or calling, or for any other purposes, whether the principal office, or place of business of such person or corporation is located in said town, or not, for the benefit of said town, before such person, persons or corporation, shall be permitted to pursue such business, trade, occupation or calling within the corporate limits of said town. Said council may also require a license of any agent of any fertilizer company, owners or keepers of motor vehicles, wagons, drays, carts, hacks, or other wheeled carriages kept or employed in said town for hire, or as carriers for the purpose, whether the same be run by animals or by gasoline, oil, electricity or other power, and may subject the same to such regulations as they may deem proper. 
Sec. 18. - Disposition of revenue. 
    The revenue from all sources shall be collected, paid over and accounted for by the treasurer at such times as the council shall order. 
Sec. 19. - Treasurer's monthly report to council. 
    The council shall require the treasurer of the said corporation to make out a monthly report of the receipts and expenditures of said town for the preceding month, which report shall state on what account the expenditures were made and from what source or sources the receipts were derived; which report the council may cause to be published in one or more newspapers of the town. 
Sec. 20. - Removal of officers. 
    The council of said town shall have power to remove all town officers, whether they be elected or appointed, for misconduct in office, or neglect of duties, but any such removal shall not be made without reasonable notice to the officer complained of, and an opportunity afforded him to be heard in his defense. Any such removal shall be by majority vote of all members elected to the council. 
Sec. 21. - Town manager generally. 
    The council, if it deems proper, may elect an officer to be known as town manager, whose duties shall be to exercise general supervision over the electric light and power plant, waterworks, sewer, streets, ground, buildings, cemeteries, and other property belonging to the town and do such other things as the council may direct or the necessities of the town require, whether said duties may be specifically mentioned herein or not. 
    He shall be supplied with blank books and stationery by the town, but all such articles shall be turned over by him, together with all maps, plans, estimates and papers pertaining to his office, to his successor, who shall in like manner hold the same as the property of the town. 
    He shall keep a book in which he shall enter all surveys of any of the streets, the grades of the same when established, and the grades, extent, depth and capacity of all public sewers. 
    He shall make or cause to be made and preserve in his office, as the property of the town, a map showing the location and dimensions of all culverts and sewers, water mains constructed or used in the town, and shall place upon said map each new sewer and culvert as made. 
Sec. 22. - Council may designate bank for deposits of town money. 
    The council may designate from time to time any bank or banking institution as a depository for all money belonging to the town and may require of such bank or banks bond with surety approved in such penalty as it may deem proper. 
Sec. 23. - Appointment, duties, etc., of bail commissioners. 
    The council may appoint one or more persons as bail commissioners who shall have power and jurisdiction to admit to bail persons charged with violations of the ordinances of the town. The term of office of said commissioners shall be at the pleasure of the council. The commissioners may charge and receive from the person for whom services are rendered the same fee for admitting to bail and other services as is allowed by law to justices of the peace; provided, however, that no commissioner who is working for the town on a full-time salaried basis shall receive any fee for admitting any person to bail or for any services whatsoever rendered by him in connection with any criminal case. The Town of Farmville, shall, in no case, be liable for any bail fee. 
Sec. 24. - Adoption of master plan, setback lines and building, plumbing, electrical, etc., codes. 
    For the promotion of health, safety, morals, comfort, property and general welfare, the town is empowered to provide by ordinance for the adoption of a master plan dividing the area of the town into one or more districts, establish setback building lines, regulate and restrict the location, construction, reconstruction, alteration and repair or use of buildings and other structures and their height, area and bulk and percentage of lot to be occupied by buildings or other structures and the trade, industry and other specific uses of the premises in such districts and adopt building, plumbing, electrical and other codes to carry these purposes into effect. 
Sec. 25. - Appointment, duties, etc., of the justices of the peace. 
    The circuit court of Prince Edward County may appoint one or more persons as justices of the peace for the town, who shall have power to issue warrants, commit persons to jail and to admit to bail persons charged with violation of the ordinances of the town. The term of office of the justices of the peace shall be at the pleasure of the circuit court of Prince Edward County. No justice of the peace who receives a salary from the town, as a justice of the peace, shall receive any fee for admitting any person to bail or for any services whatever rendered by him in connection with any criminal cases. The council of the Town of Farmville shall have the authority to fix the compensation of justices of the peace appointed hereunder. The town council may, from time to time, by resolution duly adopted, appoint any one of its members vice-mayor to act in the place and stead of the mayor in the trial and disposition of any warrant issued in violation of a town ordinance, in the event of the mayor's absence, sickness or disqualification. 
Sec. 26. - (Repealed by Acts 1968, ch. 580, § 1) 
Sec. 26.1. - Issuance of bonds and notes. 
    The council shall have the power to and may, in the name of and for the use of the town, borrow money, contract debts, incur indebtedness and make and issue, or cause to be made and issued, as evidence thereof, bonds, notes or other obligations, subject to the limitations of section 127 of the Constitution of Virginia. 
(Repealed by Acts 1968, ch. 580, § 1) 
Secs. 27 to 29. -  (Repealed by Acts 1968, ch. 580, § 2) 
Sec. 30. - Mayor generally-Powers and duties generally. 
    The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the town unless otherwise provided by the council; he shall be ex officio conservator of the peace within the town, and within a mile of its corporate limits, and shall within the same exercise all of the powers that are vested in a justice of the peace under the general laws; he shall, unless otherwise provided by the council if previously authorized by council, have supervisory control of the police of the town and may appoint special police officers when necessary, either or both, if authorized by the council; he shall have authority to issue his warrant for the arrest of any person or persons for violation of any of the ordinances or resolutions of the town; he shall preserve peace and order in the town, and see that persons and property are protected; he shall have power to issue executions for all fines and costs imposed by him, and in default of the payment thereof, he may commit the party in default to jail until the same shall be paid, but the term of imprisonment shall not exceed two months as provided in section 19-309 of the Code of Virginia for such purposes; he shall have the power to hear and determine cases involving violations of town ordinances and may impose such penalty as may be provided in such ordinance upon any person convicted of such violation; provided, however, that in no case may he sentence any person to confinement in excess of twelve months; he shall from time to time recommend to the council such measures as he may deem needful for the welfare of the town and may, at least once a year, make a written report of the general conditions of the town, together with such recommendation as may be deemed advisable by him for the welfare of the town, or its property, or public utilities; he shall have power to suspend all other town officers for misconduct in office or neglect of duties, until the next regular meeting of the town council thereafter or until a special meeting is called for the purpose, which cause of said suspension shall be specified in the order thereof. All fees collected in criminal proceedings before said mayor shall be collected by the sergeant and paid into the treasury of the town. The mayor shall, when present, preside over all meetings of the council with no power to vote except in case of a tie; and in his absence, the president of the town council, who shall be elected from its membership for a term of two years by the council at its first regular meeting held after July one, nineteen hundred fifty-six, and thereafter every two years at its regular July meeting, shall preside; he shall have the right of veto on any matter voted upon by the council, provided, he notifies the clerk of the council before the adjournment of the council meeting at which the matter is voted upon, of his desire to consider a veto, specifying what matter, and must actually exercise his veto power within five days from the adjournment of such council meeting, otherwise the right to veto shall be waived; shall file with the clerk within said five-day period his written act of veto and assign his reasons therefor in writing, whereupon the clerk shall forthwith send a written copy of the same to each councilman and then not less than five days thereafter at a called meeting held for the purpose or at its next regular meeting, whichever shall first occur; the action of the mayor in vetoing any such matter may be overridden by a two-thirds vote of the elected members of the council, but if the council does not within said period of time override the mayor's veto, then the veto shall remain in full force and effect thereafter; and the mayor shall perform such other duties as shall be from time to time imposed upon him by the council not inconsistent with the provisions herein contained or the general laws of the commonwealth; and for his failure to execute any duties imposed upon him, he shall be liable, upon a petition of any five qualified electors of the town, to mandamus proceedings as provided by law. 
(Acts 1968, ch. 580, § 1) 
Sec. 31. - Same-Written recommendations to council. 
    He may recommend to the council by a message in writing at its regular July meeting of each year and at such other times as he may deem proper, such measures as he may consider necessary and expedient for the public welfare. 
Sec. 32. - Same-Appointment of police officers; powers and duties as police justice; appointment of police justice by council. 
    The mayor may be authorized by the council to appoint police officers as he may deem necessary, to assist the sergeant of the said town. The mayor shall, unless and until a police justice is appointed as hereinafter provided, have power to issue warrants and summon witnesses, and shall have exclusive original jurisdiction to try cases involving violations of town ordinances or the collection of town taxes or assessments or any other form of debt owing to the town, and shall have like powers in the matter of collecting fines and costs imposed by him as are vested by law in trial justices for similar services. The fees and costs in connection with such cases shall be the same as are authorized by law to be charged, taxed and collected by trial justices for similar services, and such fees and all fines shall be collected by the town sergeant and shall be promptly paid by him into the town treasury, unless the council by ordinance directs some other person to collect such fines and costs and some other person to receive the same; provided, that the council may at any time it deems the same expedient appoint a police justice for the town who shall be an attorney authorized to practice law by and under the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia, and who shall give such bond as the council requires; shall serve during the pleasure of the council and shall receive such compensation as the council prescribes. 
    In the event of the appointment of such police justice, he shall have, during such time as he serves, and to the exclusion of the mayor, the same power and jurisdiction as are hereinabove conferred upon and vested in the mayor but only in the trial and disposition of police matters and shall exercise the same in like manner as they are above authorized and directed to be exercised by the mayor. 
Sec. 33. - Town treasurer-Record of council meetings kept in minute book. 
    The town treasurer shall keep an accurate record of all the proceedings of the meetings of the town council in a well-bound book called the "minute book." 
Sec. 34. - Same-Attest corrections of records, etc., of council. 
    He shall attest the corrections of all records and orders of the council. 
Sec. 35. - Same-Transcribe ordinances, resolutions, etc., of permanent nature into ordinance book. 
    He shall transcribe to a book kept for the purpose all ordinances, resolutions and orders of a permanent nature; such book shall be known as the "ordinance book." 
Sec. 36. - Same-Assessment of property. 
    He shall perform all the duties in relation to the assessment of property for the purpose of levying town taxes and licenses that may be ordered by the town council. 
Sec. 37. - Same-Annual list of assessments for taxes, public utility patrons, etc.; amounts outstanding. 
    He shall make out an annual list of all assessments for taxes and licenses and a list of all patrons of water, electricity and sewer service together with all amounts owing by them from time to time; and whenever called upon by the council make such report of his transactions as may be required. 
Sec. 38. - Same-Records, etc., to be kept; inspection by mayor or council. 
    He shall keep such books, records, schedules and other papers and in such manner as the town council shall prescribe, and all such books, records, schedules and other papers shall be subject to the inspection of the mayor and council. 
Sec. 39. - Same-Collection and disbursement of funds; accounts to be kept. 
    He shall collect and receive all the moneys due the town and pay out the same upon the order of the town council under such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the council. He shall keep his books and accounts in such manner as the council may prescribe. 
Sec. 40. - Same-Duty to make deposits. 
    He shall deposit to the credit of the town in such bank or banks as the town council may designate as depository of the town moneys, all moneys received by him. 
Sec. 41. - Same-Report at regular council meetings. 
    He shall make a report at each regular meeting of the town council of all moneys received by him for the preceding month, together with all disbursements made for the said month, such report to be in form prescribed by the council. 
Sec. 42. - Same-Bond required. 
    He shall give bond in such penalty prescribed by the council with security approved by the council. 
Sec. 43. - Same-Compensation. 
    His compensation shall be fixed by the town council. 
Sec. 44. - Same-Vested powers for the collection of taxes, etc.; subject to liabilities, etc. 
    In the collection of taxes and assessments the treasurer shall be vested with all the powers and subject to all the liabilities and penalties now prescribed by law with regard to county treasurers of the State of Virginia and shall have power to levy on property and sell the same for cash. 
Sec. 45. - Same-Reports required by council. 
    He shall make such reports from time to time as may be required of him by the council. 
Sec. 46. - Town sergeant-Powers generally. 
    The Town sergeant shall be vested with all the powers which general laws of the state confer on law enforcement officers in all cases, civil and criminal, arising in said town or within one mile of the corporate limits. 
Sec. 47. - Same-Duties as chief of police. 
    He shall be chief of police of the town. In addition to the powers conferred upon town sergeants by the general laws of the state, he shall have all the powers conferred upon special police by law. He shall have power to arrest, without warrant and carry before the proper judicial body, to be dealt with according to law, any and all persons who shall violate any ordinance of the town or law of the state, in his presence; and it shall be his duty to swear out warrants of arrest for any person or persons when he has reason to believe any offense has been committed; and such other duties as may be prescribed by the town council. 
Sec. 48. - Same-Bond. 
    He shall give bond in such penalty as the council may direct, with security approved by the council conditioned according to law. 
Sec. 49. - Same-Compensation. 
    His compensation shall be fixed by the town council. 
Sec. 50. - Same-Weekly report to treasurer. 
    He shall make a weekly report and deliver to the treasurer of the town all fines and costs imposed by the mayor or other judicial officers of the town and take proper receipts for all such fines and costs collected and may be required to include in his report all fines not collected. 
Sec. 51. - Appointive town officers to have powers of corresponding county officers. 
    The officers of said town, elected or appointed by the council, shall, during the time they are in office, have all the power and authority of like officers in the County of Prince Edward, unless the same be abridged or restricted by the council. 
Sec. 52. - Town moneys paid to treasurer; disposition of funds shall be authorized by council. 
    All moneys belonging to the said town shall be paid over to the treasurer, and no money shall be paid out by him except as the same shall have been appropriated and ordered to be paid by the council; and the treasurer shall pay the same in such manner as may be prescribed by the council. 
Sec. 53. - Failure of treasurer or other bonded officer to account for funds or perform duties. 
    If the treasurer shall fail to collect and account for or pay over all moneys coming into his hands, or any other bonded officer of the town shall fail to discharge the duties of his office when so required by the council, the council in the corporate name of the town may, by motion before the circuit court of Prince Edward County, recover from the treasurer, or other officer, and his sureties, or their personal representatives, any sum that may be due from said treasurer, or other officer, to said town, in accordance with the procedure provided by law. 
Sec. 54. - Fiscal year; annual treasurer's statement to council. 
    The fiscal year for the town shall be from the first of July to June thirtieth of the following year, and at the first regular meeting of the council in each year, the treasurer shall make to the council a full statement of all his transactions for the preceding year under the regulations of the council, and whose accounts shall be annually audited by a certified public accountant to be appointed by the council. 
Sec. 55. - Powers of eminent domain. 
    The council of said town shall not take or use any private property for streets or other public purposes without making to the owner or owners thereof just compensation for the same; and in all cases where the said town cannot, by agreement, obtain title to the property desired for such purposes, it shall be lawful for said town to apply to and obtain from the circuit court of Prince Edward County authority to condemn the same, which proceedings shall be had according to law. 
    In the exercise of the power of eminent domain granted under this section the town may proceed in the manner provided by law for the state highway commissioner in sections 33-57 to 33-75 of the Code of Virginia. 
Editor's note- The current law on eminent domain and damages for the commonwealth transportation commissioner is in Code of Virginia, §§ 33.1-89 to 33.1-132. 
Sec. 56. - Adoption of orders, bylaws and ordinances; penalty for violations; appeal in criminal cases. 
    To carry into effect the powers herein enumerated, and all other powers conferred upon the said town or the council by the laws of Virginia, said council shall have power to make and pass all needful and proper orders, bylaws and ordinances not contrary to the Constitution and laws of said state, and to prescribe reasonable fines or penalties; to provide for the enforcement of the collection of fines; which fines, penalties or imprisonment shall be imposed, recovered or enforced, under the judgment of the mayor or any other officer authorized to act; and the authorities of said town may, with consent of the circuit court of Prince Edward County, entered of record, use the jail of said county for any purposes for which the use of a jail may be needed by them, under the acts of the council or of the State of Virginia; provided, however, that in all cases where a fine is imposed by the mayor, any councilman or any other authorized officer, or by the council, the party or parties so fined shall have the right of appeal to the circuit court of Prince Edward County. 
Sec. 57. - Mayor and councilmen declared conservators of the peace. 
    The mayor and each one of the councilmen of said town, for the time being, are declared to be, and are hereby constituted conservators of the peace within said town, and within one mile of the corporate limits thereof, and shall have all the powers and authority in civil as well as criminal cases of justices of the peace, if so appointed by the circuit court of Prince Edward County. 
Sec. 58. - Exemption from county poor rates and road tax; responsibility for streets and the poor of the town. 
    The said town and the taxable persons and property therein shall be exempt and free from the payment of any poor rates or road tax levies by the board of supervisors of the county for any year in which it shall appear that said town shall, at its own expense, provide for its own poor and keep its streets in proper repair. 
Sec. 59. - Continuation of vested rights and prior laws, etc. 
    All the rights, privileges and properties of the Corporation of Farmville heretofore acquired and possessed, owned and enjoyed by any act now in force, not in conflict with this Act, shall continue undiminished and remain vested in said town under this Act, and all laws, ordinances and resolutions of the Corporation of Farmville now in force, and not inconsistent with the Act, shall be and continue in full force and effect in the Town of Farmville until regularly repealed by a council elected as provided under this Act. 
Sec. 60. - Severability clause. 
    In the event that any portion, section or provision of this Charter shall be declared illegal, invalid or unconstitutional by final judgment of any court of competent jurisdiction such judgment shall not invalidate any other section, portion, or provision hereof; but all parts of said Charter not expressly held to be invalid shall remain in full force and effect. 
Sec. 61. - Ordinances to remain in force. 
    All ordinances not in force in the Town of Farmville not inconsistent with this Act shall be and remain in full force until altered, amended, or repealed by the town council. 
Sec. 62. - Continuation of existing officers. 
    The present officers of the town shall be and remain in office until expiration of their several terms as provided in section 3 of this Act and until their successors have been duly elected and qualified. 
Sec. 63. - Repeal of former charters. 
    All former charters and amendments thereto for the Town of Farmville, Virginia, are hereby repealed. 
Sec. 64. - Effective date. 
    An emergency exists and this Act is in full force from its passage. 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
  

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the Town of Farmville, Virginia," and may be so cited. Such ordinances may also be cited as "Code of Farmville." 
(Code 1973, § 1-1) 
Charter reference- Adoption of orders, bylaws and ordinances, § 56. 
State Law reference- Codification and recodification of ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-37.3. 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all town ordinances the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the town council: 
    Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient. 
    Charter. The word "Charter" means the Farmville Charter of 1956, as amended from time to time. 
    Code of Virginia. The words "Code of Virginia" mean the Code of Virginia of 1950, as amended. 
    Commonwealth. See "State." 
    Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given, an act to be done or a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given, or such act is done, shall be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall not be counted. 
State Law reference- Computation of time, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.3. 
    Council. The word "council" shall be construed to mean the council of the Town of Farmville. 
State Law reference- "Council" defined, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.5. 
    County. The words "county" or "the county" shall mean the County of Prince Edward in the State of Virginia. 
    Following. See "Preceding." 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations, as well as to males. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.7. 
    Highway. See "Street." 
    In the town. The words "in the town" shall mean any territory jurisdiction of which for the exercise of its regulatory power has been conferred on the town by public or private law. 
    In writing. See "Written." 
    Joint authority. All words giving joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.1. 
    May, shall. The word "may" is permissive; the word "shall" is mandatory. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.13. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only shall extend and be applied to several persons or things, as well as to one (1) person or thing; a word importing the plural number only may extend and be applied to one (1) person or thing, as well as to several persons or things. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.15. 
    Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.16. 
    Occupant. The word "occupant" applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
    Officers, etc. Any reference to an officer, department, board or commission is construed as if followed by the words "of the Town of Farmville, Virginia." 
    Person. The word "person" shall include any individual, corporation, partnership, association, company, business, trust, joint venture or other legal entity. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.19. 
    Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 1-13.6, 1-13.23. 
    Property. The word "property" shall mean real, personal or mixed property. 
    Shall. See "May." 
    Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curb line, or the lateral lines of a roadway where there is no curb, and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    State, commonwealth. The word "state" or "commonwealth" shall be construed as if the words "of Virginia" followed it. 
State Law reference- "State" defined, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.26. 
    Street, highway. The word "street" or "highway" shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of every way or place open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel in the town, including the streets and alleys, and, for law enforcement purposes, the entire width between the boundary lines of all private roads or private streets which have been specifically designated "highways" by an ordinance adopted by the council in which such private roads or streets are located. 
State Law reference- "Highway" defined, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100. 
    Swear, sworn. The words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed" in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.28. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    This corporation, this town. The words "this corporation" or "this town" shall be construed to mean the corporation of the Town of Farmville. 
    Town. The word "town" shall be construed as if the words "of Farmville" followed it. 
State Law reference- "Town" defined, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.29. 
    Written, in writing. The words "written" and "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.32. 
    Year. Unless otherwise expressed, the word "year" shall be construed to mean a calendar year; and the word "year" alone shall be equivalent to the expression "year of our Lord." 
(Code 1973, § 1-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.33. 
Sec. 1-3. - Provisions continuations of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of the 1959 Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the 1959 Code and included herein, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1973, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the town council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code, or its application to any person or circumstances, shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1973, § 1-4) 
Charter reference- Severability clause, § 60. 
State Law reference- Severability of statutory provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-17.1. 
Sec. 1-5. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1973, § 1-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-13.9. 
Sec. 1-6. - General penalty. 
(a)  Whenever in any provision of this Code or in any other ordinance of the town or any rule or regulation promulgated by an officer or agency of the town, under authority duly vested in such officer or agency, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or the doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided for the violation of such provision and such violation is not described as being of a particular class of misdemeanor, or where it is provided that the violation shall be punished as prescribed in this section, without further qualification, no penalty imposed for such violation shall exceed a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment in a penal or correctional institution for twelve (12) months or both; provided, however, that such penalty shall not exceed the penalty prescribed by general law for a like offense. 
(b)  Unless otherwise provided, each day any violation of this Code or any ordinance or rule or regulation referred to in this section continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
State Law reference- Precedence of charter provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-840; penalties for violations of municipal ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-901; bond of persons convicted to prevent additional violations, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-902; injunctive relief against continuing violation of ordinance, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-905; classification of criminal offenses, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-9; punishment for conviction of misdemeanor, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-11; punishment for misdemeanor where no penalty prescribed, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-12, 18.2-13. 
Sec. 1-7. - Official map of town. 
    That certain plan and map begun October 1, 1933, completed July 1, 1934, and presented to the town council on September 11, 1934, is hereby adopted and designated as the official map of the town, a copy of which is filed in the office of the town and in the office of the county clerk in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Virginia, § 15-765. 
(Code 1973, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-8. - Repealing, amending and suspending ordinances generally. 
    No ordinance shall be amended, suspended or repealed except by ordinance regularly introduced and adopted. 
(Code 1973, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-9. - Repeal not to affect liabilities, etc. 
    No new ordinance shall be construed to repeal a former ordinance as to any offense committed against the former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act so committed or done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued, or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter had shall conform, so far as practicable, to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceedings. 
(Code 1973, § 1-8) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-16. 
Sec. 1-10. - Repeal not to revive former ordinance. 
    When an ordinance which has repealed another shall itself be repealed, the previous ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that effect. 
(Code 1973, § 1-9) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-17. 
Sec. 1-11. - Effective date and publication of ordinances. 
    Any ordinance or resolution passed at a regular meeting of the town council shall become effective immediately from its passage by a majority vote of the council, and, except where required by law, no notice or publication need be made to render such ordinance or resolution operative and binding; provided, that the town council may in its discretion cause certain ordinances or resolutions to be printed in a local newspaper when it seems advisable. The town council may in its discretion require the expenses of such publication to be defrayed by a person where the ordinance or resolution involves the granting of a right or privilege to such person. 
(Code 1973, § 1-10) 
State Law reference- Notice of automobile graveyard and junkyard ordinance, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-28. 
Sec. 1-12. - Ordinances and resolutions in evidence. 
    In any civil action, the court shall take judicial notice of a copy of any ordinance or resolution of the town certified by the clerk of the council, or a printed copy thereof which purports to have been printed by the authority of the council, for any purpose for which the original ordinance or resolution could be received. 
(Code 1973, § 1-11) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 8.01-386. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Administration, § 3 et seq.; council proceedings, § 14 et seq.; removal of officers, § 20; mayor, § 30 et seq.; powers of appointive officers, § 51. 
Cross reference- Airport, Ch. 4; cemeteries, Ch. 8; elections, Ch. 9; finance, Ch. 11; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 12; planning, Ch. 20; police department, Ch. 21; solid waste and weeds, Ch. 22; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23; taxation, Ch. 25; water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 28; building official, § 6-3; board of survey, § 6-5; board of appeals for building code, § 6-6; volunteer fire department, § 12-76 et seq.; chief of the fire department, § 12-77; fire marshal, § 12-84; administration of noise control program, § 16-4; planning commission, § 20-26 et seq.; administration of subdivision regulations, § 24-3; management of waterworks, § 28-29; administration of zoning chapter, § 29-3; board of zoning appeals, § 29-411 et seq. 
State Law reference- The Virginia Freedom of Information Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.1-340 et seq.; government of towns, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-792 et seq., 15.1-826 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Office hours of town manager and town treasurer. 
    The offices of the town manager and the town treasurer shall be open from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday. 
(Code 1973, § 2-1) 
Charter reference- Town manager generally, § 21; town treasurer generally, §§ 6, 18, 33 et seq. 
Sec. 2-2. - Bond of treasurer. 
    The bond of the town treasurer shall be in the penalty of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), which shall be submitted to and approved by the town council. 
(Code 1973, § 2-2) 
Charter reference- Bond of treasurer, § 42. 
State Law reference- Bonds of town officers, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-797. 
Sec. 2-3. - Vacancy in office appointed by council. 
    In case of a vacancy in the office of the town manager, town attorney, town treasurer or chief of police caused by resignation, death or otherwise, the council may appoint any qualified person to fill such vacancy. All such appointments shall be determined by a majority vote of the council. 
(Code 1973, § 2-3) 
Sec. 2-4. - Duty of town officers to turn over property to successor. 
    It shall be the duty of any elected or appointed town officer, upon ceasing to hold such office, to transmit to his successor in office all books, papers, documents and other property belonging to the town in his custody or pertaining to his office. 
(Code 1973, §§ 2-4, 2-11) 
Sec. 2-5. - Personnel background searches. 
(a)  This section is enacted pursuant to Code of Virginia §§ 19.2-389 and 15.2-1503.1. In the interest of public welfare and safety it is necessary to determine whether the past criminal and/or child protective services conduct of each person described in subsections (b), (c) and (d) of this section is compatible with the nature of each person's employment. 
(b)  In addition to other background searches authorized by local, state, or federal law, the town manager and his designees within town government shall conduct: 
(1)  Criminal history record searches; and 
(2)  Sex offender and crimes against minors registry searches for all applicants for full-time employment who are offered a conditional offer of employment with the town, all employees who are being promoted to a position in their own or another department or applying for a transfer to a position in another department, and all applicants for part-time employment in safety sensitive positions as determined by the town manager who are offered conditional offers of employment. 
(c)  In addition to other background searches authorized by local, state or federal law, the town manager and his designees within town government shall conduct: 
(1)  Criminal history record searches; 
(2)  Sex offender and crimes against minors registry searches; and 
(3)  Child protective services central registry searches on full-time and part-time town employees who provide services to juveniles or who provide maintenance services at local schools, and applicants for town employment, both full-time and part-time, who will hold such positions and who have received a conditional offer of employment. 
(d)  In addition to other background searches authorized by local, state or federal law, the town manager and his designees within town government shall conduct: 
(1)  Criminal history record searches; and 
(2)  Sex offender and crimes against minors registry searches on volunteers for town departments who will provide services to juveniles, and volunteer rescue squads. 
(e)  The town manager is authorized to identify employee and volunteer positions which meet the criteria of subsections (c) and (d) of this section and to incorporate such list into an administrative policy which implements the provisions of this section. Such administrative policy shall indicate whether such searches shall be universal or random and shall identify consequences for past behavior. 
(f)  All employees, volunteers and applicants identified in subsections (b), (c), or (d) of this section shall execute, as a condition of employment or service, the necessary documents to permit the searches described in this section and shall cooperate with all agencies providing information. In addition, all applicants for employment given a conditional offer of employment shall submit two (2) sets of fingerprints for processing a nationwide background check. 
(g)  Any employee disciplined as a result of a background search may grieve such discipline in accordance with the town grievance procedure. 
(Ord. No. 138, 6-16-2011) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 138, adopted June 16, 2011, enacted provisions intended for codification as § 2-6 of this Code. To preserve the style of this Code, and to facilitate indexing, said provisions have been redesignated as § 2-5. 
Sec. 2-6. - Fee for returned checks. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the Code of Virginia, § 15.2-106, and any and all future amendments, reenactments, modification or recodifications thereof as may from time to time occur, the town shall charge a fifty dollar ($50.00) fee to the drawer of any check, draft or order for payment of taxes or any other sum due the town, which is subsequently returned for insufficient funds or because there is no account or the account has been closed, or because such check, draft, or order was retuned because of a stop-payment order placed in bad faith on the check, draft or order by the drawer. 
(Ord. No. 144, 9-14-2011) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 144, adopted Sept. 14, 2011, enacted provisions intended for codification as § 2-5 of this chapter. To preserve the style of this Code, and to facilitate indexing, said provisions have been redesignated as § 2-6. 
Secs. 2-7-2-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TOWN COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Council, § 3 et seq.; mayor and councilmen declared conservators of the peace, § 57. 
State Law reference- Powers of town vested in governing body, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-7; residence of town officers, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-51; council member holding other office, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-800; oaths of councilmen and mayor, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-829. 

Sec. 2-21. - President. 
    The council shall at its first regular meeting in July of each even year elect from their number a person to be known as president of the council, who shall, when the mayor is absent or cannot sit, have all the powers and perform all the duties conferred by law upon the mayor; provided, that any vacancy in the office of mayor shall be filled as required by law. 
(Code 1973, § 2-5) 
Sec. 2-22. - Meetings. 
    Regular meetings of the council shall be held on the second Wednesday in each month at 7:00 p.m. Special meetings of the council may be convened at any time upon the call in writing of the mayor or any three (3) members of the council. All meetings of the council shall be held in the appropriate place designated by town council and shall at all times be open to the public, except as provided in Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3711. 
(Code 1973, § 2-6; Ord. No. 14, 7-9-92; Ord. No. 67, 8-1-2002) 
State Law reference- How council convened, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-832. 
Sec. 2-23. - Power to compel absent members to attend meetings. 
    Any three (3) members of the council may compel the attendance of the absent members at any meeting of the council by serving a written notice upon the absent members to attend at once. If there is any absent member who does not attend at once, he may, at the discretion of the council, be fined five dollars ($5.00), which shall be entered on the minutes of the council and deducted from his salary; or, in case no salary is due him, the penalty may be collected by suit against him brought in the name of the town. 
(Code 1973, § 2-7) 
Sec. 2-24. - Council judge of election, etc., of members; may punish or expel members; vacancies. 
    The council shall judge the election, qualification and returns of its members, may fine them for disorderly behavior and, with the concurrence of two-thirds, expel a member. If any person returned is adjudged disqualified or be expelled, a new election to fill the vacancy shall be held at the same place, on such day as the council may prescribe, except that when there shall be vacancies in the majority of the council, the circuit court of the county or the judge thereof in vacation shall fill such vacancies. Any vacancy occurring otherwise during the term for which any of such persons have been elected may be filled by the council from the electors of the town. A vacancy in the office of mayor may be filled by the council from the electors of the town. 
(Code 1973, § 2-8) 
Charter reference- Filling of vacancies, § 7. 
State Law reference- Council judge of election, etc., of members, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-830. 
Sec. 2-25. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 108, adopted Nov. 11, 2006, rescinded § 2-25, which pertained to members ineligible to certain offices and derived from Code 1973, § 2-9. 
Sec. 2-26. - Reports of town manager. 
    The town manager shall make a monthly report to the council, unless required by the council to make such reports more often, of his acts and doings as town manager. He shall submit his books to the inspection of the mayor, council or any committee of the council, whenever requested by them, or any of them, so to do. 
(Code 1973, § 2-10) 
Charter reference- Town manager generally, § 21. 
Secs. 2-27-2-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TOWN ATTORNEY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Town attorney, § 6. 
State Law reference- Town attorney holding other office, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-50(A)(1). 

Sec. 2-46. - Qualifications. 
    The town attorney shall be a practicing attorney, licensed as such by the town and the state, with his law office in the town. 
(Code 1973, § 2-12) 
Sec. 2-47. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the town attorney to draft all bonds, deeds, obligations, agreements and other legal instruments of whatsoever nature whenever it shall be required of him by this Code, any ordinance of the town or order of the town council. He shall commence and prosecute all actions and suits to be commenced by the town. He shall appear in, defend or advocate the rights and interests of the town, or any of the officers of the town, in any suit or prosecution of any act in the discharge of their official duties wherein any estate, right, privilege, ordinance or acts of the town may be brought in question. He shall be the legal advisor of the mayor, the town council and any committee thereof and of the several departments of the town government in all matters relating to their official duties. 
(b)  The town attorney shall have such other powers and perform such other duties as may be provided for by the council, this Code, the charter or other ordinances of the town or the laws of the state. 
(Code 1973, § 2-13) 
Sec. 2-48. - Compensation. 
    The salary of the town attorney shall be as designated by the town council at its regular meeting in July, payable monthly, and shall be in full compensation for all services rendered the town; provided, that nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit the council from paying the town attorney extra compensation for extra or unanticipated services; further provided, council has given approval prior to the performance of any extra services. When the duties of the town attorney require his presence out of town on official business, reasonable hotel and travel expenses shall be allowed him. However, such expenses shall not be in excess of those provided for persons reimbursed by the state when traveling on state business. 
(Code 1973, § 2-14) 
State Law reference- Traveling expenses on business of town, Code of Virginia, § 14.1-7. 
Secs. 2-49-2-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PERSONNEL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-66. - Leaves generally. 
    Leaves shall be accrued but may not be taken during the employee's probationary period with the exception of compensatory leave. An employee who is dismissed or resigns during the probationary period shall not receive any earned leave other than compensatory leave. Any time taken in excess of accumulated or extraordinary leave shall be without pay. If an employee has an unexcused absence at any time during a calendar month, he shall not be credited for any additional leave for that month. 
(Code 1973, § 2-15) 
Sec. 2-67. - Personal days off annual leave policy. 
(a)  The personal days off annual leave policy set out in this section shall be applicable to all full-time town employees. Full-time employees are those hired for an indefinite period of time and are regularly scheduled for thirty-eight (38) or more hours per week. 
(b)  Personal days off annual leave shall be accumulated at the rate of six (6) hours per two-week pay period during the first year of employment. After one (1) year has been completed, personal days off annual leave shall be earned at the rate of eight (8) hours per two-week pay period completed. After ten (10) years have been completed, annual leave shall be earned at the rate of ten (10) hours per two-week pay period completed. Annual leave shall normally be used on a whole day basis. Department heads may grant annual leave on an hour per hour basis in emergencies. Vacations may be taken only with the approval of the department heads who shall have the responsibility of scheduling annual leave. The maximum carry-over of annual leave shall be four hundred eighty (480) hours at the end of the last full two-week pay period in the calendar year. If called to work during his/her period of annual leave, an employee shall be paid at a rate of one and one-half (11/2) times his regular hourly rate of pay in addition to his annual leave. 
(Code 1973, § 2-16; Ord. No. 44, 6-11-97; Ord. No. 143, 7-13-2011; Ord. No. 147, 10-12-2011; Ord. No. 168, 5-14-2014 ) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 143, adopted July 13, 2011, changed the title of § 2-67 from annual leave policy to personal days off annual leave policy. 
Sec. 2-68. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 143, adopted July 13, 2011, deleted § 2-68, which pertained sick leave and derived from the Code of 1973, § 2-17; Ord. No. 44, 6-11-97. 
Sec. 2-69. - Full part-time employee benefits. 
(a)  Employees that work a minimum of twenty (20) hours per week will be entitled to one-half (1/2) the personal days off benefits accrued by full-time employees. 
(b)  No other benefits will apply to part-time employees. 
(Code 1973, § 2-18; Ord. No. 143, 7-13-2011) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 143, adopted July 13, 2011, changed the title of § 2-67 from part-time employee benefits to full part-time employee benefits. 
Sec. 2-70. - Holidays. 
(a)  The following holidays shall be granted: 
(1)  New Year's Eve, December 31 
(2)  New Year's Day January 1 
(3)  Lee-Jackson Day, the Friday before the third Monday in January 
(4)  Martin Luther King birthday observance, the third Monday in January 
(5)  President's Day, the third Monday in February 
(6)  Easter Monday, the Monday immediately following Easter Sunday 
(7)  Memorial Day, the last Monday in May 
(8)  Independence Day, July 4 
(9)  Labor Day, the first Monday in September 
(10)  Columbus Day, the second Monday in October 
(11)  Veterans Day, November 11 
(12)  Thanksgiving holidays, the fourth Thursday and Friday in November 
(13)  Christmas Eve, December 24 
(14)  Christmas Day, December 25 
(b)  If a holiday falls on a Saturday, the preceding Friday shall be observed; if the holiday falls on a Sunday, the following Monday shall be observed. An employee who works on a holiday shall be paid for the holiday and for working at one and one-half (11/2) times his regular hourly rate if he works a total of forty (40) hours that week. Excused absences (such as personal annual leave) are counted as working time. None of the above shall apply to personnel working on a shift basis. 
(Code 1973, § 2-19; Ord. No. 82, 5-12-2004; Ord. No. 91, 1-12-2005; Ord. No. 143, 7-13-2011) 
State Law reference- Legal holidays, Code of Virginia, § 2.1-21. 
Sec. 2-71. - Resignation. 
    An employee may leave the employment of the town voluntarily by submitting, in writing, his notice to the town management not less than fourteen (14) days before the effective date of his resignation. With the approval of the town manager and department head, the employee may withdraw his resignation unless the position has been filled. To receive seventy-five (75) percent compensation for any annual leave an employee shall give two (2) weeks' notice of his resignation. Failure to give two (2) weeks' notice will be noted on the employee's records. 
(Code 1973, § 2-20; Ord. No. 168, 5-14-2014 ) 
Sec. 2-72. - Financial disclosure forms. 
    Pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 2.1-639.14, recorded herein by reference, known as the State and Local Government Conflict of Interests Act, requires the filing of a financial disclosure of any officer or employee of the local government who has a personal interest in any transaction before the agency of which he is an officer or employee. Such disclosure must be maintained in the public records of the clerk's office for the respective locality for at least five (5) years. Financial disclosure forms shall be filed by the town attorney, the town manager, the chief of police, the clerk/treasurer, the members of town council and the mayor. In addition, all future officers or employees who have a personal interest in any transaction before the government agency of which he is an officer or employee shall file a disclosure of such interest. 
(Code 1973, § 2-21) 
Sec. 2-73. - Bonuses for employees. 
    At such times, and in such amounts, as are properly budgeted for, the Farmville Town Council may, by resolution, provide for monetary bonuses to its officers and employees. 
(Ord. No. 2-2015 , 4-8-2015) 
Secs. 2-74-2-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - AFFIRMATIVE ACTION PLAN 

Sec. 2-91. - Nondiscrimination policy. 
(a)  In compliance with Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, it is the policy of the town: 
(1)  To provide equality of opportunity in employment with the town for all persons. 
(2)  To carry out all programs and activities in compliance with Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and in such a manner that no person shall, on the grounds of race, color, national origin, religion, age, handicap or sex, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination with respect to any such programs or activities. 
(3)  To afford full and fair representation of all sectors of the population within the corporate limits of the town. 
(b)  To effectuate its nondiscrimination policy, the town adopts this affirmative action program. 
Sec. 2-92. - Employment and personnel practices. 
    It is the policy of the town to prohibit discrimination because of race, color, national origin, religion, age, handicap or sex in all aspects of its personnel policies, programs, practices and operations, and in all its working conditions and relationships with employees and applicants for employment; and to promote the full realization of equal opportunity in employment through continuing programs of affirmative action in the town. 
Sec. 2-93. - Affirmative action program. 
    The town manager shall direct the implementation of this affirmative action program to promote equal opportunity in every aspect of employment policy and practice, including but not limited to: employment, upgrading, demotion or transfer, recruitment or recruitment advertising; layoff or termination; rates of pay or other forms of compensation; and selection of training, including apprenticeship. This implementation shall include, but not be limited to, the following actions: 
(1)  A notice of the town's policy on nondiscrimination in employment shall be posted in a conspicuous place, so as to come to the attention of all town employees and applicants for employment. 
(2)  Notification of employment opportunities, new positions, vacancies, promotion possibilities and training opportunities shall be posted in a conspicuous place, so as to come to the attention of all town employees and applicants for employment. 
(3)  Newspaper advertisements and other public announcements of employment opportunities placed by or on behalf of the town shall state that the town is an equal opportunity employer. 
(4)  The town manager shall make an annual assessment of the town employment. This assessment shall include an equal opportunity strategy outlining the specific equal opportunity actions to be taken by the town during the upcoming fiscal year. 
Sec. 2-94. - Personnel for implementing equal opportunity policy. 
(a)  Equal opportunity review board. The town designates the town council as the town's equal opportunity review board (EOR board). In all cases involving employment actions, the decision of such EOR board, upon review of proceedings carried out in accord with the procedures established by this section, shall be final. 
(b)  Equal opportunity counselor. The town council shall designate an equal opportunity counselor. The town manager shall not hold this position. It shall be the duty of such counselor to provide advice to employees, or other persons, concerning their rights under the equal opportunity policy established in section 2-91, and other pertinent laws and regulations; to conduct initial investigations as provided in this section; and to seed conciliation of such complaints with the appropriate town officials. 
(c)  Equal opportunity hearing officer. In appropriate cases, the equal opportunity review board shall designate a disinterested person to conduct formal investigations and hearing on complaints of discrimination brought in the manner provided in this section. 
(d)  Display of names. The name of the equal opportunity counselor and hearing officer shall be posted in conspicuous places. 
Sec. 2-95. - Procedures for conciliation, investigation and resolution of complaints of discrimination. 
(a)  Any person who believes that he has been discriminated against by reason of race, color, religion, sex, age, creed, handicap or national origin, in connection with any personnel action taken by or under the authority of the town, shall have the right to seek advice and conciliation through the equal opportunity counselor. 
(b)  The steps to be followed in processing a grievance shall be outlined in the town's grievance procedure. 
Sec. 2-96. - Contractors. 
    Contractors of the town shall comply with Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. 
Sec. 2-97. - Operation practices. 
    It is the policy of the town to provide equal access to all persons, regardless of race, color, religion, age, handicap, sex or national origin, to all aspects of all its operations, including organization and administration. 
Sec. 2-98. - Procedures. 
(a)  Any person who believes that he has been discriminated against by reason of race, color, religion, age, handicap, sex or national origin, in connection with the administration of the town, shall be advised of his right to seek advice and conciliation through the equal opportunity counselor. 
(b)  The aggrieved party shall submit his complaint in writing to the equal opportunity counselor. 
(c)  Thereafter, the procedure shall be the same as set forth in the grievance procedures. 
Chapter 3 - ADVERTISING[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Cable television, Ch. 7; junkyards, car lots and automobile graveyards, Ch. 13; licenses and permits, Ch. 14; peddlers and solicitors, Ch. 19; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23; taxicabs, Ch. 26; trees and shrubs, Ch. 27; advertisements on fences around junkyard, car lot or automobile graveyard, § 13-6; scattering handbills on streets and sidewalks, § 23-12. 

Sec. 3-1. - Posting advertisements, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to paste, write, print, stamp, nail or affix to any building, erection, fence, tree, lamppost, sidewalk, telephone, telegraph or other pole or to any other improvement any poster, showbill, handbill or other printed notice or sign without a permit from the town manager. 
(Code 1973, § 3-1) 
Sec. 3-2. - Tearing down authorized advertisements or posters. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to tear down any advertisement or poster put up with the consent of the owner of the property whereupon the same is posted, or to alter or mutilate the same. 
(Code 1973, § 3-2) 
Sec. 3-3. - Permit prerequisite to distribution of handbills, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute or hand out any handbills, circulars or other advertising matter without first having secured a permit therefor from the town manager. 
(Code 1973, § 3-3) 
Sec. 3-4. - Standards for issuance of permit. 
    Permits under this chapter shall be issued when consistent with the health, safety and welfare of the town's inhabitants. 
Chapter 4 - AIRPORT[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 12; licenses and permits, Ch. 14; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 15; taxicabs, Ch. 26. 
State Law reference- Authority of town to acquire, construct, maintain and operate airports, Code of Virginia, § 5.1-31. 

Sec. 4-1. - Name. 
    The airport owned by the town and located approximately three (3) miles northwest of town in Cumberland County, Virginia, is named and shall be known as the Farmville Regional Airport. 
(Code 1973, § 4-1; Ord. No. 83, 5-12-2004) 
Sec. 4-2. - General supervision and control. 
    The general supervision and control of the Farmville Municipal Airport shall be vested in the town manager, and he shall be in charge of all work done therein. It shall be his duty to see that the landing strip, turnarounds, taxiways, apron, grounds, fences, buildings and facilities are kept in good condition, and he shall report their condition and needs to the town council. 
(Code 1973, § 4-2) 
State Law reference- Operation of airport by special officer, Code of Virginia, § 5.1-41. 
Sec. 4-3. - Trespassing at night. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon the Farmville Municipal Airport property during the hours of darkness without permission of the town manager or the custodian of the airport for any purpose other than law enforcement, town business or service or flying of aircraft. 
(Code 1973, § 4-3) 
Sec. 4-4. - Hunting; discharge of firearms generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt or discharge firearms within the enclosure of the Farmville Municipal Airport property without written permission of the town manager; except, that nothing herein contained shall be construed to impede or prohibit any law enforcement officer in the normal performance of his duty. Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 4-4) 
Editor's note- Because of the restrictions in Code of Virginia, § 15.1-29.15, the above section has not been revised. 
Cross reference- Discharge of firearms in cemetery, § 8-19; discharge of firearms generally, § 18-47. 
Sec. 4-5. - Operation of vehicles-Limited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, operate or ride any bicycle, motorcycle, automobile, truck, tractor or any other type of vehicle or conveyance except aircraft on the landing strip, turnarounds, taxiways, apron or grassed areas of the Farmville Municipal Airport except for maintenance purposes or for movement and service of aircraft under the supervision of the custodian, town manager or a designated agent of the town. Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 4-5) 
Sec. 4-6. - Same-Regulations. 
    The streets and parking lots on the Farmville Municipal Airport property are hereby declared to be within the meaning of the term "highway" as that word is used and defined in section 1-2. The operation and use of vehicles on the streets and parking lots shall comply with and be subject to the traffic laws of the commonwealth. 
(Code 1973, § 4-6) 
Sec. 4-7. - Use of apron. 
    The apron between the taxiways and the hangars and administration building may be used only for loading and unloading passengers, freight and mail from airplanes or service to airplanes. Airplanes shall not be parked or left unattended on the apron except in the tie-down area. 
(Code 1973, § 4-7) 
Sec. 4-8. - Regulations generally. 
    Any person operating or using or visiting the Farmville Regional Airport shall conform and be bound by the following regulations: 
(1)  All persons and aircraft operating on or from the airport shall be subject to and bound by the rules and regulations adopted by the Federal Aviation Administration and the rules and regulations established by the state aviation board, pursuant to the Code of Virginia § 5.1. Such rules are hereby specifically adopted by reference and expressly made a part hereof as fully as if the same were completely. 
(2)  Violations of these regulations shall constitute a breach of duty causing a legal liability therefor. 
(3)  All persons using in any way the airport area shall exercise due care to guard against fire and injury to persons or property. No rubbish shall be scattered about the airport area and the crew of all visiting aircraft shall be required to keep clean the space allotted. 
(4)  No landing fee shall be collected by any person for the privilege of landing aircraft on the airport, the port being an "open port." 
(5)  Fees charged for storage of aircraft, service, etc. shall be posted. 
(6)  All landings and take-offs shall be made on the runways provided therefor. 
(7)  Unhoused aircraft must be parked in the space allotted and tied down at all times when the owner, the operator or his mechanic is not in attendance. 
(8)  No plane shall remain on the runways longer than is absolutely necessary in flying operations. The runways shall be kept clear of obstructions to planes at all times, and the runways shall be used solely for the landing and taking off of airplanes. 
(9)  All pilots landing on the field shall report immediately to the administrative office of the airport to register their names, addresses, types of equipment, license or military number of aircraft, its ownership, the time of their arrival, expected time of departure, service required and such other information as may be required for record purposes. 
(10)  It shall be the duty of every pilot, mechanic or other person employed at the airport, and they are authorized, to carry out these rules and to see that the general public uses due care and caution to prevent injury to themselves and other persons or property, and further, to preserve and protect the property and equipment of whatever nature on the field. 
(11)  It shall be the duty of the party in charge of operating the airport to immediately notify the director of public works of any defect in the condition of the airport for flying purposes. Any failure to so report any such defect until after an accident has been caused thereby shall be an omission of duty on the part of the party in charge of operating the airport. 
(12)  Notice is given that the airport is being operated under a license agreement also granting the privilege of local commercial flying for hire over which operation and commercial flying the town exercises no control, and all pilots of visiting planes, passenger and commercial flyers, operators and all persons visiting or flying in or from or using or operating the airport thereby agree to release the town from any and all responsibility incident to the manner in which the airport or landing field is operated and served from within or used from without. 
(13)  Landings and takeoffs shall be made, when practical, into the wind. 
(14)  A plane taxiing before taking off or after landing shall taxi on the right side of the runway according to the direction in which he is progressing, in order that sufficient space be allowed for the takeoff and landing of other aircraft. 
(15)  These rules and regulations shall be posted in conspicuous places to fully notify all persons of the terms and conditions upon which the airport is open. 
(Code 1973, § 4-8; Ord. No. 84, 5-12-2004) 
State Law reference- Airport rules and regulations, fees and charges, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-44. 
Sec. 4-9. - Records. 
    Proper records shall be kept by the custodian of the airport's operation, which records shall be open to inspection by the town council at all reasonable times. A complete report shall be made to the town council annually. 
(Code 1973, § 4-9) 
Chapter 5 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 61, adopted Dec. 12, 2002 amended and re-enacted the former Ch. 5 and enacted a new Ch. 5 as set out herein. The former Ch. 5 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1973, §§ 5-1-5-21; Ord. No. 54, adopted Nov. 10, 1999. To preserve the numbering system of the Code and to facilitate indexing and reference the editor has redesignated §§ 5-1-5-32 as §§ 5-1-5-9, 5-39-5-47, 5-68-5-71, 5-92, 5-93, 5-124-5-127, 5-148-5-151, 5-172. 
Cross reference- Licenses and permits, Ch. 14; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 15; noise control, Ch. 16; nuisances, Ch. 17; zoning, Ch. 29. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1. - Purpose; legislative authority. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to provide for the regulation of dogs, or other animals and fowl, in the town and to prescribe penalties for its violation. 
(b)  This article is adopted under the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.84 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 61, 12-12-2001) 
Sec. 5-2. - Definition. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal warden means any animal warden and any deputy animal warden duly appointed by the town manager and/or town council. 
    Livestock includes all domestic or domesticated bovine animals; equine animals, ovine animals; porcine animals, cervidae animals, capradae animals; animals of the genus Lama; ratites; fish or shellfish in aquaculture facilities, as defined in Code of Virginia, § 3.1-73.6; enclosed domesticated rabbits or hares raised for human food or fiber; or any other individual animal specifically raised for food or fiber, except companion animals. 
    Other officer includes all other persons employed by the people of Virginia or by any municipality, county or incorporated town thereof, whose duty it is to preserve the peace, to make arrests or to enforce the law. 
    Owner includes any person having a right or property in a dog; any person who keeps or harbors a dog, has it in his care, or acts as its custodian; and any person who permits a dog to remain on or about any premises occupied by him. 
    Poultry includes all domestic fowl and game birds raised in captivity. 
    Treasurer includes the treasurer of this town or other officer designated by law to collect taxes in this town and his assistants. 
(Ord. No. 61, 12-12-2001) 
Sec. 5-3. - Duties of animal warden. 
    The animal warden shall discharge the duties provided for in Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.66 et seq., and such other duties as are provided in this article. The animal warden or deputy animal warden shall be appointed by the town manager and/or town council and under the supervision of the chief of police. The animal warden and assistants shall discharge their duties as outlined in Section 5 of the Town Code and other duties as provided in [Code of Virginia, §] 3.1-796.105. 
(Ord. No. 61, 12-12-2001) 
Sec. 5-4. - Running at large. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any dog, belonging to him or under his control, to run at large in the town at any time. 
(b)  Or the purpose of this section, a dog shall be deemed to run at large while roaming, running or self-hunting off the property of its owner or custodian and not under its owner's or custodian's immediate control. Any person who permits his dog to run at large, or remain unconfined, unrestricted and not penned up during the period specified in subsection (a) of this section shall be deemed to have violated the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor and shall be subject to punishment as provided in Code of Virginia, §§ 3.1-796.93 and 3.1-796.128. 
(Ord. No. 61, 12-12-2001) 
Sec. 5-5. - Dogs killing, injuring or chasing livestock or poultry. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of any animal warden or other officer who may find a dog in the act of killing or injuring livestock or poultry to kill such dog forthwith whether such dog bears a tag or not. Any person finding a dog committing any of the depredations mentioned in this section shall have the right to kill such dog on sight as shall any owner of livestock or his agent finding a dog chasing livestock on land utilized by the livestock when the circumstances show that such chasing is harmful to the livestock. Any court shall have the power to order the animal warden or other officer to kill any dog known to be a confirmed livestock or poultry killer; and any dog killing poultry for the third time shall be considered a confirmed poultry killer. The court, through its contempt powers, may compel the owner, custodian, or harborer of the dog to produce the dog. 
(b)  Any animal warden who has reason to believe that any dog is killing livestock or poultry shall be empowered to seize such dog solely for the purpose of examining such dog in order to determine whether it committed any of the depredations mentioned in this section. Any animal warden or other person who has reason to believe that any dog is killing livestock, or committing any of the depredations mentioned in this section, shall apply to a magistrate of the county, city or town wherein such dog may be, who shall issue a warrant requiring the owner or custodian, if known, to appear before a general district court at a time and place named in the warrant, at which time evidence shall be heard. If it shall appear that the dog is a livestock killer, or has committed any of the depredations mentioned in this section, the district court shall order that the dog be: 
(1)  Killed immediately by the animal warden or other officer designated by the court; or 
(2)  Removed to another state that does not border on the commonwealth and prohibited from returning to the commonwealth. Any dog order removed from the commonwealth which is later found in the commonwealth shall be ordered by a court to be killed immediately. 
(Ord. No. 61, 12-12-2001) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796-116. 
Sec. 5-6. - Compensation for livestock and poultry killed by dogs. 
(a)  Any person who has any livestock or poultry killed by any dog not his own shall be entitled to receive as compensation the fair market value of such livestock or poultry not to exceed four hundred dollars ($400.00) per animal or ten dollars ($10.00) per fowl, provided that the: 
(1)  The claimant has furnished evidence within sixty (60) days of discovery of the quantity and value of the dead or injured livestock and the reasons the claimant believes that death or injury was caused by a dog; 
(2)  Animal warden or other officer shall have been notified of the incident within seventy-two (72) hours of its discovery; and 
(3)  Claimant first has exhausted his legal remedies against the owner, if known, of the dog doing the damage for which compensation under this section is sought. Exhaustion shall mean a judgment against the owner of the dog upon which an execution has been returned unsatisfied. 
(b)  The council may by ordinance waive the requirements of subsections (a)(1) or (a)(2), or both, provided that the ordinance adopted requires that the animal warden has conducted an investigation and that his investigation supports the claim. Upon payment under this section, the council shall be subrogated to the extent of compensation paid to the right of action to the owner of the livestock or poultry against the owner of the dog and may enforce the same in an appropriate action at law. 
(Ord. No. 61, 12-12-2001; Ord. No. 85, 5-12-2004) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.118. 
Sec. 5-7. - Unlawful acts. 
    The following shall be deemed unlawful acts and constitute class 4 misdemeanors: 
(1)  Diseased dogs. For the owner of any dog with a contagious or infectious disease to permit such dog to stray from his premised is such disease is known to the owner. 
(1)  Female dog in season. For the owner of any female dog to permit such dog to stray from his premises while such dog is known to such owner to be in season. 
(3)  Removing collar and tag. For any person except the owner or custodian to remove a legally acquired license tag from a dog without the permission of the owner or custodian. 
(4)  Concealing a dog. For any person to conceal or harbor any dog for which the license tax has not been paid or to conceal a mad dog to keep the same from being killed. 
(Ord. No. 61, 12-12-2001) 
Sec. 5-8. - Dogs deemed personal property; rights relating thereto. 
(a)  All dogs shall be deemed personal property and may be the subject of larceny and malicious or unlawful trespass. Owners, as defined in Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.66, may maintain any action for the killing of any such animals, or injury thereto, or unlawful detention or use thereof as in the case of other personal property. The owner of any dog which is injured or killed contrary to the provisions of this chapter by any person shall be entitled to recover the value thereof or the damage done thereto in an appropriate action at law from such person. 
(b)  An animal warden or other officer finding a stolen dog, or a dog held or detained contrary to law, shall have authority to seize and hold such animal pending action before a general district court or other court. If no such action is instituted within seven (7) days, the animal warden or other officer shall deliver the dog to its owner. 
(c)  The presence of a dog on the premises of a person other than its legal owner shall raise no presumption of theft against the owner, and the animal warden may take such animal in charge and notify its legal owner to remove it. The legal owner of the animal shall pay a reasonable charge as the town council by ordinance shall establish for the keep of such animal while in the possession of the animal warden. 
(Ord. No. 61, 12-12-2001) 
Sec. 5-9. - Pound; confinement and disposition of stray animals. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning; 
    Animal shall not include agricultural animals. 
    Humane society, when referring to an organization without the commonwealth, means any nonprofit organization organized for the purposes of preventing cruelty to animals and promoting humane care and treatment or adoption of animals. 
    Rightful owner means a person with a right of property in the animal. 
(b)  Keeping of confined animals. 
(1)  An animal confined pursuant to this section shall be kept for period of not less than five (5) days, such period to commence on the day immediately following the day the animal is initially confined in the facility, unless sooner claimed by the rightful owner thereof. 
(2)  The operator or custodian of the pound shall make a reasonable effort to ascertain whether the animal has a collar, tag, license, tattoo or other from of identification. If such identification is found on the animal, the animal shall be held for an additional five (5) days unless sooner claimed by the rightful owner. If the rightful owner of the animal can be readily identified, the operator or custodian of the pound shall make a reasonable effort to notify the owner of the animals' confinement within the next forty-eight (48) hours following its confinement. 
(3)  If any animal confined pursuant to this section is claimed by its rightful owner, such owner shall be charged with the actual expenses incurred in keeping the animal impounded, including veterinary fees. 
(c)  Disposition. If an animal confined pursuant to this section has not been claimed upon expiration of the appropriate holding period as provided by subsection (c) of this section, it shall be deemed abandoned and become the property of the pound or shelter. If such abandoned animal did not when delivered to the pound bear a collar, tag, license, tattoo or other form of identification, it may be humanely destroyed or disposed of by: 
(1)  Sale or gift to a federal agency, state-supported institution, agency of the commonwealth, agency of another state, or a licensed federal dealer having its principal place of business located within the commonwealth, provided that such agency, institution or dealer agrees to confine the animal for an additional period of not less than five (5) days; 
(2)  Delivery to any humane society or animal shelter within the commonwealth. 
(3)  Delivery by any person who is a resident of the town/county and who will pay the required license fee, if any, on such animal; 
(4)  Adoption by a resident of an adjacent political subdivision of the commonwealth; or 
(5)  Delivery, for the purposes of adoption or euthanasia only, to a humane society or an animal shelter located in and lawfully operating under the laws of another state, provided that such humane society or animal shelter; 
a.  Maintains records which would comply with Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.105; 
b.  Requires that adopted dogs and cats be sterilized; and 
c.  Has been approved by the state veterinarian or his designee as a facility which maintains such records, requires adopted dogs and cats to be sterilized, and provides adequate care and euthanasia. 
If such abandoned animal when delivered to the pound bore a collar, tag, license, tattoo or other form of identification, it may be humanely destroyed or disposed of by the methods described in subsections (c)(2), (c)(3) or (c)(4) of this section. No pound or shelter shall deliver more than two (2) animals or a family of animals during any thirty-day period to any one person under subsection (c)(3) or (c)(4) of this section. 
(d)  Destruction of ill animals. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the immediate destruction of a critically injured, critically ill, or unweaned animal for humane purposes. Any animal destroyed pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be euthanized by one (1) of the methods prescribed or approved by the state veterinarian. 
(e)  Disposal by owner. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the immediate destruction or disposal by the methods listed in subsections (d)(2)-(5) of an animal that has been delivered voluntarily or released to a pound, animal shelter, animal warden or humane society by the animal's rightful owner after the rightful owner has, in writing, surrendered all property rights in such animal and has read and signed a statement certifying that no other person has a right of property in the animal and acknowledging that the animal may be immediately euthanized or disposed of by the methods listed in subsections (d)(2)-(5). 
(f)  Euthanizing feral dogs, cats. Nothing in this section shall prohibit any feral dog or feral cat not bearing a collar, tag, tattoo or other form of identification which, based on the written certification of a disinterested person, exhibits behavior that poses a risk of physical injury to any person confining the animal, from being euthanized after being kept for a period of not less than three (3) days, at least one (1) of which shall be a full business day, such period to commence on the day the animal is initially confined in the facility, unless sooner claimed by the rightful owner. The certification of the disinterested person shall be kept with the animal as required by Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.105. For purposes of this subsection, a disinterested person shall not include a person releasing or reporting the animal to the facility. 
(Ord. No. 61, 12-12-2001) 
Sec. 5-10. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 122, adopted Feb. 11, 2009, repealed § 5-10 which pertained to license required for cats and derived from Ord. No. 74, 6-11-2003. 
Secs. 5-11-5-38. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - VICIOUS AND DANGEROUS DOGS 

Sec. 5-39. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dangerous dog means a canine or canine crossbreed that has bitten, attacked or inflicted injury on a person or companion animal, other than a dog, or killed a companion animal. 
    Vicious dog means a canine or canine crossbreed that has: 
(1)  Killed a person: 
(2)  Inflicted serious injury to a person, including multiple bites, serious disfigurement, serious impairment of health, or serious impairment of a bodily function; or 
(3)  Continued to exhibit the behavior that resulted in a previous finding by a court that it is a dangerous dog, provided that its owner has been given notice of that finding. 
(Ord. No. 61, 12-12-2001) 
Sec. 5-40. - Owner to appear in court. 
    Any animal warden who has reason to believe that a canine or canine crossbreed within his jurisdiction is a dangerous dog or vicious dog shall apply to a magistrate of the jurisdiction for the issuance of a summons requiring the owner or custodian, if known, to appear before a general district court at a specified time. The summons shall advise the owner of the nature of the proceeding and the matters at issue. The animal warden or owner shall confine the animal until such time as evidence shall be heard and a verdict rendered. The court, through its contempt powers, may compel the owner, custodian or harborer of the animal to produce the animal. If after hearing the evidence the court finds that the animal is a dangerous dog, the court shall order the animal's owner to comply with the provisions of this article. If, after hearing the evidence, the court finds that the animal is a vicious dog, the court shall order the animal euthanized in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 3.1-796.119. 
(Ord. No. 61, 12-12-2001) 
Sec. 5-41. - Determination. 
    No canine or canine crossbreed shall be found to be a dangerous dog or vicious dog solely because it is a particular breed, nor shall the local governing body prohibit the ownership of a particular breed of canine or canine crossbreed. No animal shall be found to be a dangerous dog or vicious dog if the threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who was: 
(1)  Committing, at the time, a crime upon the premises occupied by the animal's owner or custodian; 
(2)  Committing, at the time, a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the animal's owner or custodian; or 
(3)  Provoking, tormenting or physically abusing the animal, or can be shown to have repeatedly provoked, tormented, abused or assaulted the animal at other times. 
    No police dog which was engaged in the performance of its duties as such at the time of the acts complained of shall be found to be a dangerous dog or a vicious dog. No animal which, at the time of the acts complained of, was responding to pain or injury, or was protecting itself, its kennel, its offspring, or its owner or owner's property, shall be found to be a dangerous dog or a vicious dog. 
(Ord. No. 61, 12-12-2001) 
Sec. 5-42. - Registration certificate. 
(a)  Required. The owner of any animal found to be a dangerous dog shall, within ten (10) days of such finding, obtain a dangerous dog registration certificate from the animal warden for a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) in addition to other fees that may be authorized by law. The animal warden shall also provide the owner with a uniformly designed tag which identifies the animal as a dangerous dog. The owner shall affix the tag to the animal's collar and ensure that the animal wears the collar and tag at all times. All certificates obtained pursuant to this section shall be renewed annually for the same fee and in the same manner as the initial certificate was obtained. 
(b)  Issuance. 
(1)  All certificates or renewals required to be obtained under this section shall only be issued to persons eighteen (18) years of age or older who present satisfactory evidence: 
a.  Of the animal's current rabies vaccination, if applicable; and 
b.  That the animal is and will be confined in a proper enclosure or is and will be confined inside the owner's residence or is and will be muzzled and confined in the owner's fenced-in yard until the proper enclosure is constructed. 
(2)  In addition, owners who apply for certificates or renewals under this section shall not be issued a certificate or renewal thereof unless they present satisfactory evidence that: 
a.  Their residence is and will continue to be posted with clearly visible signs warning both minors and adults of the presence of a dangerous dog on the property; and 
b.  The animal has been permanently identified by means of a tattoo on the inside thigh or by electronic implantation. 
(Ord. No. 61, 12-12-2001) 
Sec. 5-43. - Confinement; leash. 
(a)  While on the property of its owner, an animal found to be a dangerous dog shall be confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked structure of sufficient height and design to prevent its escape or direct contact with or entry by minors, adults, or other animals. The structure shall be designed to provide the animal with shelter from the elements of nature. 
(b)  When off its owner's property, an animal found to be a dangerous dog shall be kept on a leash and muzzled in such a manner as not to cause injury to the animal or interfere with the animal's vision or respiration, but so as to prevent it from biting a person or another animal. 
(Ord. No. 61, 12-12-2001) 
Sec. 5-44. - Ownership by minors. 
    If the owner of an animal found to be a dangerous dog is a minor, the custodial parent or legal guardian shall be responsible for complying with all requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 61, 12-12-2001) 
Sec. 5-45. - Notification of change in status. 
    After an animal has been found to be a dangerous dog, the animal's owner shall immediately, upon learning of same, notify the animal warden if the animal: 
(1)  If loose or unconfined: 
(2)  Bites a person or attacks another animal; 
(3)  Is sold, given away, or dies; or 
(4)  Has been moved to a different address. 
(Ord. No. 61, 12-12-2001) 
Sec. 5-46. - Disposition of fees. 
    All fees collected pursuant to this article, less the costs incurred by the animal warden in producing and distributing the certificates and tags required by this article, shall be paid into a special dedicated fund in the town treasury for the purpose of paying the expenses of any training course required under Code of Virginia, § 3.1.796.105. 
(Ord. No. 61, 12-12-2001) 
Sec. 5-47. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    The owner of any animal that has been found to be a dangerous or vicious dog who willfully fails to comply with the requirements of this article shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 61, 12-12-2001) 
Secs. 5-48-5-67. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RABIES 

Sec. 5-68. - Declaration of a quarantine. 
    When in the judgment of the county health director an emergency is deemed to exist in the town or any section of the town due to widespread rabies epizootic, the health director may declare a quarantine in the town or such section of the town as may be affected and restrict all dogs and cats to the owners' premises and/or to the immediate custody of a responsible person for the duration of such emergency as is set forth. During such period, the animal may be leashed under restraint of the owner in such a manner that persons or animals will not be subject to the danger of being bitten by a rabid animal. 
(Ord. No. 61, 12-12-2001) 
Sec. 5-69. - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this article shall be enforced by all public officers of the town, police chief and his officers and the town animal warden. 
Sec. 5-70. - Penalties. 
    It shall be unlawful and constitute a class 4 misdemeanor for any person to violate any of the provisions of this article or present either a certificate of vaccination for a dog other than that for which it was issued or an authorized certificate of vaccination. 
(Ord. No. 61, 12-12-2001) 
Sec. 5-71. - Inoculation of dogs and cats required. 
    The owner or custodian of all dogs and cats four (4) months of age and older shall have them currently vaccinated for rabies by a licensed veterinarian or licensed veterinary technician who is under the immediate and direct supervision of a licensed veterinarian on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 61, 12-12-2001; Ord. No. 75, 7-9-2003) 
Secs. 5-72-5-91. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEAD ANIMALS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 5-92. - Burial or cremation of dead animals and fowl. 
(a)  When the owner of any animal or grown fowl that has dies knows of such death, such owner shall forthwith have its body buried or cremated. If he fails to do so, any judge of a general district court, after notice to the owner if he can be ascertained, shall cause any such dead animal or fowl to be buried or cremated by an officer or other person designated for the purpose. 
(b)  Such officer or other person shall be entitled to recover from the owner of every such animal so cremated or buried the actual cost of the cremation or burial, not to exceed seventy-five dollars ($75.00), and from the owner of every such fowl so cremated or buried the actual cost of the cremation or burial, not to exceed five dollars ($5.00), to be recovered in the same manner as officers' fees are recovered, free from all exemptions in favor of such owner. 
(c)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 61, 12-12-2001) 
Sec. 5-93. - Commercial, food use of animal. 
    Nothing in this division shall be deemed to require the burial or cremation of the whole or portions of any animal or fowl that is to be used for food or in any commercial manner. 
(Ord. No. 61, 12-12-2001) 
Secs. 5-94-5-123. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ANIMALS DYING FROM DISEASE 

Sec. 5-124. - Burial or cremation of animals and fowl dying of disease. 
    The owner of any animal or grown fowl that has died of a disease, knowing of such death, shall forthwith bury or cause to be buried, cremate or cause to be cremated, or deliver immediately to some rendering company approved by health director or county agent the body of such animal or grown fowl. If he fails to do so, any magistrate, after notice to the owner if he can be ascertained, shall cause any such dead animal or fowl to be cremated or buried by a constable or other person designated for the purpose. 
(Ord. No. 61, 12-12-2001) 
Sec. 5-125. - Fees. 
    The constable or other person designated for the purpose of cremating or burying an animal or fowl that has died of a disease shall be entitled to recover from the owner of every such animal so cremated or buried the actual cost of the cremation or burial, not to exceed seventy-five dollars ($75.00), and from the owner of every such fowl so cremated or buried the actual cost of the cremation or burial, not to exceed five dollars ($5.00), to be recovered in the same manner as officers' fees are recovered, free from all exemptions in favor of such owner. 
(Ord. No. 61, 12-12-2001) 
Sec. 5-126. - Diseased animals at large. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any animal or grown fowl suffering from a disease that is likely to result in the death of the animal or grown fowl to knowingly permit the same to run at large or go upon the public highways or premises of another, or to fail to confine such animal or grown fowl so that it will not likely endanger the health of animals or fowl of others. 
(Ord. No. 61, 12-12-2001) 
Sec. 5-127. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating the provisions of this division shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 61, 12-12-2001) 
Secs. 5-128-5-147. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 5-148. - Annual permit. 
    An annual permit, obtained from the town manager's office is required for the keeping of animals or fowl other than dogs and cats. A fee may be charged to allow for the cost incurred. 
(Ord. No. 61, 12-12-2001) 
Sec. 5-149. - Animals or fowl prohibited within occupied building or residence, nor near well, spring, stream, creek or brook. 
    In the preservation of public safety and human health, no animal or fowl, other than dogs and cats may be kept within one hundred (100) feet of an occupied building or residence. Nor shall they be permitted within fifty (50) feet of a well, spring, stream, creek or brook. Reference Code of Virginia 1995 as amended § 3.1-796.94:1. 
(Ord. No. 61, 12-12-2001) 
Sec. 5-150. - Emergency veterinary treatment. 
    The owner shall bear the expense or cost of emergency veterinary treatment when an animal is in custody of the animal warden, providing there is no negligence on the warden's part. 
(Ord. No. 61, 12-12-2001) 
Sec. 5-151. - Animal excreta or waste. 
(a)  The owner of an animal shall be responsible for the removal of any waste or feces deposited by such owner's animal on public and private property. 
(b)  Waste or excreta deposited by an animal on public property or on the private property of any person other than such animal's owner shall be collected and removed immediately by such animal's owner. Animal waste or excreta deposited on any other property shall be collected and removed daily. 
(c)  Collection and removal of animal waste or excreta shall be in a container of such a type that, when closed, is ratproof and flyproof. Such container shall be kept closed after each collection. At least once a week, each such animal owner shall cause all waste or excreta so collected to be disposed of in such a manner as not to permit fly breeding. 
(Ord. No. 61, 12-12-2001) 
Secs. 5-152-5-171. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CRUELTY TO ANIMALS 

Sec. 5-172. - Cruelty to animals; penalty. 
(a)  Any person who (i) overrides, overdrives, overloads, tortures, ill-treats, abandons, willfully inflicts inhumane injury or pain not connected with bona fide scientific or medical experimentation, or cruelly or unnecessarily beats, maims, mutilates, or kills any animal, whether belonging to himself or another; or (ii) deprives any animal of necessary food, drink, shelter or emergency veterinary treatment; or (iii) willfully sets on foot, instigates, engages in, or in any way furthers any act of cruelty to any animal; or (iv) carries or causes to be carried in or upon any vehicle, vessel or otherwise any animal in a cruel, brutal, or inhumane manner, so as to produce torture or unnecessary suffering; or (v) causes any of the above things, or being the owner of such animal permits such acts to be done by another, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person who (i) tortures, willfully inflicts inhumane injury or pain not connected with bonafide scientific or medical experimentation, or cruelly and unnecessarily beats, maims, mutilates or kills any animal whether belonging to himself or another; or (ii) instigates, engages in, or in any way furthers any act of cruelty to any animal set forth in clause (i) of this subsection; or (iii) causes any of the actions described in subdivisions (i) and (ii) of this subsection, or being the owner of such animal permits such acts to be done by another; and has been within five (5) years convicted of a violation of this subsection or subsection (a), shall be guilty of a class 6 felony if the current violation or any previous violation of this subsection or subsection (a) resulted in the death of an animal or the euthanasia of an animal based on the recommendation of a licensed veterinarian upon determination that such euthanasia was necessary due to the condition of this animal, and such condition was a direct result of a violation of this subsection or subsection (a). 
(c)  Any person who abandons any dog, cat or other domesticated animal in any public place including the right-of-way of any public highway, road or street or on the property of another shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(d)  This section shall not prohibit authorized wildlife management activities or hunting, fishing or trapping as regulated under other titles of the Code of Virginia, including, but not limited to Title 29.1, or to farming activities as provided under this title or regulations promulgated thereto. 
(e)  In addition to the penalties provided in subsection (a), the court may, in its discretion, require any person convicted of a violation of subsection (a) to attend an anger management or other appropriate treatment program or obtain psychiatric or psychological counseling. The court may impose the costs of such a program or counseling upon the person convicted. 
(f)  It is unlawful for any person to kill a domestic dog or cat for the purpose of obtaining the hide, fur or pelt of the dog or cat. A violation of this subsection shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. A second or subsequent violation of this subsection shall constitute a class 6 misdemeanor. Reference Code of Virginia as amended § 3.1-796.122. 
(Ord. No. 61, 12-12-2001) 
Chapter 6 - BUILDINGS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 79, adopted Dec. 10, 2003 rescinded the Arts. I-IV, §§ 6-1-6-13, 6-31-6-33, 6-51-6-53, 6-71-6-74 and enacted new Arts. I-IV as set out herein. The former Arts. I-IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1973, §§ 7-1, 7-3-7-11, 7-22, 10-1-10-4, 21-1-21-4, 31-1-31-3; Ord. No. 2, adopted Aug. 8, 1991; Ord. No. 24, §§ 1-4, adopted Oct. 13, 1993. 
Charter reference- Authority of council to regulate building of houses or other structures, § 10. 
Cross reference- Cable television, Ch. 7; erosion and sediment control, Ch. 10; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 12; licenses and permits, Ch. 14; noise control, Ch. 16; nuisances, Ch. 17; planning, Ch. 20; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23; taxation, Ch. 25; water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 28; zoning, Ch. 29; house numbers, § 18-24; certificate of occupancy required, § 29-30. 
State Law reference- Authority of town to require removal, repair, etc., of buildings and other structures, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-11.2; local certification to do building-related work, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-11.4, 36-99.1; power of town to regulate the building of houses, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-15(1); construction, maintenance, etc., of municipal buildings, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-846; repair or other abatement of dangerous buildings, etc., Code of Virginia, § 15.1-867; power of town to regulate the light, ventilation, sanitation, use and occupancy of buildings, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-869; limitation of prosecutions of building code violations, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-8; Virginia Industrialized Building Safety Law, Code of Virginia, § 36-70 et seq.; Uniform Statewide Building Code, Code of Virginia, § 36-97 et seq.; effect of building code on other building regulations, Code of Virginia, § 36-98; enforcement of building code, appeals from decisions of local building department, inspection of buildings, Code of Virginia, § 36-105; voluntary apprenticeship, Code of Virginia, § 40.1-117 et seq.; contractors, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-1100 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Building code adopted. 
(a)  The provisions of the International Building Code (IBC), latest edition adopted by the state, are hereby adopted. This publication, compiled and published by the International Code Council, Inc. (ICC) constitutes, in part, the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code as described in the Code of Virginia 1950, as amended, provided that in the event any provision of the Code of Virginia shall be in conflict with or contrary to the above mentioned International Building Code or supplement, the law of the state shall control absolutely and without question. 
(b)  One (1) copy of the above mentioned International Building Code publication shall be maintained by the town manager and the town building official, respectively, and shall be available to the public for use at their respective offices. 
(Ord. No. 79, 12-10-2003) 
Charter reference- Adoption of building code, § 24. 
Sec. 6-2. - Building official. 
(a)  The town building official shall be appointed by the town manager, subject to the approval of town council. The town manager shall provide him with appropriate supervision and working facilities, subject to the approval of town council. The position classifications plan of the town shall specifically set forth the qualifications and the salary of the town building official. His duties and powers shall be as follows: 
(1)  To enforce provisions from the International Building Code, as well as the specific electrical, mechanical and plumbing codes contained in this chapter. 
(2)  To make all required inspections to ensure the enforcement of subsection (1) above. 
(3)  To receive all applications and issue all permits for the erection or alteration of buildings or structures. 
(4)  To issue all orders or notices necessary to remove any illegal or unsafe conditions in any building or structure whether under construction or previously constructed. 
(5)  To keep official records of the activities of his office, such records to be open for public inspection at appropriate times. 
(6)  To perform any and all additional responsibilities as may be assigned to him by the town manager or town council. 
(b)  The town building official shall not have the power to change any rules or regulations prescribed under any section of this Code without the express consent of the town council. 
(Ord. No. 79, 12-10-2003) 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 
Sec. 6-3. - Moving of buildings. 
(a)  No building or part of any building shall be moved through or across any sidewalk, street, alley or highway within the corporate limits of the town without first obtaining a permit from the town manager; provided, that nothing herein set forth shall be construed to require a permit for the moving of any structure the size and character of which does impede, disrupt or interfere with the normal flow of traffic and the nature of which does not pose a hazard to the public, public property or private property along the route of such moving. 
(b)  Any person desiring to move a building shall first file with the town manager a written application setting forth the following information: 
(1)  Type and kind of building to be moved. 
(2)  The original cost of the building. 
(3)  The extreme dimension: length, height and width of the building. 
(4)  The present location of the building and the proposed new location by lot, block, subdivision and street numbers. 
(5)  The approximate time such building will be upon the streets, and the contemplated route that will be taken from present to new location. 
(c)  If, in the opinion of the town manager, the moving of any building will cause serious injury to persons or property or serious injury to the streets or other public improvements, or moving of the building will violate any of the requirements of this Code or of the zoning regulations of the town, the permit shall not be issued, and the building shall not be moved over the streets of the town. 
(d)  Any building being moved for which permit was granted shall not be allowed to remain in or on the streets of the town for more than forty-eight (48) hours. 
(e)  The town manager, as a condition precedent to the issuance of such permit, shall require a bond to be executed by the person desiring such permit, with corporate surety to his satisfaction. Such bond shall be made payable to the town and for such amount as he prescribes, but in no event to be less than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). It shall indemnify the town against any and all damage caused by the moving of such building to streets, curbs, sidewalks, shade trees, highways and any other property which may be affected by the moving of a building. Such surety bond shall also be conditioned upon and liable for strict compliance with the terms of such permit, as to route to be taken and limit of time in which to effect such removal and to repair or compensate for the repair and to pay the town as liquated damages an amount not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) to be prescribed by the town manager for each and every day's delay in completing such removal or in repairing any damage to property or public improvement or in clearing all public streets, alleys or highways of any debris occasioned thereby. 
(f)  Any persons desiring to move any building shall, at no expense to the town, secure and maintain in force, during the entire time that the building is being moved, all forms of insurance for the protection of the mover, the town, and the general public, against any damage, liability, claim or lawsuit arising from or in connection with the moving of the building. Such person desiring to move any building against any and all claims, liabilities and damages, including the costs of defending the town therefrom, arising from or in connection with moving any building. 
(g)  Prior to the issuance of a permit to move any building, there shall be paid to the town treasurer a fee for such permit in the sum of two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(h)  The following provisions for public safety are required: 
(1)  Lights required. Every building which occupies any portion of public property after sundown shall have sufficient lights continuously burning between sunset and sunrise for the protection of the public. 
(2)  Number and location of lights. There shall be a minimum of five (5) red lights placed on each street around the building; such red lights shall be attached to the building in such a fashion as to indicate extreme width, height and size. 
(3)  Flares required. There shall be placed in addition to the red lights on the building, flares at regular intervals for a distance of two hundred (200) feet up the street on each side of the building. 
(4)  Flagmen required. When more than fifty (50) percent of the street, measured between curbs, is occupied at night by the building, or when, in the opinion of the town manager, flagmen are necessary to divert or caution traffic, the owner or person moving such building shall employ at their expense two (2) flagmen, one (1) at each street intersection beyond the building; such flagmen shall remain at these intersections diverting or cautioning traffic from sunset to sunrise. Red lights shall be employed in flagging traffic at night. 
(Ord. No. 79, 12-10-2003) 
Cross reference- Moving vehicles and traffic, Ch. 15. 
Sec. 6-4. - Board of appeals. 
    The town council shall have full and exclusive authority to appoint members of any board of appeals; otherwise, a board of appeals shall function exactly as described in the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 79, 12-10-2003) 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 
Sec. 6-5. - Schedule of fees-Building permits. 
    The following fees for building permits are hereby levied in accordance with and by the authority of the Code of Virginia 1950, as amended. No permit shall be issued until the fees prescribed herein are paid, nor shall any amendment to a permit be granted until the additional fee, if any, has been paid. Any person who fails to obtain a permit before commencing work shall be punishable under section 6-8 of this chapter. Any fees required by this schedule shall be paid at the time application is made. The fees shall be affixed at the following rates: 
(1)  Residential: New construction and structural renovations-One- and two-family dwellings: 
Single-family dwellings (total footprint) ..... $75.00 base fee + $0.20 /sq. ft. 
Renovations (total renovated space) 
Structural only ..... $75.00 base fee + $0.20/sq. ft. 
Non-structural renovations that do not involve adding, removing, or changing any structural member of the building: 
Base fee and trade permits: 
Mobile/modular homes ..... $75.00 + $0.15/sq. ft. 
Separate plumbing, electric and HVAC ..... $75.00 each 
Garages and additions ..... $50.00 base fee + $0.15/sq. ft. 
Porches, sheds and decks ..... .15/sq. ft. ($50.00 minimum) 
Demolition: 
Residential accessory structure ..... $50.00 
Residential homes ..... $75.00 
Commercial or industrial buildings ..... $125.00 
Swimming pools: 
In-ground pools ..... $125.00 
Above ground pools ..... $75.00 
(2)  Commercial: New Construction and structural renovations: $150.00 Base Fee + $0.25/sq. ft. 
Non-structural renovations that do not involve adding, removing, or changing any structural member of the building: 
Base fee and trade permits: 
Separate plumbing, electric and HVAC etc. ..... $150.00 each 
Commercial accessory structure ..... $150.00 + $0.25 /sq. ft. 
(3)  Other inspections: 
Electric upgrade or change service ..... $75.00 
Re-inspection fee ..... $30.00-after 2nd failure 
Signs 
a. Non-illuminated flush mounted wall signs ..... $45.00 
b. All other signs ..... $75.00 
Moving building or structure ..... $150.00 
Plan review ..... $200.00 
Certificate of occupancy for existing buildings - amending or transfer of a permit ..... $50.00 
The commonwealth imposes a two (2) percent levy which will be assessed to all building permit fees. 
Request for refund, eighty (80) percent of permit cost. The refund must be requested in writing within six (6) months of the application date or within six (6) months of the issue date, where no inspections have been performed. 
(Ord. No. 79, 12-10-2003; Ord. No. 142, 7-13-2011; Ord. No. 146, 9-14-2011) 
Sec. 6-6. - Same-Inspections of both mechanical and general construction work. 
    The fees for inspections of both mechanical and general construction work are hereby levied in accordance with the Code of Virginia 1950, as amended, and section 6-5 of this chapter. No such work shall be certified by the town building official until such fees are paid. Any person who fails to obtain a required inspection from the town building official shall be deemed in violation of this chapter, and shall be punishable under section 6-8. 
(Ord. No. 79, 12-10-2003) 
Sec. 6-7. - Relocation and installation of mobile homes. 
    All mobile homes relocated or installed in the town after December 6, 1975, must be provided with mounting and anchorage for stabilization. 
(Ord. No. 79, 12-10-2003) 
Sec. 6-8. - Penalty for violation of this article. 
    Pursuant to the Code of Virginia 1950, as amended, any person who violates this article shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. Any person convicted of a second offense committed within less than five (5) years after a first offense under this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). Any person convicted of a second offense committed within a period of five (5) to ten (10) years of a first offense under this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). Any person convicted of a third or subsequent offense involving the same property committed within ten (10) years of an offense under this chapter after having been at least twice previously convicted shall be punished by confinement in jail for not more than ten (10) days and a fine of not less than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) nor more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), either or both. No portion of the fine imposed for such third or subsequent offense committed within ten (10) years of an offense under this chapter shall be suspended. 
(Ord. No. 79, 12-10-2003) 
Sec. 6-9. - Article supplemental to International Building Codes. 
    The provisions of this article shall be construed to be supplemental and in additional to the requirements contained in the International Building Codes; provided, that any part of this article in conflict with any provision in such code, the International Building Code shall take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 79, 12-10-2003) 
Sec. 6-10. - Building maintenance code. 
(a)  Official action. The Town of Farmville is hereby designated to act as the enforcing agency for the enforcement of "The Building Maintenance Code" of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, duly adopted by the Virginia Board of Housing and Community Development under the authority of the Code of Virginia 1950, as amended. Enforcement shall be according to the terms of this section. 
(b)  Enforcement. The enforcement procedures of "The Building Maintenance Code" shall be instituted by the code official when a written complaint is filed with the code official. 
(c)  Appeals. The town board of appeals is hereby designated as the appeals board to hear appeals arising from the application of the provisions of "The Building Maintenance Code". 
(d)  Administrative practices. The code official shall establish such procedures or requirements as may be necessary for administration and enforcement of this section. The procedures are to be approved by town council. 
(Ord. No. 79, 12-10-2003) 
Secs. 6-11-6-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLUMBING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Plumbing code, § 24. 
Cross reference- Water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 28; plumbing for utilities, § 28-196 et seq. 
State Law reference- Ordinances certifying plumbers, etc., Code of Virginia, § 15.1-11.4. 

Sec. 6-21. - Plumbing code adopted. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of the Code of Virginia 1950, as amended, the provisions of the International Plumbing Code, latest edition, as adopted by the state, are hereby adopted. This publication, compiled and published by the International Code Council, Inc. constitutes, in part, the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, as described in the Code of Virginia 1950, as amended. If any provision of either the Code of Virginia or this Code shall be in conflict with or contrary to the above-mentioned International Code, the laws of the state or the ordinances of the town shall control absolutely and without question. 
(b)  One (1) copy each of the above-mentioned International Plumbing Code shall be maintained by the town manager and the town building official, respectively, and shall be available for public use at their respective offices. 
(Ord. No. 79, 12-10-2003) 
Sec. 6-22. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Pursuant to the Code of Virginia 1950, as amended, any person who violates this article shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. Any person convicted of a second offense committed within less than five (5) years after a first offense under this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). Any person convicted of a second offense committed within a period of five (5) to ten (10) years of a first offense under this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). Any person convicted of a third or subsequent offense involving the same property committed within ten (10) years of an offense under this chapter after having been at least twice previously convicted shall be punished by confinement in jail for not more than ten (10) days and a fine of not less than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) nor more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), either or both. No portion of the fine imposed for such third or subsequent offense committed within ten (10) years of an offense under this chapter shall be suspended. 
(Ord. No. 79, 12-10-2003) 
Secs. 6-23-6-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MECHANICAL CODE 

Sec. 6-31. - Mechanical code adopted. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of the Code of Virginia 1950, as amended, the provisions of the International Mechanical Code, latest edition as adopted by the state, are hereby adopted. This publication, compiled and published by the International Code Council, Inc. as described in the Code of Virginia 1950, as amended. If any provision of either the Code of Virginia or this Code shall be in conflict with or contrary to the above-mentioned International Code, the laws of the state or the ordinances of the town shall control absolutely and without question. 
(b)  One (1) copy each of the above-mentioned International Mechanical Code shall be maintained by the town manager and the town building official, respectively, and shall be available for public use at their respective offices. 
(Ord. No. 79, 12-10-2003) 
Sec. 6-32. - Penalty for violation of this article. 
    Pursuant to the Code of Virginia 1950, as amended, any person who violates this article shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. Any person convicted of a second offense committed within less than five (5) years after a first offense under this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than one thousand ($1,000.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). Any person convicted of a second offense committed within a period of five (5) to ten (10) years of a first offense under this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). Any person convicted of a third or subsequent offense involving the same property committed within ten (10) years of an offense under this chapter after having been at least twice previously convicted shall be punished by confinement in jail for not more than ten (10) days and a fine of not less than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) nor more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), either or both. No portion of the fine imposed for such third or subsequent offense committed within ten (10) years of an offense under this chapter shall be suspended. 
(Ord. No. 79, 12-10-2003) 
Secs. 6-33-6-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTRICAL CODE 

Sec. 6-41. - Electrical code adopted. 
    The provisions of the National Electrical Code, latest edition as adopted by the state, are hereby adopted; provided, that the rules and regulations of such code are not in conflict with the laws of the state or ordinances of the town. Copies of such code may be obtained from either the town manager or the town building official for use in their respective offices. 
(Ord. No. 79, 12-10-2003) 
Charter reference- Adoption of electrical code, § 24. 
Sec. 6-42. - Schedule of fees for inspections of electrical work. 
    The fees for inspections of electrical work are hereby levied in accordance with and by the authority of the Code of Virginia 1950, as amended, and section 6-5 of this chapter. No such work shall be certified by the town building official until such fees are paid. Any person who fails to obtain a required inspection from the town building official shall be deemed in violation of this article and shall be punishable as provided in section 6-43. 
(Ord. No. 79, 12-10-2003) 
Sec. 6-43. - Penalty for violation of this article. 
    Pursuant to the Code of Virginia 1950, as amended, any person who violates this article shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. Any person convicted of a second offense committed within less than five (5) years after a first offense under this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). Any person convicted of a second offense committed within a period of five (5) to ten (10) years of a first offense under this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). Any person convicted of a third or subsequent offense involving the same property committed within ten (10) years of an offense under this chapter after having been at least twice previously convicted shall be punished by confinement in jail for not more than ten (10) days and a fine of not less than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) nor more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), either or both. No portion of the fine imposed for such third or subsequent offense committed within ten (10) years of an offense under this chapter shall be suspended. 
(Ord. No. 79, 12-10-2003) 
Secs. 6-44-6-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - UNSAFE, UNSANITARY OR DEFICIENT BUILDINGS 

Sec. 6-91. - Application of article. 
    This article applies only to buildings constructed prior to September 1, 1973. 
(Code 1973, §§ 7-12-7-21) 
Sec. 6-92. - Right of condemnation. 
    All buildings or structures that become unsafe, unsanitary or deficient in adequate exitway facilities, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life or the public welfare, or are declared to be of illegal or improper use, occupancy or maintenance, shall be deemed unsafe buildings or structures. All unsafe buildings shall be taken down and removed or made safe and secure, as the building official may deem necessary and as provided in this section. A vacant building, unguarded or open at door or window, shall be deemed a fire hazard and unsafe. 
(Code 1973, § 7-12) 
Sec. 6-93. - Notice of unsafe building. 
    If an unsafe condition is found in a building or structure, the building official shall serve on the owner, agent or person in control of the building or structure a written notice describing the building or structure deemed unsafe and specifying the required repairs or improvements to be made to render the building or structure safe and secure, or requiring the unsafe building or structure or portion thereof to be demolished within a stipulated time. Such notice shall require the person thus notified to immediately declare to the building official his acceptance or rejection of the terms of the order. 
(Code 1973, § 7-13) 
Sec. 6-94. - Restoration of unsafe building. 
    A building or structure condemned by the building official may be restored to safe condition; provided, that no change of use or occupancy is contemplated or compelled by reason of such reconstruction or restoration, unless the damage or cost of reconstruction or restoration is in excess of fifty (50) percent of its replacement value, or assessed value, whichever is greater. 
(Code 1973, § 7-14; Ord. No. 169 , 2-11-2015) 
Sec. 6-95. - Posting unsafe notice. 
    If the person addressed with an unsafe notice cannot be found within the town after diligent search, such notice shall be sent by registered or certified mail to the last known address of such person, and a copy of the unsafe notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Such procedure shall be deemed the equivalent of personal notice. 
(Code 1973, § 7-15) 
Sec. 6-96. - Disregard of unsafe notice. 
    Upon refusal or neglect of the person served with an unsafe notice to comply with the requirements of the order to abate the unsafe condition, the proper legal official of the town shall be advised of all the facts, and he shall institute the appropriate action to compel compliance. 
(Code 1973, § 7-16) 
Sec. 6-97. - Vacating buildings. 
    When, in the opinion of the building official, there is actual and immediate danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure, or part of a structure has fallen, and life is endangered by the occupation of the building, the building official is hereby authorized and empowered to order and require the inmates and occupants to vacate the same forthwith. He shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such building a notice reading as follows: "This building is unsafe, and its use or occupancy has been prohibited by the building official." It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such building or structure except for the purpose of making the required repairs or of demolishing the same. 
(Code 1973, § 7-17) 
Sec. 6-98. - Temporary safeguards. 
    When, in the opinion of the building official, there is actual and immediate danger of collapse or failure of a building or structure or any part thereof which would endanger life, he shall cause the necessary work to be done to render such building or structure or part thereof temporarily safe, whether or not the legal procedure herein described has been instituted. 
(Code 1973, § 7-18) 
Sec. 6-99. - Performance of work by official. 
    For the purposes of this article, the building official shall employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible. 
(Code 1973, § 7-19) 
Sec. 6-100. - Cost of emergency repairs or demolition. 
    Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work or demolition shall be paid from the municipal treasury on certificate of the building official, and the legal authority of the town shall institute appropriate action against the owner of the premises where the unsafe building or structure was located for the recovery of such costs. 
(Code 1973, § 7-20) 
Sec. 6-101. - Service connections. 
    Before a building can be demolished or removed, the owner or agent shall notify all utilities having service connections within the building such as water, electric, gas, sewer and other connections. A permit to demolish or remove a building shall not be issued until a release is obtained from the utilities, stating that their respective service connections and appurtenant equipment, such as meters and regulators, have been removed or sealed and plugged in a safe manner. 
(Code 1973, § 7-21) 
Chapter 7 - CABLE TELEVISION[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Advertising, Ch. 3; buildings, Ch. 6; licenses and permits, Ch. 14; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23; zoning, Ch. 29. 

Sec. 7-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Community Antenna Television Franchise Ordinance." 
(Code 1973, § 32-1) 
Sec. 7-2. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
    Annual gross operating revenues means any and all compensation and other consideration derived directly by the grantee from subscribers in the town for regularly furnished basic CATV service, revenues derived from per-program or per-channel charges, leased channel revenues, or advertising revenues. 
    Community antenna television system, CATV system or system means a system of coaxial cables or other electrical conductors and equipment used or to be used primarily to receive television or radio signals directly or indirectly off-the-air and transmit them to subscribers for a fee. 
    Council means the Town Council of the Town of Farmville. 
    Grantee means the Farmville Cablevision Company [2] or anyone who succeeds Farmville Cablevision Company in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
    Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
    Town means the Town of Farmville. 
(Code 1973, § 32-2) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
An affiliate of Dokel Communications Corporation. 

Sec. 7-3. - Grant of authority. 
(a)  Generally. There is hereby granted by the town to Farmville Cablevision Company* the right and privilege to construct, erect, operate and maintain in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the streets, alleys, public ways, and public places now laid out or dedicated, and all extensions thereof, and additions thereto in the town, on poles, wires, cable, underground conduits, manholes, and other television conductors and fixtures, and to use poles, wires, cables and other facilities of persons, providing consent is obtained from such persons, necessary for the maintenance and operation in the town of a community television system for the interception, sale and distribution of television and radio signals. 
(b)  Nonexclusive grant. The right to use and occupy the streets, alleys, public ways and places, or the facilities of other places for the purpose herein set forth shall not be exclusive, and the town reserves the right to grant a similar use of such streets, alleys, public ways and places, to any person at any time during the period of the franchise. 
(c)  Qualifications of grantee. The town has approved the legal, character, financial, technical and other qualifications of the grantee, and the adequacy and feasibility of the grantee's construction arrangements as part of a full public proceeding affording due process of law. 
(Code 1973, § 32-3) 
Sec. 7-4. - Company liability, indemnification. 
(a)  It is expressly understood and agreed by and between the grantee and the town that the grantee shall, and does by its acceptance of the franchise, specifically agree to save the town harmless from all loss sustained by the town on account of any suit, judgment, execution, claim or demand whatsoever resulting from the granting of the franchise. The above shall include, but shall not be limited to, damages arising out of copyright infringement and all other damages arising out of the installation, operation or maintenance of the CATV system authorized herein, whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed, or prohibited by the franchise. 
(b)  The grantee, by its acceptance of the franchise, specifically agrees that it shall maintain throughout the term of the franchise liability insurance, insuring the town and the grantee against all claims or damages in the minimum amounts of at least: 
(1)  One hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for bodily injury or death to any one (1) person, and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for bodily injury or death resulting from any one (1) accident. 
(2)  One hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for property damages resulting from any one (1) accident. 
(3)  All of the foregoing insurance contracts shall be issued and maintained by companies authorized to do business in the commonwealth and acceptable to the town and such contracts shall provide for thirty (30) days' written notice of any cancellation to both the town and the grantee herein. 
(Code 1973, § 32-4) 
Sec. 7-5. - Compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. 
    The grantee shall, at all times during the life of the franchise, be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power by the town and to such reasonable regulation as the town, state or federal government shall hereafter provide. Any lawful modification resulting from amendment of section 76.31 ("Franchise Standards") of the Rules and Regulations of the Federal Communications Commission shall be incorporated into this chapter as the date such modifications become obligatory under federal regulations, or in the event no obligatory date is established, within one (1) year of adoption, or at the time of the renewal of the terms of this chapter, whichever occurs first. 
(Code 1973, § 32-5) 
Sec. 7-6. - Territorial area involved. 
    The franchise relates to the present territorial limits of the town and to any area henceforth added thereto during the term of the franchise. 
(Code 1973, § 32-6) 
Sec. 7-7. - Application to FCC. 
    The grantee shall, within sixty (60) days from the date of the granting of the franchise, make proper application to the FCC for all permits, licenses or approvals required by law for the construction and operation of CATV system; and shall promptly and diligently pursue the granting of all FCC permits. 
(1)  Within twelve (12) months after all necessary permits from the FCC have been obtained, the grantee will have an operable headend completed. 
(2)  Upon receipt of the necessary permits from the FCC, and pole rental permits from the utility companies, the grantee shall install coaxial cables in accordance with the following minimum schedule: 
a.  During the first six (6) months, twenty-five (25) percent of the total required. 
b.  During the first twelve (12) months, fifty (50) percent of the total required. 
c.  During the first eighteen (18) months, seventy-five (75) percent of the total required. 
d.  During the first twenty-four (24) months, substantially all of the coaxial cable required to be installed shall be installed. 
(Code 1973, § 32-7) 
Sec. 7-8. - Signal quality requirements. 
(a)  The grantee shall engineer, install, maintain, operate and equip the CATV system herein provided so as to meet the technical standards of the FCC. 
(b)  The signals distributed by the grantee shall be the best possible signals available under the circumstances existing at the time and shall provide the best possible quality reception to each subscriber. 
(c)  Demonstrate by instruments and otherwise to subscribers that a signal of adequate strength and quality is being delivered. 
(Code 1973, § 32-8) 
Sec. 7-9. - Operation and maintenance of system. 
    The grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Such interruptions, insofar as possible, shall occur during periods of minimum use of the system. The grantee shall maintain a local business office or agent which subscribers may telephone during regular business hours without incurring added toll charges so that CATV maintenance service shall be promptly available. 
(Code 1973, § 32-9) 
Sec. 7-10. - Rules and regulations governing operation. 
    The grantee shall render its service in accordance with the rules and regulations of the town applicable to their operation, or such rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the town or by any public regulatory agency of the state or the United States. 
(Code 1973, § 32-10) 
Sec. 7-11. - Program alteration. 
    All programs of broadcasting stations carried by the grantee shall be carried in their entirety as received, with announcements and advertisements and without additions. 
(Code 1973, § 32-11) 
Sec. 7-12. - Service to schools. 
    The grantee shall provide service to public school locations and teaching stations within the town for educational purposes upon request by the town and at no cost to it or to the public school system. Service shall be provided to the schools by means of drop cable to the outside only. The grantee may at its election provide similar services without cost to private schools. 
(Code 1973, § 32-12) 
Sec. 7-13. - Emergency use of facilities. 
    In the case of any emergency or disaster, the grantee shall, upon request of the town council, make available facilities to the town for emergency use during the emergency or disaster period. 
(Code 1973, § 32-13) 
Sec. 7-14. - Other business activities. 
(a)  Neither the grantee under this chapter, nor any shareholder of the grantee shall engage in the business of selling, repairing or installing television receivers, radio receivers, or accessories for such receivers within the town during the term of the franchise and the grantee shall not allow any of its shareholders to so engage in any such business. 
(b)  The franchise authorizes only the operation of a CATV system as provided for herein, and does not take the place of any other franchise, license or permit which might be required by law of the grantee. 
(Code 1973, § 32-14) 
Sec. 7-15. - Promulgation of rules. 
    The grantee shall have the authority to promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable the grantee to exercise its rights and perform its obligations under the franchise, and to assure an uninterrupted service to each and all of its customers. Provided, however, that such rules, regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions hereof or of laws of the state or of the United States. 
(Code 1973, § 32-15) 
Sec. 7-16. - Safety requirements. 
(a)  The grantee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisance to the public. 
(b)  The grantee shall install and maintain its wires, cables, fixtures and other equipment in accordance with the requirements of the National Electrical Code, and in such manner that they will not interfere with any installation of the town or of a public utility serving the town. 
(c)  All structures, and all lines, equipment and connections in, over, under and upon streets, sidewalks, alleys, and public ways or places of the town, wherever situated or located, shall at all times be kept and maintained in a safe, suitable, substantial condition, and in good order and repair. 
(Code 1973, § 32-16) 
Sec. 7-17. - Conditions on street occupancy. 
(a)  Use. All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by the grantee or used on other poles or facilities within the town shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alleys, and other public ways and places and to cause minimum interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the streets, alleys or other public ways and places. 
(b)  Restoration. In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing, the grantee shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the town manager or his duly appointed agent replace and restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway or surface of any street or alley disturbed in as good condition as before such work was commenced. 
(c)  Relocation. If at any time during the period of the franchise the town shall lawfully elect to alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other public way, the grantee, upon reasonable notice by the town, shall remove, relay and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its own expense. 
(d)  Placement of fixtures. The grantee shall not place poles or other fixtures where the same will interfere with any gas, electric or telephone fixture, water hydrant or main, and all such poles or other fixtures placed in any street or otherwise shall be placed at the outer edge of the sidewalk and inside the curb line, and those placed in alleys shall be placed close to the line of the lot abutting on such alley, and then in such a manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on such streets, alleys and public ways. All of the preceding shall be approved by the town manager and in accordance with existing town policy. 
(e)  Temporary removal of wire for building moving. The grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the town, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of building. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same and shall not exceed the actual costs of the grantee. The grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The grantee shall be given no less than forty-eight (48) hours' advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
(f)  Tree trimming. The grantee shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the town so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the grantee and at the expense of the grantee. 
(Code 1973, § 32-17) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23; trees and shrubs, Ch. 27. 
Sec. 7-18. - Preferential or discriminatory practices prohibited. 
    The grantee shall not, as to rates, charges, service facilities, rules, regulations or in any other respect, make or grant any preference or advantage, provided that nothing in the franchise shall be deemed to prohibit the establishment of a graduated scale of charges and classified rate schedule to which any customer coming within such classification would be entitled, nor shall it be deemed to prohibit the grantee from giving free service for school purpose, or for any other public use. 
(Code 1973, § 32-18) 
Sec. 7-19. - Removal of facilities upon request. 
    Upon termination of service to any subscriber, the grantee shall promptly remove all its facilities and equipment from the premises of such subscriber upon his request. 
(Code 1973, § 32-19) 
Sec. 7-20. - Town rights in franchise. 
(a)  Town rules. The right is hereby reserved by the town to adopt, in addition to the provision herein contained and existing applicable ordinances, such additional regulations as it shall find necessary in the exercise of the police power, provided that such regulations, by ordinance or otherwise, shall be reasonable, and not in conflict with the rights herein granted and shall not be in conflict with the laws of the state or the United States. 
(b)  Use of system by town. The town shall have the right during the life of the franchise to install and maintain free of charge upon the poles of the grantee any wires and pole fixtures necessary for a police or fire alarm system so long as such wires and pole fixtures do not interfere with the CATV operation of the grantee. 
(c)  Supervision and inspection. The town shall have the right to supervise all construction or installation work performed subject to the provisions of this chapter and to make such inspections as it shall find necessary to insure compliance with governing ordinances. 
(d)  Procedure after expiration of franchise. At the end of the term of the franchise, the town shall have the right to determine whether the grantee shall continue to operate and maintain its distribution system pending the decision of the town as to the granting of another franchise for its future maintenance and operation of such system. 
(Code 1973, § 32-20) 
Sec. 7-21. - Payment to the town. 
    The grantee shall pay to the town annually the amount of five (5) percent of the annual gross operating revenues, or maximum allowable by the FCC, whichever is greater; in no event shall the maximum rate exceed that allowed by law, taken in and received by it on all retail sales of television signals within the town during the year, for the use of the streets and other facilities of the town in the operation of the CATV system and for the municipal supervision thereof. This does not relieve the grantee of any other taxes that he may be obligated for. 
(Code 1973, § 32-21; Ord. No. 105, 7-18-2006) 
Sec. 7-22. - Rates. 
    Rates charged by the grantee for service under this chapter shall be fair and reasonable and designed to meet necessary costs of the service, including a fair rate of return on the net valuation of its properties devoted thereto under efficient and economical management. When the franchise takes effect the grantee shall have authority to charge and collect rates not to exceed the schedule of rates, which shall be attached hereto as Schedule A, which schedule shall remain in effect until changed or modified in accordance with the general standards set out in this section. Subscriber rates may be increased only with prior approval of the council by resolution after an appropriate public hearing affording due process of law. 
(Code 1973, § 32-22) 
Editor's note- Schedule A is on file in the town hall. 
Sec. 7-23. - Records and reports. 
    The town shall have access at all reasonable hours to all of the grantee's plans, contracts and engineering, accounting, financial, statistical, customer and service records relating to the property and operation of the grantee and to all other records required to be kept under this chapter. 
(1)  Company rules and regulations. Copies of such rules, regulations, terms and conditions and all plans adopted by the grantee for the conduct of its business. 
(2)  Gross revenue. An annual summary report showing gross revenues received by the grantee from its operations within the town during the preceding year and such other information as the town shall request with respect to properties and expenses related to the grantee's services within the town. 
(Code 1973, § 32-23) 
Sec. 7-24. - Term of franchise. 
    The franchise and rights granted under the provisions of this chapter shall take effect and be in force from and after the final passage thereof, as provided by law and upon filing of acceptance and all other instruments required herein by the grantee with the town clerk, and shall continue in force and effect for a term of fifteen (15) years after the effective date of the franchise. This grant of authority may be renewed for a term not to exceed an additional fifteen (15) years following a full public proceeding affording due process, during which hearing the grantee's performance and the adequacy of this chapter will be reviewed. 
(Code 1973, § 32-24) 
Sec. 7-25. - Transfer of franchise. 
    The franchise shall not be assigned or transferred, in whole or in part, without the consent of the town council. 
(Code 1973, § 32-25) 
Sec. 7-26. - Separability. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter shall for any reason be held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. 
(Code 1973, § 32-26) 
Sec. 7-27. - Penalties. 
    Any violation by the grantee, its vendee, lessee or successor, of the provisions of the franchise or any material portions thereof, or the failure promptly to perform any of the provisions thereof, shall be cause for the forfeiture of the franchise and all rights hereunder to the town after written notice to the grantee and continuation of such violation, failure or default. 
(Code 1973, § 32-27) 
Chapter 8 - CEMETERIES[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of council to provide places for burials and regulate interments, § 10; acquisition of property, § 12. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; licenses and permits, Ch. 14; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 15; noise control, Ch. 16; zoning, Ch. 29. 
State Law reference- Authority of town to provide places for the interment of the dead in or near the town, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-14; cemeteries generally, Code of Virginia, § 57-22 et seq. 

Sec. 8-1. - Cemetery named. 
    The municipal cemetery shall be named the Westview Cemetery. 
(Code 1973, § 8-1) 
Sec. 8-2. - Duties of town manager. 
(a)  The town manager shall exercise general supervision over the cemeteries and all work done therein. He shall see that the cemeteries are kept in a neat and clean condition, free from trash, debris, litter and other waste; free from dead or diseased trees and other vegetation; and free from vines, broken trees or tree branches. He shall see that the grasses are kept clipped and the shrubs and other plants are kept trimmed. He shall see that fallen, leaning or broken lot enclosures, monuments, tombstones or other grave markers are removed, repaired or reset so that they will not be hazardous, unsightly or detrimental to the general appearance of the cemeteries. He shall see that the cemeteries are laid off into necessary streets, walkways and burial lots. He shall report the condition and needs of the cemeteries to the council at its regular meetings at least once every two (2) months. 
(b)  The town manager shall have authority to cause trees, shrubs, bushes or other vegetation to be cut, trimmed or removed when necessary to prevent encroachment or infringement of adjoining lots, walkways or streets or when necessary to protect the general appearance of the cemeteries. 
(c)  In the performance of his duties, the town manager shall have power to require the owner of any lot to correct and eliminate any detrimental, unsightly or hazardous condition on the lot within a reasonable period of time; to use town equipment and personnel for such tasks; to make demand on the lot owner for expenses incurred by the town in correcting and remedying any such condition; and, he shall have such other general and incidental powers necessary to carry out his duties. 
(Code 1973, § 8-2) 
Sec. 8-3. - Transfer of ownership of lots. 
    A transfer fee, set by the town council, shall be charged and paid to the town treasurer for the transfer of ownership of any lot in Westview Cemetery when the lot is transferred from the record of one (1) owner to another. When transfer is from an owner to the town, no fee shall be charged; and the owner shall be reimbursed the purchase price of the lot. 
(Code 1973, § 8-3) 
Sec. 8-4. - Certificate of ownership of lots-Payment prerequisite to issuance. 
    The purchase price for a lot in Westview Cemetery shall be paid to the treasurer before a certificate of ownership can be issued. Such certificates are not transferable and shall be presented to the treasurer prior to transfer of ownership. 
(Code 1973, § 8-4) 
Sec. 8-5. - Same-Preparation and execution. 
    A certificate of ownership for the conveyance of burial lots in Westview Cemetery shall be prepared by the town treasurer, unless otherwise ordered by the council, and shall be executed by the mayor in the name of the town with the seal of the town attached and attested by the treasurer. 
(Code 1973, § 8-5) 
Sec. 8-6. - Same-Contents. 
    Every certificate of ownership shall set forth the number of the lot sold, as shown on the cemetery plat, together with a clause specifying that the lot described is sold and conveyed subject to this chapter and the rules and regulations with reference to Westview Cemetery as may be in force at the time the lot is sold and the certificate of ownership made, and also such as may be thereafter prescribed. 
(Code 1973, § 8-6) 
Sec. 8-7. - Proceeds from sale of lots. 
    The money collected from the sale of burial lots in Westview Cemetery shall be expended on order of the council for the benefit of the cemetery. 
(Code 1973, § 8-7) 
Sec. 8-8. - Lot price schedule. 
    The price for lots in Westview Cemetery shall be as follows: 
Size of lot Price 4 x 8 (1 grave) $400.00 8 x 8 (2 graves)  800.00 8 x 16 (4 graves) 1,600.00 10 x 20 1,600.00 16 x 16 3,200.00 20 x 20 3,200.00  
(Code 1973, § 8-8; Ord. No. 118, 5-14-2008) 
Sec. 8-9. - Burial of paupers and stillborn infants. 
    A section shall be set aside in Westview Cemetery for the purpose of burial of paupers and stillborn infants. No person shall be buried in this section except with the approval of the town manager. No fee shall be charged for burial in this section. 
(Code 1973, § 8-8.1) 
Sec. 8-10. - Grave digging charges. 
    The schedule of charges for digging of graves in Westview Cemetery shall be six hundred fifty dollars ($650.00) on weekdays for two (2) hours of service and eight hundred dollars ($800.00) on weekends and holidays for two (2) hours of service. Cremation urns shall be three hundred twenty-five dollars ($325.00) on weekdays for two (2) hours of service and four hundred seventy-five dollars ($475.00) on weekends and holidays for two (2) hours of service. All services thereafter shall be at one hundred five dollars ($105.00) per hour. 
(Code 1973, § 8-9; Ord. No. 65, 10-13-1999; Ord. No. 153, 4-11-2012 ; Ord. No. 164, 6-12-2013, enacted 7-1-2013 ; Ord. No. 185 , 8-9-2017) 
Sec. 8-11. - Number of bodies per grave in Westview Cemetery. 
    No person shall be allowed to bury more than one (1) person, or more than two (2) cremation urns, per grave in Westview Cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 55, 1-11-2000) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 55, adopted Jan. 11, 2000, repealed the former § 8-11 and enacted a new § 8-11 as set out herein. The former § 8-11 pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from Code 1973, § 8-9.1. 
Sec. 8-12. - Depth of graves. 
    All graves within the limits of Westview Cemetery shall be made at least four (4) feet deep. 
(Code 1973, § 8-10) 
Sec. 8-13. - Vaults required. 
    Vaults shall be required for all persons buried in Westview Cemetery. Vaults shall be constructed of concrete, steel or other substances of sufficient composition so as not to deteriorate and cause settling of the burial lot. Vaults shall be provided at the owner's expense. 
(Code 1973, § 8-10.1) 
Sec. 8-14. - Enclosures and monuments or markers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect any enclosure around any burial lot or portion thereof in Westview Cemetery. All headstones, foot or other markers or stones shall be set so as to protrude at least three (3) inches above the surface of the ground and shall be installed and erected as hereinafter required and prescribed: 
(1)  Foundations shall be installed for all monuments, markers and all stones at the owner's expense. 
(2)  In addition to the cost of providing foundations as required the owner shall pay the cost of constructing and installing at ground level on all monuments and markers a cement border or flange around such foundation at least three and one-half (31/2) inches wide and not less than six (6) inches deep in the ground so as to prevent the roots of grass and other vegetation from growing against such stone. 
(Code 1973, § 8-11) 
Sec. 8-15. - Debris, trash and rubbish. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or leave any paper, tin cans, broken glass or china vessels, decayed flowers, dirt, bricks, shavings, pieces of wood or other things constituting debris, trash or rubbish within the enclosure of Westview Cemetery or any burial lot. 
(Code 1973, § 8-12) 
Cross reference- Solid waste and weeds, Ch. 22. 
Sec. 8-16. - Removal of dirt, etc., after completion of work. 
    All dirt, bricks or rubbish shall be removed from Westview Cemetery within twenty-four (24) hours after the completion of a vault, other job or work. 
(Code 1973, § 8-13) 
Sec. 8-17. - Injury to property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to injure or deface any part of the enclosure of Westview Cemetery; any enclosure of any grave or lot; any monument, tombstone or slab; any inscription or device thereon or to destroy or injure any tree, shrub, vine or flower therein. 
(Code 1973, § 8-14) 
State Law reference- Injuries to cemeteries, burial grounds, etc., Code of Virginia, § 18.2-127; injuring, etc., any property, monument, etc., Code of Virginia, § 18.2-137. 
Sec. 8-18. - Trespass at night. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner, proprietor or custodian, to go or enter upon in the nighttime the premises, property, driveways or walks of the cemeteries, either public or private within the town, or within one (1) mile thereof, for any purpose other than to visit the burial lot or grave of some member of his family. 
(Code 1973, § 8-15) 
Cross reference- Trespassing generally, § 18-43. 
State Law reference- Trespass at night upon any cemetery, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-125. 
Sec. 8-19. - Discharge of firearms. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a police officer in the performance of his duty, to shoot or discharge any gun, firearm or other weapon within the enclosure of Westview Cemetery, except with approval of the town manager. 
(Code 1973, § 8-16) 
Editor's note- Because of the restrictions in Code of Virginia, § 15.1-29.15, the above section has not been revised. 
Cross reference- Discharge of firearms at airport, § 4-4; discharge of firearms generally, § 18-47. 
Sec. 8-20. - Permit for planting or removal of plants, shrubbery or trees; installing monuments or markers in any lot. 
    No person shall plant or remove any plants, shrubbery, or trees, or install any monument or marker in any lot in Westview Cemetery without first securing a permit from the town manager or his authorized representative to do so. Such permit shall be in writing and in such form as may be prescribed by the town manager. After such plants, shrubbery or trees have been planted or removed, the permit shall be surrendered to the town office and canceled. 
(Code 1973, § 8-17) 
Cross reference- Licenses and permits, Ch. 14; trees and shrubs, Ch. 27. 
Sec. 8-21. - Placement of floral arrangements, statues, etc. 
1.  At any time of the year cut flower or artificial flowers may be placed in bronze vases preferably subsurface vases which can be inverted in the ground and mowed over when not in use or floral saddles, available through most florist shops. 
2.  Glass containers, tin cans, breakable plastic containers are not permitted at any time of the year. 
3.  Statues, ceramic ware, porcelain, figurines, balloons, wire or wire flag holders of any kind are not permitted. The cemetery reserves the right to remove these items. 
4.  Funeral flowers, holders, containers, baskets and easels will be removed between three-seven days after the funeral service, depending upon the condition of the flowers. 
5.  Wreaths, baskets, easels, flags or potted plants are not permitted and will be removed except for the following occasions: 
Easter Memorial Day Valentine's Day Mother's Day Father's Day Veteran's Day Thanksgiving  
Arrangements for these special days will be removed after fifteen (15) days. 
6.  Special Christmas arrangements and wreaths are permitted from December first to January fifteenth. All such decorations must be secured against strong winds of the winter season. All Christmas arrangements will be removed starting on the 15th of January. 
7.  Any floral arrangements that become discolored, wilted, seasonally inappropriate or unsightly in any manner will be removed. The Town of Farmville is not responsible for items removed. 
8.  Between March first and March fifteenth and between September fifteenth and October first of each year, all flowers and decorations will be removed for beautification work. This rule does not apply to funeral services being held between the above mentioned dates. 
(Ord. No. 95, 7-20-2005) 
Chapter 9 - ELECTIONS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Elections, § 5 et seq. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 

Sec. 9-1. - Authority to establish a ward system. 
    Pursuant to mandate of Article VII, Section 5 of the Constitution of Virginia, 1950 as amended, [and to authority contained in the Code of Virginia,] §§ 15.1-37.4 through 15.1-37.8, §§ 24.1-90 through 24.1-93, and the Charter of the Town of Farmville, Virginia, Section 3; the Town of Farmville shall be divided and five (5) wards are hereby created and established as set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 30-1; Ord. No. 22, § 1, 4-14-93; Ord. No. 26, § 1, 12-8-93; Ord. No. 60, § 1, 10-10-2001; Ord. No. 159, 10-10-2012 ) 
Sec. 9-2. - Population of wards. 
    The wards, with populations as set forth, are as follows: 
Ward A - Population 1,693 Ward B - Population 1,694 Ward C - Population 1,562 Ward D - Population 1,640 Ward E - Population 1,627  
(Code 1973, § 30-2; Ord. No. 5, 10-10-91; Ord. No. 22, § 2, 4-14-93; Ord. No. 26, § 2, 12-8-93; Ord. No. 60, § 2, 10-10-2001; Ord. No. 159, 10-10-2012 ) 
Sec. 9-3. - Boundaries of wards. 
    The boundaries of the respective wards are set forth as follows: 
(1)  Ward A: Commencing at a point where the corporate limits of the Town of Farmville intersects with U.S. Business 460 (West Third Street) and Industrial Park Road; thence in a northerly direction along the corporate limits of the Town of Farmville following Industrial Park road until its termination and thence continuing until the corporate limits of the Town of Farmville, Prince Edward County and Cumberland County intersect at the Appomattox River; thence in a westerly direction along the Appomattox River at which point the corporate limits of the Town of Farmville proceeds in a southerly direction crossing U.S. Routes 15 and 460 and Layne Street following the corporate limits to where the limits cross the High Bridge Trail State Park; thence in an easterly direction along the High Bridge Trail State Park, to a point where the corporate limits of the Town of Farmville intersects with High Bridge Trail State Park, then proceed Southeasterly along the corporate limits of the Town of Farmville to a point where the corporate limits of the Town of Farmville intersects with State Route 628 (Germantown Road); thence in a southeasterly direction along the corporate limits of the Town of Farmville to a point where the corporate limits intersects Peery Drive; thence proceeding in a southerly direction along Peery Drive to a point where the corporate limits of the Town of Farmville crosses U.S. Route 15 (South Main Street) and continuing easterly along corporate limits to a point where the corporate limits of the Town of Farmville turns, thence proceeds northerly and then westerly following the corporate limits of the Town of Farmville then turning east still following the corporate limits of the Town of Farmville to a point where the corporate limits of the Town of Farmville intersect with Scott Drive; thence north following Scott Drive to a point where Scott Drive and Milnwood Road intersect thence westerly along Milnwood Road to a point where Milnwood Road intersects with U.S. Business Route 15 (South Main Street); thence northerly along U.S. Business Route 15 (South Main Street) intersects Griffin Boulevard and thence north on Griffin Boulevard to a point where Griffin Boulevard intersects Barrow Street; thence west 2 blocks to a point where Barrow Street intersects First Avenue; thence north 1 block to a point First Avenue intersects Hurd Street; thence west 2 blocks to a point where Hurd Street intersects Third Avenue; thence north 2 blocks to a point where Third Avenue intersects Edmunds Street; thence east 1 block to a point where Edmunds Street intersects Second Avenue; thence north 1 block on Second Avenue to a point where Second Avenue intersects Fayette Street; thence west 2 blocks on Fayette Street to a point where Fayette Street and Fourth Avenue intersect; thence north on Fourth Avenue to a point where Fourth Avenue intersects High Street; thence westerly on High Street to a point where High Street intersects with the Little Buffalo Creek; thence north along the Little Buffalo Creek to a point where the Little Buffalo Creek flows under West Third Street (U.S. Route 15 and 460); thence westerly along Third Street to a point where Third Street intersects Hudson Lane; thence northerly to the corporate limits of the Town of Farmville; thence westerly along the corporate limits of the Town of Farmville to the point of the beginning, including all of the territory encompassed within said lines and being further described as including census blocks: 
(Prince Edward County) 
Tract 930100, VTD101 
Blocks 2137, 2138, 2140, 2141, 2150, 2151, 2155 
Tract 930201, VTD502 
Blocks 1018, 1019, 1020, 1021, 1022, 1023, 1024, 1025, 1028, 1030, 1031, 1033, 1096 
Tract 930201, VTD701 
Blocks 1035, 1036, 1039, 1040, 1041, 1088, 1090, 1091, 1092, 1093, 1094, 1097, 1098, 1099, 1100, 1101, 1102, 1109, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015, 2016, 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021, 2022, 2023, 2024, 2025, 2027, 2028, 2031, 2032, 2033, 2036, 2049, 2051, 2052, 2053, 2055, 2056 
(2)  Ward B: Commencing at a point where High Street intersects Fourth Avenue; thence south along Fourth Avenue to a point where Fourth Avenue intersects Fayette Street; thence east 2 blocks to where Fayette Street intersects Second Avenue; thence south 1 block on Second Avenue to a point where Second Avenue intersects Edmunds Street; thence west 1 block on Edmunds Street to a point where Edmunds Street intersects Third Avenue; thence south 2 blocks on Third Avenue to Hurd Street; thence east 2 blocks on Hurd Street to a point where Hurd Street intersects First Avenue; thence north 4 blocks along First Avenue to a point where First Avenue intersects School Street; thence east on School Street and a short section of Redford Street to a point where Redford Street intersects Watkins Street; thence north along Watkins Street to a point where Watkins Street intersects Chambers Street; thence east 1 block along Chambers Street to a point where Chambers Street intersects Griffin Boulevard; thence south along Griffin Boulevard to a point where Griffin Boulevard intersects Madison Street; thence east 1 block to a point where Madison Street intersects Brock Commons; thence north 1 block along Brock Commons to a point where Brock Commons intersects High Street; thence east along High Street to a point where High Street intersects Randolph Street; thence north 3 blocks to a point of the High Bridge State Park; thence in an easterly direction a little north of the High Bridge State Park to Mill Street and along Mill Street north to First Street; thence east to North Main Street, thence north on Main Street to a point approximately 150 feet north of Elm Street; thence westerly through the northside of the public parking lot to the Appomattox River, following the Appomattox River to a point where the Appomattox River intersects the corporate limits of the Town of Farmville, thence continuing along the corporate limits of the Town of Farmville to a point where the corporate limits of the Town of Farmville intersects with the High Bridge State Park; thence in a southerly direction to Hudson Lane, thence along Hudson Lane to a point where Hudson Lane intersects U.S. Business 15 and 460 (West Third Street), thence in an easterly direction along U.S. Business 15 and 460 (West Third Street) to a point where the Little Buffalo Creek crosses under West Third Street; thence in a southerly direction along the Little Buffalo Creek to a point where the Little Buffalo Creek intersects with High Street, thence easterly along High Street to the point of beginning, including all of the territory encompassed within said lines and being further described as including census blocks: 
(Prince Edward County) 
Tract 930201, VTD701 
Blocks 1042, 1043, 1057, 1074, 2000, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2017, 2026, 2029, 2030, 2044, 2045, 2050 
Tract 930203, VTD701 
Blocks 1003 
Tract 930201, VTD101 
Blocks 1051, 1052, 1053, 1054, 1056, 1058, 1059, 1061, 1062, 1063, 1064, 1065, 1066, 1067, 1068, 1069, 1070, 1071, 1072, 1073, 1075, 1081, 1082, 1083 
(3)  Ward C: Commencing at a point where South Main Street and Fourth Street intersect; thence south along South Main Street to a point where Madison Street and South Main Street intersect; thence west along Madison Street to a point where Madison Street and Griffin Boulevard intersect; thence north along Griffin Boulevard to a point where Griffin Boulevard and Chambers Street intersect; thence west along Chambers Street to a point where Chambers Street intersects Watkins Street; thence south along Watkins Street to a point where Watkins Street and Redford Street intersect; thence west along a short section of Redford Street and the continuation as School Street to a point where School Street and First Avenue intersect; thence south 5 blocks along First Avenue to a point where First Avenue and Barrow Street intersect; thence east 2 blocks along Barrow Street to a point where Barrow Street intersects Griffin Boulevard; thence south along Griffin Boulevard to South Main Street (U.S. Business 15 South) intersect; thence northerly along South Main Street to a point where South Main Street (U.S. Business 15 South) intersects Putney Street; thence east to a point approximately 50 feet east of the intersection of Putney Street and South Street; thence north to a point on the south east corner of building 4 at Midtown Square; thence west to the end of Paulette Street; thence north to a point approximately 30 feet west of the intersection of Fourth Street and South Street; thence west along Fourth Street to the point of the beginning, including all of the territory encompassed within said lines and being further described as including census blocks: 
(Prince Edward County) 
Tract 930100, VTD801 
Blocks 1009, 1010, 1011, 1012 
Tract 930201, VTD801 
Blocks 2001, 2010, 2011, 2039, 2040, 2041, 2042, 2047, 2048 
Tract 930201, VTD701 
Blocks 2043, 2046 
Tract 930203, VTD801 
Blocks 1004, 1005, 1006, 1007, 1009, 1010, 1011, 1012 
(4)  Ward D: Commencing at a point approximately 30 feet west of the intersection of Fourth Street and South Street; thence east along Fourth Street to a point where Fourth Street intersects with North Virginia Street (Fourth Street becomes Longwood Avenue progressing east from this point); thence northerly along North Virginia Street to a point where North Virginia Street and First Street intersect; thence east 1 block along First Street to a point where First Street and North Bridge Street intersect; thence south along North Bridge Street to a point where North Bridge Street and East Second Street intersect; thence easterly along East Second Street to a point where East Second Street intersects Cedar Avenue; thence southerly along Cedar Avenue to a point where Cedar Avenue intersects East Third Street (U.S. Business 460); thence southeasterly along East Third Street (U.S. Business 460) to a point where East Third Street (U.S. Business 460) and Milnwood Road intersect; thence southwesterly on Milnwood Road to a point where Milnwood Road and Greenhouse Road intersect; thence along Greenhouse Road to a point where Greenhouse Road and the corporate limits of the Town of Farmville intersect; thence southwesterly along the corporate limits of the Town of Farmville intersects Scott Drive; thence north along Scott Drive to a point where Scott Drive and Milnwood Road intersect; thence southwesterly along Milnwood Road to a point where Milnwood Road and South Main Street (U.S. Route 15 South) intersect; thence north along South Main Street (U.S. Route 15 South) to a point where South Main Street (U.S. Route 15 South) and Putney Street intersect; thence east to a point approximately 50 feet east of the intersection of Putney Street and South Street; thence north to a point on the south east corner of building 4 at Midtown Square; thence west to the end of Paulette Street; thence north to the point of the beginning, including all of the territory encompassed within said lines and being further described as including census blocks: 
(Prince Edward County) 
Tract 930100, VTD801 
Blocks 1000, 1001, 1006, 1007, 1008, 1013, 1014, 1015, 1016, 1017, 1018, 1020, 1021, 1022, 1023, 1024, 1027, 1028, 1029, 1030, 1031, 1032, 1035, 1037 
Tract 930100, VTD101 
Blocks 1002, 1019, 1025, 1026, 1033, 1034, 1036, 2058, 2067, 2068, 2071, 2072, 2078, 2079, 2145, 2146, 2147 
(5)  Ward E: Commencing at a point where Fourth Street and North Main Street intersect proceeding along Fourth Street to a point where Fourth Street (Fourth Street becomes Longwood Avenue at North Virginia Street) and North Virginia Street intersect; thence northerly along North Virginia Street to a point where North Virginia Street and First Street intersect; thence east 1 block along First Street to a point where First Street and North Bridge Street intersect; thence south along North Bridge Street to a point where North Bridge Street and East Second Street intersect; thence easterly along East Second Street to a point where East Second Street and Cedar Avenue intersect; thence southerly along Cedar Avenue to a point where Cedar Avenue intersects East Third Street (U.S. Business 460); thence southeasterly along East Third Street (U.S. Business 460) to a point where East Third Street (U.S. Business 460) and Milnwood Road intersect; thence southerly along Milnwood Road to a point where Milnwood Road and Greenhouse Road intersect; thence southeasterly along Greenhouse Road which becomes the corporate limits of the Town of Farmville to point where the corporate limits of the Town of Farmville crosses East Third Street (U.S. Business 460) and continues northerly to the Persimmon Tree Fork Road; thence easterly on Persimmon Tree Fork Road to a point where Persimmon Tree Fork Road intersects with the corporate limits of the Town of Farmville; thence northerly along the corporate limits of the Town of Farmville to a point where the corporate limits of the Town of Farmville and the Prince Edward/Cumberland County lines intersect at the Appomattox River; thence northerly along the corporate limits of the Town of Farmville (area in Cumberland County) to a point where the corporate limits of the Town of Farmville intersect State Highway 45 (North Main Street); thence southwesterly along the corporate limits of the Town of Farmville to a point where the corporate limits of the Town of Farmville, Appomattox River, Prince Edward County, and Cumberland County intersect; thence easterly along the Appomattox River to a point west of the public parking lot at River Side Park; thence east through the north side of the public parking lot to a point 150 feet from the intersection of Elm Street and North Main Street; thence south along North Main Street a point where South Main Street intersects First Street; thence west along First Street to the intersection of First Street and Mill Street; thence south along Mill Street to the High Bridge State Park; thence west along the High Bridge State Park to a point of intersection with Randolph Street extended line; thence southerly on Randolph Street to a point where Randolph Street and High Street intersects; thence west along High Street to a point where High Street and Brock Commons intersects; thence southerly along Brock Commons to a point where Brock Commons and Madison Street intersects; thence east on Madison Street to a point where Madison Street and South Main Street (U.S. Business 15 South) intersect; thence north along South Main Street (U.S. Business 15 South) to a point where South Main and Fourth Street intersect (South Main becomes North Main at this point), including all of the territory encompassed within said line and being described as including census blocks: 
(Cumberland County) 
Tract 930200, VTD501 
Blocks 2123, 2124, 2125, 2129, 3044, 3045, 3046, 3047, 3048, 3049, 3050, 3051, 3052, 3053, 3054, 3055, 3056, 3057, 3058, 3059, 3060, 3061 
(Prince Edward County) 
Tract 930100, VTD101 
Blocks 1003, 1004, 1005, 2041, 2042, 2043, 2050, 2051, 2052, 2053, 2054, 2055, 2056, 2057, 2059, 2060, 2061, 2062, 2063, 2064, 2065, 2066, 2069, 2070, 2073, 2080, 2081, 2082, 2086, 2152, 2153, 2154, 2156 
Tract 930201, VTD101 
Blocks 1060, 1076, 1077, 1078, 1079, 1080, 1084, 1085, 1086 
Tract 930203, VTD101 
Blocks 1000, 1001, 1002 
Tract 930203, VTD801 
Block 1008 
The ward narrative boundary is a written interpretation of the ward map boundaries. Refer to the ward map for the location of exact ward lines. 
(Code 1973, § 30-3; Ord. No. 5, 10-10-91; Ord. No. 22, § 3, 4-14-93; Ord. No. 26, § 3, 12-8-93; Ord. No. 60, § 3, 10-10-2001; Ord. No. 159, 10-10-2012 ) 
Sec. 9-4. - Number of council members-Wards. 
    One (1) town council member shall be elected from each of the wards created by this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 30-4; Ord. No. 22, § 4, 4-14-93; Ord. No. 26, § 4, 12-8-93; Ord. No. 60, § 4, 10-10-2001; Ord. No. 159, 10-10-2012 ) 
Sec. 9-5. - Same-At-large. 
    Two (2) town council members shall be elected at-large from the entire population of the town. 
(Code 1973, § 30-5; Ord. No. 22, § 5, 4-14-93; Ord. No. 26, § 5, 12-8-93; Ord. No. 60, § 5, 10-10-2001; Ord. No. 159, 10-10-2012 ) 
Sec. 9-6. - Election of mayor. 
    The mayor of the town shall be elected at-large from the entire population of the town. 
(Code 1973, § 30-6; Ord. No. 22, § 6, 4-14-93; Ord. No. 26, § 6, 12-8-93; Ord. No. 60, § 6, 10-10-2001; Ord. No. 159, 10-10-2012 ) 
Sec. 9-7. - Term of council members-Wards D and E. 
    Ward D and Ward E shall elect their council representative in the election on May 1, 1984. Such term of office shall commence July 1, 1984, and expire June 30, 1988, and the election of councilmen from Ward D and Ward E shall be every four (4) years thereafter on the first Tuesday in May. 
(Code 1973, § 30-7; Ord. No. 159, 10-10-2012 ) 
Sec. 9-8. - Same-Wards A, B, and C. 
    Ward A, Ward B and Ward C shall elect their council representative in the election on the first Tuesday in May 1986. Such term of office shall commence July 1, 1986, and expire June 30, 1990; and the election of the councilmen from Ward A, Ward B and Ward C shall be every four (4) years thereafter. 
(Code 1973, § 30-8; Ord. No. 159, 10-10-2012 ) 
Sec. 9-9. - Same-At-large. 
    The two (2) at-large council races shall be as follows: 
(1)  One (1) at-large council seat shall be elected the first Tuesday in May 1984, such term of office shall commence July 1, 1984, and expire June 30, 1988, and the election of this councilman shall be every four (4) years thereafter. 
(2)  One (1) council seat shall be elected the first Tuesday in May 1986, such term of office shall commence July 1, 1986, and expire June 30, 1990, and the election of the councilman shall be every four (4) years thereafter. 
(Code 1973, § 30-9; Ord. No. 159, 10-10-2012 ) 
Sec. 9-10. - Term of mayor. 
    The term of the mayor of the council shall be for four (4) years with election on the first Tuesday in May 1986, such term of office shall commence July 1, 1986, and expire June 30, 1990; and the election of the mayor of the council shall be every four (4) years thereafter. 
(Code 1973, § 30-10; Ord. No. 159, 10-10-2012 ) 
Sec. 9-11. - Qualification of candidates. 
    Candidates for office from a ward shall file petitions, as provided in Code of Virginia, § 24.1-168, bearing signatures of registered voters of their respective wards; or, if a candidate at-large, then the petition shall bear signatures of registered voters of the town at-large. 
(Code 1973, § 30-11; Ord. No. 159, 10-10-2012 ) 
Chapter 10 - EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 37, adopted June 12, 1996, deleted §§ 10-1-10-11 and added new §§ 10-1-10-9. Formerly, such sections pertained to similar provisions and derived from §§ 10.1-1-10.1-11 of the 1973 Code. 
Cross reference- Buildings, Ch. 6; nuisances, Ch. 17; planning, Ch. 20. 
State Law reference- Erosion and Sediment Control Law, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-560 et seq. 

Sec. 10-1. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance of the Town of Farmville." The purpose of this chapter is to conserve the land, water, air and other natural resources of the town by establishing requirements for the control of erosion and sedimentation, and by establishing procedures whereby these requirements shall be administered and enforced. 
(Ord. No. 37, 6-12-96) 
Sec. 10-2. - Authority for chapter. 
    This chapter is authorized by the Code of Virginia, Title 10.1, Chapter 5, Article 4 (10.1-560 et seq.), known as the Erosion and Sediment Control Law. 
(Ord. No. 37, 6-12-96) 
Sec. 10-3. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, unless the context requires a different meaning: 
    Agreement in lieu of a plan means a contract between the plan-approving authority and the owner which specifies conservation measures which must be implemented in the construction of a single-family residence, this contract may be executed by the plan-approving authority in lieu of a formal site plan. 
    Applicant means any person submitting an erosion and sediment control plan for approval or requesting the issuance of a permit, when required, authorizing land disturbing activities to commence. 
    Board means the Virginia Soil and Water Conservation Board. 
    Certified inspector means an employee or agent of a program authority who (i) holds a certificate of competence from the board in the area of project inspection or (ii) is enrolled in the board's training program for project inspection and successfully completes such program within one year after enrollment. 
    Certified plan reviewer means an employee or agent of a program authority who (i) holds a certificate of competence from the board in the area of plan review, (ii) is enrolled in the board's training program for plan review and successfully completes such program within one year after enrollment, or (iii) is licensed as a professional engineer, architect, certified landscape architect or land surveyor pursuant to Article 1 (54.1-400 et seq.) of Chapter 4 of Title 54.1. 
    Certified program administrator means an employee or agent of a program authority who (i) holds a certificate of competence from the board in the area of program administration or (ii) is enrolled in the board's training program for program administration and successfully completes such program within one year after enrollment. 
    Clearing means any activity which removes the vegetative ground cover including, but not limited to, root mat removal or top soil removal. 
    Conservation plan, erosion and sediment control plan or plan means a document containing material for the conservation of soil and water resources of a unit or group of units of land. It may include appropriate maps, an appropriate soil and water plan inventory, and management information with needed interpretations and a record of decisions contributing to conservation treatment. The plan shall contain all major conservation decisions to assure that the entire unit or units of land will be so treated to achieve the conservation objectives. 
    Department means the department of conservation and recreation. 
    Director means the director of the department. 
    District or soil and water conservation district means a political subdivision of the commonwealth organized in accordance with the provisions of Article 3 (§ 10.1-506 et seq.) of Chapter 5, of Title 10.1. 
    Erosion impact area means an area of land no associated with current land disturbing activity but subject to persistent soil erosion resulting in the delivery of sediment onto neighboring properties or into state waters. This definition shall not apply to any lot or parcel of land of five thousand (5,000) square feet or less used for residential purposes or to shorelines where the erosion results from wave action or other coastal processes. 
    Excavating means any digging, scooping or other methods of removing earth materials. 
    Filling means any depositing or stockpiling of earth materials. 
    Grading means any excavating of or filling with earth material or any combination thereof, including the land in its excavated or filled conditions. 
    Land disturbing activity means any land change which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands in the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, except that the term shall not include: 
(1)  Minor land disturbing activities such as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs and maintenance work; 
(2)  Individual service connections; 
(3)  Installation, maintenance or repairs of any underground public utility lines when such activity occurs on an existing hard-surfaced road, street or sidewalk provided such land disturbing activity is confined to the area of the road, street or sidewalk which is hard-surfaced; 
(4)  Septic tank lines or drainage fields unless included in an overall plan for land disturbing activity relating to construction of the building to be served by the septic tank system; 
(5)  Surface or deep mining; 
(6)  Exploration or drilling for oil and gas including the well site, roads, feeder lines and off-site disposal areas; 
(7)  Tilling, planting or harvesting of agricultural, horticultural or forest crops or livestock feedlot operations; including engineering operations and agricultural engineering operations as follows: construction of terraces, terrace outlets, check dams, desilting basins, dikes, ponds not required to comply with the Dam Safety Act, Article 2, (section 10.1-604 et seq.) of Chapter 6, ditches, strip cropping, lister furrowing, contour cultivating, contour furrowing, land drainage and land irrigation; however, this exception shall not apply to harvesting of forest crops unless the area on which harvesting occurs is reforested artificially or naturally in accordance with provisions of Chapter 11 (section 10.1-1100 et seq.) of this title or is converted to bona fide agricultural or improved pasture use as described in subsection B of section 10.1-1163. 
(8)  Agricultural engineering operations including, but not limited to, the construction of terraces, terrace outlets, check dams, desilting basins, dikes, ponds not required to comply with the Dam Safety Act, Chapter 8.1 (§ 62.1-115.1 et seq.), ditches, strip cropping, lister furrowing, contour cultivating, contour furrowing, land drainage and land irrigation; 
(9)  Repair or rebuilding of the tracks, right-of-way, bridges, communication facilities and other related structures and facilities of a railroad company; 
(10)  Disturbed land areas of less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet; 
(11)  Installation of fence and sign posts or telephone and electric poles and other kinds of posts or poles; 
(12)  Shore erosion control projects on tidal waters when the projects are approved by local wetlands boards, the Marine Resources Commission or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; 
(13)  Emergency work to protect life, limb or property, and emergency repairs; provided that if the land disturbing activity would have required an approved erosion and sediment control plan, if the activity were not an emergency, then the land area disturbed shall be shaped and stabilized in accordance with the requirements of the town. 
    Land disturbing permit means a permit issued by the town for the clearing, filling, excavating, grading, transferring or any combination thereof or for any purpose set forth herein. 
    Local erosion and sediment control program or local control program means an outline or explanation of the various elements or methods employed by the town to regulate land disturbing activities and thereby minimize erosion and sedimentation in compliance with the state program and may include such items as a local ordinance, policies and guidelines, technical materials, inspection, enforcement and evaluation. 
    Owner means the owner or owners of the freehold of the premises or lesser estate therein, a mortgage or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of a property. 
    Permittee means the person to whom the permit authorizing land disturbing activities is issued or the person who certifies that the approved erosion and sediment control plan will be followed. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, county, city, town or other political subdivision of the commonwealth, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
    Plan approving authority means the department(s) responsible for determining the adequacy of a conservation plan submitted for land disturbing activities on a unit or units of land and for approving plans. 
    Program authority means a district, county, city or town which has adopted a soil and sediment control program which has been approved by the board. 
    Responsible land disturber means an individual from the project or development team, who will be in charge of and responsible for carrying out a land-disturbing activity covered by an approved plan or agreement in lieu of a plan, who (i) holds a responsible land disturber certificate of competence, (ii) holds a current certificate of competence from the board in the areas of combined administration, program administration. Inspection, or plan review, (iii) holds a current contractor certificate of competence for erosion and sediment control, or (iv) is licensed in Virginia as a professional engineer, architect, certified landscape architect or land surveyor pursuant to Article 1 (section 54.1-400 et seq.) of Chapter 4 of Title 54.1. 
    Single-family residence means a noncommercial dwelling that is occupied exclusively by one family and not part of a residential subdivision development. 
    Stabilized means an area that can be expected to withstand normal exposure to atmospheric conditions without incurring erosion damage. 
    State erosion and sediment control program or state program means the program administered by the state soil and water conservation board pursuant to the State Code including regulations designed to minimize erosion and sedimentation. 
    State waters means all waters on the surface and under the ground wholly or partially within or bordering the commonwealth or within its jurisdictions. 
    Town means the Town of Farmville. 
    Transporting means any moving of earth materials from one place to another place other than such movement incidental to grading, when such movement results in destroying the vegetation ground cover either by tracking or the buildup of earth materials to the extent that erosion and sedimentation will result from the soil or earth materials over which such transporting occurs. 
(Ord. No. 37, 6-12-96; Ord. No. 110, 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 10-4. - Local erosion and sediment control program. 
(a)  The town hereby adopts the regulations promulgated by the state soil and water conservation board pursuant to Code of Virginia § 10.1-562 for the effective control of soil erosion, sediment deposition and nonagricultural runoff to prevent the unreasonable degradation of properties, stream channels, waters and other natural resources. The Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Regulations, The Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook and the Town Code, as amended periodically, are adopted as the standards, reference and guidelines for the local program. The standards contained within these publications are to be used by the applicant when making a submittal under the provisions of this chapter and in the preparation of an erosion and sediment control plan. The plan approving authority, in considering the adequacy of a submitted plan, shall be guided by the same standards, regulations and guidelines. When the standards vary between the publications, the state regulations shall take precedence. 
(b)  The town designates the town's certified plan reviewer or the Piedmont Soil and Water Conservation District as the plan-approving authority. 
(c)  Pursuant to Code of Virginia § 10.1-561.1, (i) an erosion control plan shall not be approved until it is reviewed by a certified plan reviewer, (ii) inspections of land-disturbing activities shall be conducted by a certified inspector and (iii) the erosion control program of (locality) shall contain a certified program administrator, a certified plan reviewer, and a certified inspector, who may be the same person. 
(d)  The program and regulations provided for in this chapter shall be made available for public inspection at the office of the program administrator. 
(Ord. No. 37, 6-12-96) 
Sec. 10-5. - Regulated land disturbing activities; submission and approval of plans. 
(a)  Except as provided herein, no person shall engage in any land disturbing activity until he has submitted to the program administrator for the town an erosion and sediment control plan for land disturbing activity and such plan has been approved by the plan approving authority. For commercial, industrial or multi-family residential projects, said plan will require the seal and signature of a professional engineer, land surveyor, architect or landscape architect as defined by the Code of Virginia, § 54.1-400, as amended, or any person certified by the Virginia Department of Conservation (DCR) under Code of Virginia, § 10.1-561, as amended, as a plan reviewer or combined administrator. Where land disturbing activities involve lands under the jurisdiction of more than one (1) local control program, an erosion and sediment control plan, at the option of the applicant, may be submitted to the board of review and approval rather than to each jurisdiction concerned. 
(b)  The plan approving authority shall, within forty-five (45) days, approve any such plan, if he determines that the plan meets the requirements of the board's regulations, and if the person responsible for carrying out the plan certifies that he will properly perform the erosion and sediment control measures included in the plan and will conform to the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  The plan shall be acted upon within forty-five (45) days from receipt thereof by either approving said plan in writing or by disapproving said plan in writing and giving specific reasons for its disapproval. When a plan is determined to be inadequate, the plan approving authority shall specify such modifications, terms and conditions that will permit approval of the plan. If no action is taken within forty-five (45) days, the plan shall be deemed approved and the person authorized to proceed with the proposed activity. 
(d)  An approved plan may be changed by the plan approving authority when: 
(1)  The inspection reveals that the plan is inadequate to satisfy applicable regulations; or 
(2)  The person responsible for carrying out the plan finds that because of changed circumstances or for other reasons the approved plan cannot be effectively carried out, and proposed amendments to the plan, consistent with the requirements of this chapter, are agreed to by the plan approving authority and the person responsible for carrying out the plan. 
(e)  In order to prevent further erosion, the town may require approval of a conservation plan for any land identified in the local program as an erosion impact area. 
(f)  When land disturbing activity will be required of a contractor performing construction work pursuant to a construction contract, the preparation, submission and approval of an erosion and sediment control plan shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(g)  State agency projects are exempt from the provisions of this chapter, pursuant to Code of Virginia § 10.1-564. 
(Ord. No. 37, 6-12-96; Ord. No. 92, 3-9-2005) 
Sec. 10-6. - Land disturbing permits; fees; bonding; etc. 
(a)  No person shall engage in any land disturbing activity until he has acquired a land-disturbing permit, unless the proposed land disturbing activity is specifically exempt from the provisions of this chapter, and has paid the fees and posted the required bond. 
(b)  Fees: A plan review and inspection fee of the amount listed in the town's fee schedule shall be paid to the town at the time of filing erosion and sediment control plans. 
(c)  No land disturbing permit shall be issued until the applicant submits with his application an approved erosion and sediment control plan and certification that the plan will be followed. An approved plan is required for issuance of grading, building or other permits. 
(d)  Bond: All applicants for permits shall provide to the town a performance bond, cash escrow, or an irrevocable letter of credit acceptable to the town treasurer, to ensure that measures could be taken by the town at the applicant's expense should the applicant fail within the time specified to initiate or maintain appropriate conservation measures required of him as a result of his land disturbing activity. Should it be necessary for the town to take such conservation action, the town may collect from the applicant any costs in excess of the amount of the surety held. 
Within sixty (60) days of the achievement of adequate stabilization, as determined by the program administrator, the bond, case, escrow or letter of credit, or the unexpended or unobligated portion thereof shall be either refunded to the applicant or terminated. 
These requirements are in addition to all other provisions relating to the issuance of permits and are not intended to otherwise affect the requirements for such permits. 
(Ord. No. 37, 6-12-96) 
Sec. 10-7. - Monitoring, reports and inspections. 
(a)  The program administrator shall provide for and/or conduct periodic inspections of the land disturbing activity, and may require monitoring and reports from the person responsible for carrying out the plan, to insure compliance with the approved plan and to determine whether the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. The owner, permittee or person responsible for carrying out the plan shall be given notice of the inspection. 
If the program administrator determines that there is a failure to comply with the plan, notice shall be served upon the permittee or person responsible for carrying out the plan by registered or certified mail to the address specified in the permit application or in the plan certification, or by delivery at the site of the land disturbing activities to the agent or employee supervising such activities. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. Upon failure to comply within the specified time, the permit may be revoked and the permittee or person responsible for carrying out the plan shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter and, upon conviction, shall be subject to the penalties provided by the ordinance. 
(b)  Upon determination of a violation of this chapter, the program administrator either may, in conjunction with or subsequent to a notice to comply as specified in this chapter, issue an order requiring that all or part of the land disturbing activities permitted on the site be stopped until the specified corrective measures have been taken or, if land disturbing activities have commenced without an approved plan requiring that all of the land disturbing activities be stopped until an approved plan or any required permits are obtained. 
Where an alleged noncompliance is causing or is in imminent danger of causing harmful erosion of lands or sediment deposition in waters within the watersheds of the commonwealth, or where the land disturbing activities have commenced without an approved plan or any required permits, an order may be issued whether or not the alleged violator has been issued a notice to comply. Otherwise, such an order may be issued only after the alleged violator has failed to comply with a notice to comply. 
The stop work order shall be served in the same manner as a notice to comply, and shall remain in effect for seven (7) days from the date of service pending application by the enforcing authority or alleged violator for appropriate relief to the circuit court of the jurisdiction wherein the violation was alleged to have occurred. 
If the alleged violator has not obtained an approved plan or any required permits within seven (7) days from the date of service of the order, the program administrator or his designee may issue an order to the owner requiring that all construction and other work on the site, other than corrective measures, be stopped until an approved plan and any required permits have been obtained. 
A stop work order shall be served upon the owner by registered or certified mail to the address specified in the permit application or the land records of the town. The owner may appeal the issuance of an order to the circuit court of the jurisdiction wherein the violation was alleged to have occurred. 
Any person violating or failing, neglecting or refusing to obey an order issued by the program administrator or his designee may be compelled in a proceeding instituted in the circuit court of the jurisdiction wherein the violation was alleged to have occurred to obey same and to comply therewith by injunction, mandamus or other appropriate remedy. Upon completion and approval of corrective action or obtaining an approved plan or any required permits, the order shall immediately be lifted. 
Nothing in this section shall prevent the program administrator or his designee from taking any other action authorized by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 37, 6-12-96) 
Sec. 10-8. - Penalties, injunctions and other legal actions. 
(a)  Violators of this chapter shall be guilty of a class I misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon a finding of the district court of the county, be assessed a civil penalty. The civil penalty for any one violation shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00), except that the civil penalty for commencement of land disturbing activities without an approved plan shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each day during which the violation is found to have existed shall constitute a separate offense. 
In no event shall a series of specified violations arising from the same operative set of facts result in civil penalties which exceed a total of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00), except that a series of violations arising from the commencement of land-disturbing activities without an approved plan for any site shall not result in civil penalties which exceed a total of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). The assessment of civil penalties according to this schedule shall be in lieu of criminal sanctions and shall preclude the prosecution of such violation as a misdemeanor under subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  The program administrator may apply to the circuit court of the county to enjoin a violation or a threatened violation of this chapter, without the necessity of showing that an adequate remedy at law does not exist. 
(d)  In addition to any criminal penalties provided under this chapter, any person who violates any provision of this chapter may be liable to the town in a civil action for damages. 
(e)  Without limiting the remedies which may be obtained in this section, any person violating or failing, neglecting or refusing to obey any person violating or failing, neglecting or refusing to obey any injunction, mandamus or other remedy obtained pursuant to this section shall be subject, in the discretion of the court, to a civil penalty not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each violation. A civil action for such violation or failure may be brought by the town. Any civil penalties assessed by a court shall be paid into the treasury of the town, except that where the violator is the locality itself, or its agent, the court shall direct the penalty to be paid into the state treasury. 
(f)  With the consent of any person who has violated or failed, neglected or refused to obey any regulation or condition of a permit or any provision of this chapter, the town may provide for the payment of civil charges for violations in specific sums, not to exceed the limit specified in subsection (d) of this section. Such civil charges shall be instead of any appropriate civil penalty which could be imposed under subsection (d). 
(g)  The town's attorney shall, upon request of the town or the permit issuing authority, take legal action to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(h)  Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be prima facie evidence in any legal or equitable proceeding for damages caused by erosion, siltation or sedimentation that all requirements of law have been met, and the complaining party must show negligence in order to recover any damages. 
(Ord. No. 37, 6-12-96) 
Sec. 10-9. - Appeals and judicial review. 
(a)  Any applicant under the provision of this chapter who is aggrieved by any action of the town or its agent in disapproving plans submitted pursuant to this chapter shall have the right to apply for and receive a review of such action by the town council. In reviewing the agent's actions, the town council shall consider evidence and opinions presented by the aggrieved applicant and agent. After considering the evidence and opinions, the town council may affirm, reverse or modify the action. The town council's decision shall be final, subject only to review by the circuit court of the county. Any applicant may seek an appeal hearing before the town council provided that the town council and other involved parties have at least thirty (30) days prior notice. 
(b)  Final decisions of the town under this chapter shall be subject to review by the county circuit court, provided an appeal is filed within thirty (30) days from the date of any written decision adversely affecting the rights, duties or privileges of the person engaging in or proposing to engage in land disturbing activities. 
(Ord. No. 37, 6-12-96) 
Chapter 11 - FINANCE[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Town treasurer, §§ 6, 33 et seq.; annual budget, § 15; disposition of revenue, § 18; treasurer's monthly report to council, § 19; issuance of bonds and notes, § 26.1; funds generally, § 52 et seq. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; licenses and permits, Ch. 14; taxation, Ch. 25; licensing of financial services, § 14-67; waterworks fund, § 28-30. 

Sec. 11-1. - Town depositories. 
    All commercial banks and all savings and loan associations located in the town are designated as depositories for funds of the town. All deposits shall be placed in the name of the town. The treasurer and clerk, and their sureties, are hereby relieved of any and all responsibility by reason of bank or savings and loan association failure. 
(Code 1973, § 11-1) 
Charter reference- Council may designate banks for deposits of town money, § 22. 
Sec. 11-2. - Deposit by property owner for work costs to be shared by town. 
    Whenever the town agrees to do any work where a property owner is to bear a part of the expense, such work shall not be started until the property owner shall deposit with the town either cash or a certified check to cover the amount of the cost of such work for which he agrees to pay. 
(Code 1973, § 11-2) 
Sec. 11-3. - Penalty on past due accounts. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per year on all past due or delinquent accounts, license fees or taxes; except the provisions hereof shall not apply to any account, license fee or tax on which there is otherwise imposed a specific penalty, interest or delinquency charge. Every account, license fee or tax subject to the provisions of this section shall be deemed past due and delinquent from its due date or if no due date is specified, upon the expiration of thirty (30) days from the initial billing date. 
(b)  For the second and subsequent years of delinquency, interest shall be at the rate established pursuant to section 6621 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended, or ten (10) percent annually, whichever is greater. 
(c)  The interest imposed herein shall be collected in the same manner as penalties and delinquent taxes are collected. 
(Code 1973, § 11-3) 
Sec. 11-4. - Expenditures and appropriations. 
    No contract, agreement or other obligation involving the expenditure of money shall be authorized by any officer of the town unless the treasurer shall first certify to such officer that the money required for the contract, agreement, obligation or expenditure is in the treasury or safely assured to be forthcoming in time to comply with or meet such contract, agreement, obligation or expenditure and has been duly appropriated for the purpose. If an appropriation is not sufficient to meet the necessary requirement, the matter shall be brought to the attention of the council and a sufficient appropriation made, upon the approval of the council, provided, that such officers are authorized to expend as much as one hundred dollars ($100.00) in their department without first getting the approval of the town council. 
(Code 1973, § 11-4) 
Sec. 11-5. - Procedure for payments of claims against town. 
(a)  Payment of claims against the town shall be made only upon vouchers certified to by the head of the appropriate department or other division of the town government and by means of warrants on the town treasury issued by the town treasurer and countersigned by the mayor. The treasurer shall examine all payrolls, bills and other claims and demands against the town and shall issue no warrant for payment, unless he finds that the claim is in proper form, correctly computed and duly certified; that it is justly and legally due and payable; that an appropriation has been made therefor which has not been exhausted; that the payment has been otherwise legally authorized and that there is money in the town treasury to make payment. He may require any claimant to make oath as to the validity of a claim. He may investigate any claim; and, for such purpose, he may examine witnesses under oath; and, if he finds it is fraudulent, erroneous or otherwise invalid, he shall not issue a warrant therefor. 
(b)  Whenever due to illness or other cause the town treasurer is unable to perform his duties under this section, then the deputy treasurer shall have all of the powers and duties conferred and imposed upon the treasurer by this section. Whenever due to illness or other cause the mayor is unable to perform his duties under this section, then any member of the town finance committee may perform the duties of the mayor under this section. 
(Code 1973, § 11-5) 
Sec. 11-6. - Authority of town manager to refuse licenses or permits under certain circumstances. 
    The town manager or his authorized representative shall have the authority to refuse the issuance of any license or permit to any person who has any monetary obligation to the town or is in violation of any provision of this Code or other town ordinance. 
(Code 1973, § 11-6) 
Cross reference- Licenses and permits, Ch. 14. 
Chapter 12 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of council to make regulations for preventing danger or damage from fire, § 10. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; airport, Ch. 4; buildings, Ch. 6; junkyards, car lots and automobile graveyards, Ch. 13; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 15; nuisances, Ch. 17; police department, Ch. 21; solid waste and weeds, Ch. 22; water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 28; safety devices in junkyard, car lot or automobile graveyard, § 13-10; authority of fire department officials to direct traffic, § 15-8; fire protection in subdivisions, § 24-172 et seq.; fire hydrants, § 28-31. 
State Law reference- Forest resources and the department of forestry, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1100 et seq.; removal, repair, etc., of dangerous structures, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-11.2; nuisances, keeping of combustibles, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-14(5), (6); town fire prevention and building regulations, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-15(1), (4), (5); making of fires, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-872; false fire or ambulance alarms, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-212; fire protection, Code of Virginia, § 27-1 et seq.; statewide fire prevention code, Code of Virginia, § 27-94 et seq.; explosives, Code of Virginia, § 59.1-137 et seq.; fireworks, Code of Virginia, § 59.1-142 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - False fire alarms. 
    No person shall in any manner knowingly give a false alarm of fire. 
(Code 1973, § 12-1) 
Sec. 12-2. - Damaging fire apparatus or equipment. 
    No person shall wantonly break, destroy or otherwise disfigure or damage any fire apparatus or equipment. 
(Code 1973, § 12-2) 
Sec. 12-3. - Interference with firefighters. 
    No person shall interfere with any firefighter in the discharge of his duty. 
(Code 1973, § 12-3) 
Sec. 12-4. - Guard lines around fire areas. 
    The fire department and town police officers are hereby given the right and authority to stretch lines around any fire area and block streets leading into the same. No person shall be allowed within any such enclosure except persons connected with the fire or town police forces, town officials, persons holding passes signed by the chief of the fire department and the owner or occupants of the building. 
(Code 1973, § 12-4) 
Sec. 12-5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 12-5 was repealed by the Farmville Town Council at their regular monthly meeting held June 12, 1996. Formerly, such section pertained to permit required for outdoor burning and derived from § 12-5 of the 1973 Code. 
Sec. 12-6. - Driving over fire hose. 
    It shall be unlawful, without the consent of the fire department official in command, for the driver of any vehicle to drive over any unprotected hose of a fire department laid down for use at any fire or alarm of fire. 
(Code 1973, § 12-6) 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 15. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-922. 
Secs. 12-7-12-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 68, adopted Oct. 9, 2002, amended and re-enacted the former Art. II, §§ 12-26-12-31, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1973, §§ 12-7-12-10, 12-13, 12-14. 

Sec. 12-26. - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to Chapter 9 of Title 27, Code of Virginia, an ordinance authorizing the Farmville Volunteer Fire Department to enforce the provisions of the latest edition adopted of "The Statewide Fire Prevention Code". 
    The town council hereby designates Town of Farmville Fire Marshal to act as enforcing agency for the enforcement of the latest edition adopted of "The Statewide Fire Prevention Code" duly adopted by the Virginia Board of Housing and Community Development under authority of Code of Virginia, § 27-97. 
Statewide Fire Prevention Code 
    Chapter 3 General Precautions Against Fire 
307.1 Title and Purpose. Delete and substitute section 307.1 as follows: 
This article shall be known as the Town of Farmville Ordinance for the regulation of open burning. The purpose of this article is to protect public health, safety, and welfare by regulating open burning within the Town of Farmville to achieve and maintain, to the greatest extent practicable, a level of air quality that will provide comfort and convenience while promoting economic and social development. This article is intended to supplement the applicable regulations promulgated by the State Air Pollution Control Board and other applicable regulations and laws. 
307.2 Definitions. Delete and substitute section 307.2 as follows: 
For the purpose of this article and subsequent amendments or any orders issued by the Town of Farmville, the words or phrases shall have the meaning given them in this section. 
A. Outdoor cooking mean the outdoor preparation of food, for both commercial and non-commercial purposes, when such preparation in accordance with the Statewide Fire Prevention Code and the Code of the Town of Farmville. 
B. Open burning means the burning of any matter in such a manner that the products resulting from combustion are emitted directly into the atmosphere without passing through a stack, duct or chimney. 
C. Fire pit means a commercially fabricated container used solely for recreational fire purposes. 
307.3 Open Burning Regulations. Delete and substitute Section 307.3 as follows: 
A.  Open Burning Regulations for Tree and Garden Trimmings - 15 Day Permit/Bon Fires One Day Permit: 
This section shall permit the opening burning of tree and garden trimmings subject to the requirements of this section. Tree and garden trimmings shall be defined as any vegetation that would be commonly removed from trees, shrubs or garden plants during the normal pruning process, along with any twigs or small branches that fall from trees during normal thunderstorms or on windy days and any plants removed from a garden after the growing season (corn stalks, tomato vines, beans vines, etc.) 
Opening burning does not exempt or excuse a person from the consequences, damages or injuries which may result from such conduct, nor does it excuse or exempt any person from complying with all applicable laws, ordinances, regulations, and orders of the federal government, the Commonwealth of Virginia and the Town of Farmville. 
1.  Burning of the following is prohibited: 
A.  Toxic or hazardous materials or containers for such materials 
B.  Rubber tires, asphaltic material, crankcase oil, impregnated wood, or similar materials 
C.  Paper, used lumber or trade waste 
D.  Building and/or demolition material 
E.  Household/commercial trash or refuse 
2.  A "written permit" is required for the open burning of tree and gardening trimmings. 
A.  The permit application shall be submitted at least 15 days before the desired burn date. 
B.  The permit will be valid for 15 days; limited to two permits per burn season per address. Burn season (at any time of day) is May 1 through February 14. 
C.  A detailed application shall be submitted for each permit requested. 
D.  Fifteen (15) day permits are NOT renewable. 
E.  Only one pile shall be burned at a time and shall not exceed the size of 6' x 8' x 4'. 
F.  The location of the burning shall be a minimum of 300 feet from any occupied building unless the occupants have given prior written permission. If the occupants of the building are not also the owners of the building, then the owner's permission shall also be required. 
G.  All permitted fires shall be at least 150 feet from any building and/or structure, to include combustible fencing. 
H.  The burning shall take place on the premises of the private property from which the tree and garden trimmings were taken. 
3.  The burning of limbs, tree trunks, logs or stumps is considered Property Maintenance or Land Clearing and is not allowed under this section. 
4.  The following applies to ALL open burning in Town of Farmville: 
A.  Fires shall be constantly attended by a competent person until extinguished and no longer smoldering. 
B.  The attendee shall provide adequate fire extinguishing equipment to control and/or extinguish the fire should it start to spread or get out of control. 
C.  The Virginia Department of Forestry requires that any open burning from February 15 through April 30 of each year, within 300 feet of woodland, brush land, or field containing dry grass or other combustible material leading to woodland, be done between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight. 
D.  A written permit must be obtained from the Town of Farmville Treasurer Office. Application permit shall include $25.00 fee for the permit, completed permit application, and approval of the Fire Marshal of the Town of Farmville and Fire Chief of the Farmville Volunteer Fire Department. 
E.  Any permit holder shall be required to contact the Farmville Emergency Communication Center (434-392-3332) within twenty-four (24) hours of the items to be burned, and must provide an exact time for when the burning will commence. 
5.  Failure to comply with the above conditions will constitute a violation of the law, which will result in possible legal action. 
B.  Open Burning Regulations for Debris from Land Clearing and Property Maintenance: 
This section shall permit the open burning of any natural debris waste generated from the development of property. Debris shall be defined as limbs, tree trunks, logs, stumps, and other closely related natural waste that is generated during the removal of unwanted, leaning, hazardous or dead trees, regardless of size, during normal upkeep, development or landscaping of the property. 
1.  A written permit shall be obtained from the Town of Farmville Treasurer Office. A detailed application for the permit shall include: 
A.  A $400.00 fee for permit. 
B.  A completed permit application. 
C.  A site plan of the burn site. 
D.  A certificate of liability insurance coverage for party performing the burn. The permit holder must maintain liability insurance in the minimum amount of $1,000,000 general liability coverage at all times while burning is taking place. 
2.  The permit application shall be submitted at least 15 days before the desired burn date. 
3.  Permitted open burning does not exempt or excuse a person from the consequences, damages or injuries which may result from such conduct, nor does it excuse or exempt any person from complying with all applicable laws, ordinances, regulations and orders of the federal government, the Commonwealth of Virginia and the Town of Farmville. 
4.  Burning of the following is prohibited: 
A.  Toxic or hazardous material, or containers for such materials. 
B.  Rubber tires, asphaltic material, crankcase oil, impregnated wood, or similar materials. 
C.  Paper, used lumber, or trade waste. 
D.  Buildings and/or demolition material. 
E.  Household/commercial trash or refuse. 
5.  The burning shall take place on the site from which the debris waste was generated. All reasonable effort shall be made to minimize the amount of material that is burned, with the number and size (25 feet in width by 25 feet in length by 15 feet in height) of the debris piles approved in advance by the Fire Chief of the Farmville Volunteer Fire Department and Fire Marshal of the Town of Farmville. 
6.  Permitted fires shall be constantly attended by a competent person until they are extinguished and shall be conducted to ensure the best possible combustion with a minimum of smoke and fly ash being produced. The operator and equipment to control and/or extinguish the fire(s) shall be within 100 feet of the pile at all times. 
7.  Permit will be valid for fifteen (15) calendar days from the date of issuance. A one-time fifteen (15) day extension may be requested prior to the expiration of the permit. Once a permit has expired, the applicant shall be required to submit a new application and pay another permit fee. In either case, a re-inspection of the site may be required. 
8.  Fires shall be at least 500 feet from any occupied building, unless the occupants have given prior written permission. If the occupants of the building are not also the owners of the building, then the owner's permission shall also be required. 
9.  All permitted fires shall also be 150 feet from any building and/or structure, and any other combustible material. 
10.  A copy of the permit, site plan, guidelines, and all applicable conditions shall be kept at the burn site. 
11.  The Virginia Department of Forestry requires that any open burning, from February 15 through April 30 of each year, that is located within 300 feet of any woodland, brush land, or field containing dry grass or any other combustible material leading to woodland, be commenced and extinguished between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight. 
12.  Any permit holder shall be required to contact the Farmville Emergency Communication Center (434) 392-3332, within twenty-four (24) hours of the proposed burning, and must provide an exact time for when the burning will commence. 
13.  Failure to comply with the above conditions will constitute a violation of the law, which will result in legal action. 
307.3.1 Exemptions, Not requiring a permit. Add subsection 307.3.1 as follows: 
A.  Open burning for training and instruction of fire fighters under the supervision of the designated official; and 
B.  Open burning for fires that are solely for outdoor cooking; and 
C.  Open burning in a fire pit that is solely for recreational purposes. 
(Ord. No. 68, 10-9-2002; Ord. No. 111, 1-10-2007; Ord. No. 158, 10-10-2012 ; Ord. No. 184 , 7-12-2017) 
Charter reference- Adoption of technical codes, § 24. 
Sec. 12-27. - Copies available. 
    Copies of the town's fire prevention code may be obtained at the office of the town clerk during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 68, 10-9-2002) 
Sec. 12-28. - Enforcement. 
    The enforcement procedures of "The Statewide Fire Prevention Code" shall be instituted by the fire marshal and administered in accordance with the provisions set forth in the "Statewide Fire Prevention Code" and Section Four. 
(Ord. No. 68, 10-9-2002) 
Sec. 12-29. - Definition. 
    Wherever the word "municipality" is used in the fire prevention code adopted by this article, it shall be held to mean the Town of Farmville, Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 68, 10-9-2002) 
Sec. 12-30. - Appeals. 
    The town council shall appoint the board of appeals to hear appeals arising from the application of the provisions of "The Statewide Fire Prevention Code". 
(Ord. No. 68, 10-9-2002) 
Sec. 12-31. - Administrative practices. 
    The fire marshal shall establish such procedures or requirements as may be necessary for administration and enforcement of this article. The procedures are to be approved by the town council. 
(Ord. No. 68, 10-9-2002) 
Secs. 12-32-12-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIREWORKS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Fireworks, Code of Virginia, § 59.1-142 et seq. 

Sec. 12-51. - When manufacture, transportation, sale, etc., prohibited. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to transport, manufacture, store, sell, offer for sale, expose for sale or to buy, use, ignite or explode any firecracker, torpedo, skyrocket or other substance or thing, of whatever form or construction, containing nitrates, chlorates, oxalates, sulphides of lead, barium, antimony, nitroglycerine, phosphorus or any other explosive or inflammable compound or substance, and intended or commonly known as fireworks. 
(Code 1973, §§ 12-15, 18-22) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 59.1-142. 
Sec. 12-52. - Seizure and destruction of certain fireworks. 
    Any law enforcement officer arresting any person for a violation of this article shall seize any article mentioned in section 12-51 in the possession or under the control of the person so arrested and shall hold the same until final disposition of any criminal proceedings against such person. If a judgment of conviction is entered against such person, the court shall order destruction of such articles upon expiration of the time allowed for appeal of such judgment of conviction. 
(Code 1973, § 12-16) 
Sec. 12-53. - Discharge. 
    It shall be unlawful to discharge, fire or use firecrackers, rockets, torpedoes, Roman candles or other fireworks or substances designed and intended for pyrotechnic display or pistols, cannons or other appliances using blank cartridges or caps containing chlorate of potash mixture, except at such times as shall be designated by proclamation of the mayor. 
(Code 1973, § 18-23) 
State Law reference- Using, igniting or exploding fireworks, Code of Virginia, § 59.1-142. 
Sec. 12-54. - Permits for, sales for use at displays. 
    Subject to section 12-53, the town manager may issue a permit upon application in writing, for the display of fireworks by fair associations, amusement parks or by any organization or group of individuals, under such terms and conditions as he and the chief of the fire department may prescribe. After such permit has been issued, sales of fireworks may be made for use under such permit, and the association, organization or group to which it is issued may make use of such fireworks under the terms and conditions of such permit. 
(Code 1973, § 12-17) 
State Law reference- Permits for display of fireworks, Code of Virginia, § 59.1-144. 
Sec. 12-55. - Exemptions generally. 
    This article shall have no application to any officer or member of the Armed Forces of this state, or of the United States, while acting within the scope of his authority and duties as such, nor to any offer of sale or sale of fireworks to any authorized agent of such Armed Forces; nor shall it be applicable to the sale or use of materials or equipment, otherwise prohibited by this article, when such material or equipment is used or to be used by any person for signaling or other emergency use in the operation of any boat, railroad train or other vehicle for the transportation of persons or property. 
(Code 1973, § 12-18) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 59.1-146. 
Sec. 12-56. - Certain fireworks exploded on private property. 
    This article shall not apply to sparklers, fountains, Pharoah's serpents, caps for pistols or pinwheels commonly known as whirligigs or spinning jennies, when used, ignited or exploded on private property with the consent of the owner of such property. 
(Code 1973, § 12-19) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 59.1-147. 
Secs. 12-57-12-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Fire departments and fire companies, Code of Virginia, § 27-6.1 et seq. 

Sec. 12-76. - Established. 
    There shall be established in the town one (1) or more fire companies, which companies shall be formed in accordance with Code of Virginia, §§ 27-6.1 to 27-22. 
(Code 1973, § 12-20) 
Sec. 12-77. - Appointment, term of engineer or fire chief. 
    The town manager shall appoint annually a principal engineer, upon recommendation of the members of the fire company or fire companies. He shall by virtue of his office also be chief of the fire department. His term of office shall be for one (1) year and shall commence on July first of each year. 
(Code 1973, § 12-21; Ord. No. 87, 3-9-2005) 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 
Sec. 12-78. - Appointment, term of wardens. 
    The town manager shall also appoint annually three (3) fire wardens to be numbered 1, 2 and 3 and to rank in such order. Their terms of office shall be for one (1) year each and shall begin on September first of each year. 
(Code 1973, § 12-22) 
Sec. 12-79. - Composition. 
    The chief of the fire department, together with the three (3) fire wardens and the commander of the fire companies, shall constitute the fire department of the town. They shall have power to make bylaws, consistent with the ordinances of the town and the laws of the state, to promote the objects of the department. 
(Code 1973, § 12-23) 
State Law reference- Chief, officers and employees of fire department, Code of Virginia, § 27-6.1; bylaws of fire department, Code of Virginia, § 27-7. 
Sec. 12-80. - Annual list of firefighters to be filed; additional members selected. 
    A list of the volunteer firefighters of the fire department shall be filed in the municipal office of the town each fiscal year, beginning July first of the fiscal year. In the performance of their duties, all registered firefighters shall become agents of the town. Whenever, in the opinion of the chief of the fire department or the town manager, it becomes necessary to use additional persons in and about the fighting of any fire, then they or either of them may use such volunteers as they may choose or select. The volunteers so selected shall during the performance of their duties become agents of the town, until they are discharged by the fire chief or the town manager. All members of the volunteer fire department of the town shall be under the supervision of the town manager, unless otherwise so directed by the council. 
(Code 1973, § 12-24) 
Sec. 12-81. - Powers and duties of fire chief. 
    The chief of the fire department shall have complete control of the fire companies and of all firefighting equipment of the town. The chief shall be responsible for the proper organization, training, discipline and functioning of the fire companies and for the proper care, use and safety of the equipment of the companies and the fire apparatus of the town. 
(Code 1973, § 12-25) 
State Law reference- Authority of fire chief, Code of Virginia, § 27-15.1. 
Sec. 12-82. - Delegation of duties. 
    In the absence of the chief of the fire department, the fire warden present next in command shall have all the powers and perform all the duties encumbent upon the chief. 
(Code 1973, § 12-26) 
Sec. 12-83. - Practice drills. 
    It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department to hold, after due notice, a practice drill of not less than two (2) hours at least once every month during good weather for the fire companies of the town. It shall be the duty of each member of the fire department and each member of the fire companies to attend all practice drills the same as all fire alarms. 
(Code 1973, § 12-27) 
Sec. 12-84. - Fire marshal. 
    The council shall appoint in July of each year a fire marshal who shall have such powers and perform such duties as are provided by general law. His term of office shall be for one (1) year. If it sees fit, the council may designate some officer of the town as fire marshal. At the time of such designation or appointment it shall provide for the compensation or additional compensation such person shall receive for the performance of these duties. 
(Code 1973, § 12-28; Ord. No. 88, 12-8-2004) 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Local fire marshals, Code of Virginia, § 27-30 et seq. 
Sec. 12-85. - Duties of members. 
    The members of the fire department and the members of the several fire companies shall have such other powers and perform such other duties as may be provided by the charter, this Code, the other ordinances of the town and the general laws of the state. 
(Code 1973, § 12-29) 
State Law reference- Duty of members on alarm of fire, Code of Virginia, § 27-11; authority of fire chief, Code of Virginia, § 27-15.1; right of entry to certain buildings, Code of Virginia, § 27-17. 
Secs. 12-86-12-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FIRE LANES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Stopping, standing and parking, § 15-61 et seq. 

Sec. 12-101. - Designation. 
    The fire official shall designate fire lanes on public streets and on private property where necessary for the purpose of preventing parking in front of or adjacent to fire hydrants and fire department connections and to insure access to buildings and structures for firefighting and rescue apparatus. Fire lanes shall be approved by the fire official and the chief of police. 
(Code 1973, § 12-30) 
Sec. 12-102. - Signs and markings. 
    Signs and markings to delineate fire lanes as designated by the fire official shall be provided, installed and maintained in a method and manner approved by the fire official. 
(Code 1973, § 12-31) 
Sec. 12-103. - Illegal use. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or stop in or otherwise obstruct any such designated and marked fire lane area. 
(b)  In any prosecution charging a violation of subsection (a) above, proof that the vehicle described in the complaint, summons, or warrant was parked in violation of this article, together with proof that the defendant was at the time of such parking the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that such registered owner of the vehicle was the person who parked the vehicle at the place where and for the time which such violation occurred. 
(c)  Whenever any vehicle is found to obstruct or interfere with the free ingress or egress of such designated and marked fire lane area, any officer discovering or having report of same may remove it or have it removed to the nearest storage garage for safekeeping and that fact shall be immediately reported to the state department of motor vehicles or some officer or agent of such department and to the owner of such vehicle, as promptly as possible. Such owner, before obtaining the possession of such property, shall pay to the parties entitled thereto all reasonable and necessary costs incidental to the removal or storage of such property. 
(Code 1973, § 12-32) 
Sec. 12-104. - Existing signs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure, tamper with, remove, destroy or impair the usefulness of any posted fire lane sign installed under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 12-33) 
Secs. 12-105-12-123. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 109, adopted Aug. 4, 1999, rescinded Art, VI, §§ 12-116-12-123, which pertained to open burning and derived from Ord. No. 36, adopted June 12, 1996. 
Chapter 13 - JUNKYARDS, CAR LOTS AND AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARDS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Advertising, Ch. 3; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 12; licenses and permits, Ch. 14; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 15; nuisances, Ch. 17; solid waste and weeds, Ch. 22; zoning, Ch. 29. 
State Law reference- Ordinances taxing and regulating automobile graveyards and junkyards, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-28. 

Sec. 13-1. - Definition. 
    As used in this chapter, the term "junkyards, car lots or automobile graveyards" shall mean any lot or place which is exposed to the weather and upon which more than five (5) motor vehicles, dismantled or junked cars of any kind, incapable of being operated are placed, located or found. 
(Code 1973, § 14-1) 
Sec. 13-2. - Permit-Required. 
    No person shall maintain or operate a junkyard, car lot or automobile graveyard without first having obtained a permit therefor. 
(Code 1973, § 14-2) 
Cross reference- Licenses and permits, Ch. 14. 
Sec. 13-3. - Same-Application. 
    Application for a permit under this chapter shall be made to the town manager and shall contain the name and address of the applicant and the location of the premises where such business is to be carried on. 
(Code 1973, § 14-3) 
Sec. 13-4. - Buying, selling, etc., vehicles, parts, etc., from which identification has been removed. 
    No person shall knowingly buy, sell, receive, dispose of, conceal or have in his possession any motor vehicle, part or accessory from which the manufacturer's serial number or any other number or identification mark has been removed, defaced, covered, altered or destroyed for the purpose of concealing or misrepresenting the identity of such vehicle, part or accessory. Every person to whom is offered for sale any motor vehicle, part or accessory from which has been removed, defaced, covered, altered or destroyed the manufacturer's serial number or identification mark of any other number shall immediately notify the police of such offer. 
(Code 1973, § 14-4) 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 15. 
Sec. 13-5. - Enclosing fence required. 
    Junkyards, car lots or automobile graveyards shall be entirely enclosed by a fence eight (8) feet in height, to exclude such junkyard, etc., from public view. The fence shall be kept neatly painted and in good repair and shall be constructed of corrugated iron or masonry brick, cinder block or concrete; provided, that any fence so erected shall be located at least five (5) feet from the street or road and in no case shall project beyond the building line of other buildings on the same street or road. 
(Code 1973, § 14-5) 
Sec. 13-6. - Advertisements on fences. 
    The enclosing fence shall not be used for bill posting or other advertising purposes; except, that a space not larger than six (6) feet by twelve (12) feet may be used for the advertisement of the business of the owner thereof. Where the junkyard, car lot or automobile graveyard fronts on more than one (1) street or road the use of space for advertisement herein permitted shall extend to each street or road on which the junkyard, car lot or automobile graveyard abuts. 
(Code 1973, § 14-6) 
Cross reference- Advertising, Ch. 3. 
Sec. 13-7. - Height of contents limited. 
    The contents of a junkyard, car lot or automobile graveyard shall not be placed or deposited to a height greater than the height of the fence prescribed in section 13-5. 
(Code 1973, § 14-7) 
Sec. 13-8. - Open fires. 
    No open fires for the burning of rubbish, trash, automobiles or any part thereof or other waste matter shall be permitted. An accidental or casual fire occasioned by the use of an acetylene torch shall not be regarded as an open fire under this section where it is shown that the person operating or maintaining the junkyard, car lot or automobile graveyard has, by the use of fire extinguishers or other safety devices, made reasonable effort to prevent same. 
(Code 1973, § 14-8) 
Cross reference- Permit required for outdoor burning, § 12-5. 
Sec. 13-9. - Rubbish and waste matter. 
    A junkyard, car lot or automobile graveyard shall, as far as practicable, be kept clear and clean of all rubbish or waste matter. 
(Code 1973, § 14-9) 
Cross reference- Solid waste and weeds, Ch. 22. 
Sec. 13-10. - Safety devices required. 
    Safety devices such as fire extinguishers or other like apparatus may be required wherever, in the opinion of the chief of the volunteer fire department, such devices are necessary in the interest of public safety. 
(Code 1973, § 14-10) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 12. 
Sec. 13-11. - Gasoline to be drained from vehicles. 
    All tanks and engines of all vehicles shall be kept thoroughly drained of gasoline. 
(Code 1973, § 14-11) 
Sec. 13-12. - Sidewalks and abutting streets to be clear. 
(a)  All abutting sidewalks shall be kept clear and clean of all vehicles. 
(b)  All abutting streets shall be kept clear and clean of all vehicles incapable of being operated under their own power. 
(Code 1973, § 14-12) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23. 
Chapter 14 - LICENSES AND PERMITS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Power of council to license, § 17. 
Cross reference- Advertising, Ch. 3; airport, Ch. 4; animals, Ch. 5; buildings, Ch. 6; cable television, Ch. 7; cemeteries, Ch. 8; finance, Ch. 11; junkyards, car lots and automobile graveyards, Ch. 13; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 15; peddlers and solicitors, Ch. 19; subdivisions, Ch. 24; taxation, Ch. 25; taxicabs, Ch. 26; zoning, Ch. 29; permit for planting or removal of plants, shrubbery or trees in cemetery, § 8-20; authority of town manager to refuse licenses or permits, § 11-6; permit for junkyard, car lot or automobile graveyard, § 13-2 et seq.; parade permit, § 15-157 et seq.; sale of beer or wine in dance hall, § 18-13; permit for sale of fruit, vegetables, etc., from stand or vehicle, § 23-10; certificate of public convenience and necessity for taxicabs, § 26-31 et seq.; taxicab driver's permit, § 26-56 et seq.; zoning permit, § 29-26 et seq. 
State Law reference- Professions and occupations, Code of Virginia, Title 54.1; local license taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3700 et seq.; enforcement, collection, refunds, remedies and review of local taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3900 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - LICENSE TAX SCHEDULE AND GENERAL REGULATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 42, adopted December 11, 1996, repealed §§ 14-1-14-33 and added new §§ 14-1-14-22. Formerly, such sections pertained to similar provisions and derived from §§ 15-1-15-16, 15-18-15-32, 15-34; Ord. No. 13, 6-11-92; Ord. No. 17, 2-10-93. 

Sec. 14-1. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known, designated and cited as "The License Tax Ordinance of the Town." 
(Ord. No. 42, 12-11-96) 
Sec. 14-2. - Overriding conflicting ordinances. 
    Except as may be otherwise provided by the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia, and notwithstanding any other current ordinances or resolutions enacted by the Farmville Town Council, whether or not compiled in the Code of the Town of Farmville, to the extent of any conflict, the following provisions shall be applicable to the levy, assessment, and collection of licenses required and taxes imposed on businesses, trades, professions and callings and upon the persons, firms and corporations engaged therein within the town. 
(Ord. No. 42, 12-11-96) 
Sec. 14-3. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise required by the context: 
    Affiliated group means: 
(1)  One (1) or more chains of includable corporations connected through stock ownership with a common parent corporation which is an includable corporation if: 
a.  Stock possessing at least eighty (80) percent of the voting power of all classes of stock and at least eighty (80) percent of each class of the nonvoting stock of each of the includable corporations, except the common parent corporation, is owned directly by one (1) or more of the other includable corporations; and 
b.  The common parent corporation directly owns stock possessing at least eighty (80) percent of the voting power of all classes of stock and at least eighty (80) percent of each class of the nonvoting stock of at least one of the other includable corporations. As used in this subdivision, the term "stock" does not include nonvoting stock which is limited and preferred as to dividends. The term "includable corporation" means any corporation within the affiliated group irrespective of the state or country of its incorporation; and the term "receipts" includes gross receipts and gross income. 
(2)  Two (2) or more corporations if five (5) or fewer persons who are individuals, estates or trusts own stock possessing: 
a.  At least eighty (80) percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote or at least eighty (80) percent of the total value of shares of all classes of the stock of each corporation; and 
b.  More than fifty (50) percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote or more than fifty (50) percent of the total value of shares of all classes of stock of each corporation, taking into account the stock ownership of each such person only to the extent such stock ownership is identical with respect to each such corporation. 
When one (1) or more of the includable corporations, including the common parent corporation is a nonstock corporation, the term "stock" as used in this subdivision shall refer to the nonstock corporation membership or membership voting rights, as is appropriate to the context. 
    Assessment means a determination as to the proper rate of tax, the measure to which the tax rate is applied, and ultimately the amount of tax, including additional or omitted tax, that is due. An assessment shall include a written assessment made pursuant to notice by the treasurer or a self-assessment made by a taxpayer upon the filing of a return or otherwise not pursuant to notice. Assessments shall be deemed made by the treasurer when a written notice of assessment is delivered to the taxpayer by the treasurer or an employee of the treasurer, or mailed to the taxpayer at his last known address. Self-assessments shall be deemed made when a return is filed, or if no return is required, when the tax is paid. A return filed or tax paid before the last day prescribed by ordinance for the filing or payment thereof shall be deemed to be filed or paid on the last day specified for the filing of a return or the payment of tax, as the case may be. 
    Assessor or assessing official means the treasurer of the Town of Farmville. 
    Base year means the calendar year preceding the license year, except for contractors subject to the provisions of the Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3715. 
    Business means a course of dealing which requires the time, attention and labor of the person so engaged for the purpose of earning a livelihood for profit. It implies a continuous and regular course of dealing, rather than an irregular or isolated transaction. A person may be engaged in more than one business. The following acts shall create a rebuttable presumption that a person is engaged in a business: (i) advertising or otherwise holding oneself out to the public as being engaged in a particular business; or (ii) filing tax returns, schedules and documents that are required only of persons engaged in a trade or business. 
    Contractor shall have the meaning prescribed in the Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3714.B, as amended, whether such work is done or offered to be done by day labor, general contract or subcontract. 
    Definite place of business means an office or a location at which occurs a regular and continuous course of dealing for thirty consecutive days or more. A definite place of business for a person engaged in business may include a location leased or otherwise obtained from another person on a temporary or seasonal basis; and real property leased to another. A person's residence shall be deemed to be a definite place of business if there is no definite place of business maintained elsewhere and the person is not licensable as a peddler or itinerant merchant. 
    Financial services means the buying, selling, handling, managing, investing, and providing of advice regarding money, credit, securities and other investments and shall include the service for compensation by a credit agency, an investment company, a broker or dealer in securities and commodities or a security or commodity exchange, unless such service is otherwise provided for in this chapter. 
    Broker shall mean an agent of a buyer or a seller who buys or sells stocks, bonds, commodities, or services, usually on a commission basis. 
    Commodity shall mean staples such as wool, cotton, etc. which are traded on a commodity exchange and on which there is trading in fixtures. 
    Dealer for purposes of this chapter shall mean any person engaged in the business of buying and selling securities for his own account, but does not include a bank, or any person insofar as he buys or sells securities for his own account, either individually or in some fiduciary capacity, but not as part of a regular business. 
    Security for purposes of this chapter shall have the same meaning as in the Securities Act (§ 13.1-501 et seq.) of the Code of Virginia, or in similar laws of the United States regulating the sale of securities. Those engaged in rendering financial services include, but without limitation, the following: 
Buying installment receivables 
Chattel mortgage financing 
Consumer financing 
Credit card services 
Credit unions 
Factors 
Financing accounts receivable 
Industrial loan companies 
Installment financing 
Inventory financing 
Loan or mortgage brokers 
Loan or mortgage companies 
Safety deposit box companies 
Security and commodity brokers and services 
Stockbroker 
Working capital financing 
    Gross receipts means the whole, entire, total receipts attributable to the licensed privilege, without deduction, except as may be limited by the provisions of the Code of Virginia, Title 58.1, Chapter 37. 
    License year means the calendar year for which a license is issued for the privilege of engaging in business. 
    Personal services shall mean rendering for compensation any repair, personal, business or other services not specifically classified as "financial, real estate or professional service" under this chapter, or rendered in any other business or occupation not specifically classified in this chapter unless exempted from local license tax by the Code of Virginia, Title 58.1. 
    Professional services means services performed by architects, attorneys-at-law, certified public accountants, dentists, engineers, land surveyors, surgeons, veterinarians, and practitioners of the healing arts (the arts and sciences dealing with the prevention, diagnosis, treatment and cure or alleviation of human physical or mental ailments, conditions, diseases, pain or infirmities) and such occupations, and not others, as the state department of taxation may list in the BPOL guidelines promulgated pursuant to the Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3701. The department shall identify and list each occupation or vocation in which a professed knowledge of some department of science or learning, gained by a prolonged course of specialized instruction and study is used by its practical application to the affairs of others, either advising, guiding, or teaching them, and in serving their interests or welfare in the practice of an art or science founded on it. The word "profession" implies attainments in professional knowledge as distinguished from mere skill, and the application of knowledge to uses for others rather than for personal profit. 
    Purchases shall mean all goods, wares and merchandise received for sale at each definite place of business, of a wholesale merchant. The term shall also include the cost of manufacture of all goods, wares and merchandise manufactured by any wholesaler or wholesale merchant and sold or offered for sale. Such merchant may elect to report the gross receipts from the sale of manufactured goods, wares and merchandise if it cannot determine or chooses not to disclose the cost of manufacture. 
    Real estate services shall mean rendering a service for compensation as lessor, buyer, seller, agent or broker and providing a real estate service, unless the service is otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter, and such services include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Appraisers of real estate 
Escrow agents, real estate 
Fiduciaries, real estate 
Lessors of real property 
Real estate agents, brokers and managers 
Real estate selling agents 
Rental agents for real estate 
    Retailer or retail merchant shall mean any person or merchant who sells goods, wares and merchandise for use or consumption by the purchaser or for any purpose other than resale by the purchaser, but does not include sales at wholesale to institutional, commercial and industrial users. 
    Services shall mean things purchased by a customer which do not have physical characteristics, or which are not goods, wares, or merchandise. 
    Wholesaler or wholesale merchant shall mean any person or merchant who sells wares and merchandise for resale by the purchaser, including sales when the goods, wares and merchandise will be incorporated into goods and services for sale, and also includes sales to institutional, commercial, government and industrial users which because of the quantity, price, or other terms indicate that they are consistent with sales at wholesale. 
(Ord. No. 42, 12-11-96) 
Sec. 14-4. - License requirement. 
(a)  Every person engaging in the town in any business, trade, profession, occupation or calling (collectively hereinafter "a business") as defined in this chapter, unless otherwise exempted by law, shall apply for a license for each such business if (i) such person maintains a definite place of business in the town, (ii) such person does not maintain a definite office anywhere but does maintain an abode in this jurisdiction, which abode for the purposes of this chapter shall be deemed a definite place of business, or (iii) there is no definite place of business but such person operates amusement machines, is engaged as a peddler or itinerant merchant, carnival or circus as specified in the Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3717, 3718, or 3728, respectively, or is a contractor subject to the Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3715, or is a public service corporation subject to the Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3731. A separate license shall be required for each definite place of business. A person engaged in two (2) or more businesses or professions carried on at the same place of business may elect to obtain one license for all such businesses and professions if all of the following criteria are satisfied: (i) each business or profession is licensable at the location and has satisfied any requirements imposed by state law or other provisions of the ordinances of this jurisdiction; (ii) all of the businesses or professions are subject to the same tax rate, or, if subject to different tax rates, the licensee agrees to be taxed on all businesses and professions at the highest rate; and (iii) the taxpayer agrees to supply such information as the treasurer may require concerning the nature of the several businesses and their gross receipts. 
(b)  Each person subject to a license tax shall apply for a license prior to beginning business, if he was not subject to licensing in the town on or before January 1 of the license year, or no later than March l of the current license year if he had been issued a license for the preceding license year. The application shall be on forms prescribed by the treasurer. 
(c)  The tax shall be paid with the application in the case of any license not based on gross receipts. If the tax is measured by the gross receipts of the business, the tax shall be paid on or before March 1. 
(d)  The treasurer may grant an extension of time, not to exceed ninety (90) days, in which to file an application for a license, for reasonable cause. The extension shall be conditioned upon the timely payment of a reasonable estimate of the appropriate tax, subject to adjustment to the correct tax at the end of the extension together with interest from the due date until the date paid and, if the estimate submitted with the extension is found to be unreasonable under the circumstances, a penalty of ten (10) percent of the portion paid after the due date. 
(e)  A penalty of ten (10) percent of the tax may be imposed upon the failure to file an application or the failure to pay the tax by the appropriate due date. Only the late filing penalty shall be imposed by the treasurer if both the application and payment are late; however, both penalties may be assessed if the treasurer determines that the taxpayer has a history of noncompliance. In the case of an assessment of additional tax made by the treasurer, if the application and, if applicable, the return were made in good faith and the understatement of the tax was not due to any fraud, reckless or intentional disregard of the law by the taxpayer, there shall be no late payment penalty assessed with the additional tax. If any assessment of tax by the treasurer is not paid within thirty (30) days the treasurer [or other collecting official] may impose a ten (10) percent late payment penalty. The penalties shall not be imposed, or if imposed, shall be abated by the official who assessed them, if the failure to file or pay was not the fault of the taxpayer. In order to demonstrate lack of fault, the taxpayer must show that he acted responsibly and that the failure was due to events beyond his control. 
    Acted responsibly means that: (i) the taxpayer exercised the level of reasonable care that a prudent person would exercise under the circumstances in determining the filing obligations for the business and (ii) the taxpayer undertook significant steps to avoid or mitigate the failure, such as requesting appropriate extensions (where applicable), attempting to prevent a foreseeable impediment, acting to remove an impediment once it occurred, and promptly rectifying a failure once the impediment was removed or the failure discovered. 
    Events beyond the taxpayer's control include, but are not limited to, the unavailability of records due to fire or other casualty; the unavoidable absence (e.g., due to death or serious illness) of the person with the sole responsibility for tax compliance; or the taxpayer's reasonable reliance in good faith upon erroneous written information from the treasurer, who was aware of the relevant facts relating to the taxpayer's business when he provided the erroneous information. 
(f)  Interest shall be charged on the late payment of the tax from the due date until the date paid without regard to fault or other reason for the late payment. Whenever an assessment of additional or omitted tax by the treasurer is found to be erroneous, all interest and penalty charged and collected on the amount of the assessment found to be erroneous shall be refunded together with interest on the refund from the date of payment or the due date, whichever is later. Interest shall be paid on the refund of any tax paid under this chapter from the date of payment or due date, whichever is later, whether attributable to an amended return or other reason. Interest on any refund shall be paid at the same rate charged under the Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916. 
No interest shall accrue on an adjustment of estimated tax liability to actual liability at the conclusion of a base year. No interest shall be paid on a refund or charged on a late payment, in event of such adjustment, provided the refund or the late payment is made not more than thirty (30) days from (i) the date of the payment that created the refund, or (ii) the due date of the tax, whichever is later. 
(Ord. No. 42, 12-11-96) 
Sec. 14-5. - Situs of gross receipts. 
(a)  General rule. Whenever the tax imposed by this chapter is measured by gross receipts, the gross receipts included in the taxable measure shall be only those gross receipts attributed to the exercise of a licensable privilege at a definite place of business within the town. In the case of activities conducted outside of a definite place of business, such as during a visit to a customer location, the gross receipts shall be attributed to the definite place of business from which such activities are initiated, directed, or controlled. The situs of gross receipts for different classifications of business shall be attributed to one or more definite places of business or offices as follows: 
(1)  The gross receipts of a contractor shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which his services are performed, or if his services are not performed at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which his services are directed or controlled, unless the contractor is subject to the provisions of the Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3715. 
(2)  The gross receipts of a retailer or wholesaler shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which sales solicitation activities occur, or if sales solicitation activities do not occur at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which sales solicitation activities are directed or controlled; however, a wholesaler or distribution house subject to a license tax measured by purchases shall determine the situs of its purchases by the definite place of business at which or from which deliveries of the purchased goods, ware and merchandise are made to customers. Any wholesaler who is subject to license tax in two (2) or more localities and who is subject to multiple taxation because the localities use different measures, may apply to the department of taxation for a determination as to the proper measure of purchases and gross receipts subject to license tax in each locality. 
(3)  The gross receipts of a business renting tangible personal property shall be attributed to the definite place of business from which the tangible personal property is rented or, if the property is not rented from any definite place of business, then the definite place of business at which the rental of such property is managed. 
(4)  The gross receipts from the performance of services shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which the services are performed or, if not performed at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which the services are directed or controlled. 
(b)  Apportionment. If the licensee has more than one definite place of business and it is impractical or impossible to determine to which definite place of business gross receipts should be attributed under the general rule [and the affected jurisdictions are unable to reach an apportionment agreement], except as to circumstances set forth in the Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3709, the gross receipts of the business shall be apportioned between the definite places of business on the basis of payroll. Gross receipts shall not be apportioned to a definite place of business unless some activities under the applicable general rule occurred at, or were controlled from, such definite place of business. Gross receipts attributable to a definite place of business in another jurisdiction shall not be attributed to the town solely because the other jurisdiction does not impose a tax on the gross receipts attributable to the definite place of business in such other jurisdiction. 
(c)  Agreements. The treasurer may enter into agreements with any other political subdivision of Virginia concerning the manner in which gross receipts shall be apportioned among definite places of business. However, the sum of the gross receipts apportioned by the agreement shall not exceed the total gross receipts attributable to all of the definite places of business affected by the agreement. Upon being notified by a taxpayer that its method of attributing gross receipts is fundamentally inconsistent with the method of one or more political subdivisions in which the taxpayer is licensed to engage in business and that the difference has, or is likely to, result in taxes on more than one hundred (100) percent of its gross receipts from all locations in the affected jurisdictions, the treasurer shall make a good faith effort to reach an apportionment agreement with the other political subdivisions involved. 
(Ord. No. 42, 12-11-96) 
Sec. 14-6. - Limitations and extensions. 
(a)  Where, before the expiration of the time prescribed for the assessment of any license tax imposed pursuant to this chapter, both the treasurer and the taxpayer have consented in writing to its assessment after such time, the tax may be assessed at any time prior to the expiration of the period agreed upon. The period so agreed upon may be extended by subsequent agreements in writing made before the expiration of the period previously agreed upon. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3903, the treasurer shall assess the local license tax omitted because of fraud or failure to apply for a license for the current license year and the six (6) preceding years. 
(c)  The period for collecting any local license tax shall not expire prior to the period specified in the Code of Virginia, §58.1-3940, two (2) years after the date of assessment if the period for assessment has been extended pursuant to this subdivision, two (2) years after the final determination of an appeal for which collection has been stayed pursuant to the following subsection 14-7(b) or 14-7(d) of this chapter, or two (2) years after the final decision in a court application pursuant to the Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3984 or similar law for which collection has been stayed, whichever is later. 
(Ord. No. 42, 12-11-96) 
Sec. 14-7. - Appeals and rulings. 
(a)  Any person assessed with a licensing tax under this chapter as the result of an audit may apply within ninety (90) days from the date of assessment to the treasurer for a correction of the assessment. The application must be filed in good faith and sufficiently identify the taxpayer, audit period, remedy sought, each alleged error in the assessment, the grounds upon which the taxpayer relies, and any other facts relevant to the taxpayer's contention. The treasurer may hold a conference with the taxpayer if requested by the taxpayer, or require submission of additional information and documents, further audit, or other evidence deemed necessary for a proper and equitable determination of the applications. The assessment shall be deemed prima facie correct. The treasurer shall undertake a full review of the taxpayer's claims and issue a determination to the taxpayer setting forth its position. Every assessment pursuant to an audit shall be accompanied by a written explanation of the taxpayer's right to seek correction and the specific procedure to be followed in the jurisdiction (e.g., the name and address to which an application should be directed). 
(b)  Provided an application is made within ninety (90) days of an assessment, collection activity shall be suspended until a final determination is issued by the treasurer, unless the treasurer determines that collection would be jeopardized by delay or that the taxpayer has not responded to a request for relevant information after a reasonable time. Interest shall accrue in accordance with the provisions of subsection 14-4(f) of this chapter, but no further penalty shall be imposed while collection action is suspended. The term "jeopardized by delay" includes a finding that the application is frivolous, or that a taxpayer desires (i) to depart quickly from the locality, (ii) to remove his property therefrom, (iii) to conceal himself or his property therein, or (iv) to do any other act tending to prejudice, or to render wholly or partially ineffectual, proceedings to collect the tax for the period in question. 
(c)  Any person assessed with a license tax under this chapter as a result of an audit may apply within ninety (90) days of the determination by the treasurer on an application pursuant to subsection 14-7(a) above to the tax commissioner for a correction of such assessment. The tax commissioner shall issue a determination to the taxpayer within ninety (90) days of receipt of the taxpayers' application, unless the taxpayer and the treasurer are notified that a longer period will be required. The application shall be treated as an application pursuant to the Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1821, and the tax commissioner may issue an order correcting such assessment pursuant to the Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3984. However, the burden shall be on the party making the application to show that the ruling of the tax commission is erroneous. Neither the tax commissioner nor the department of taxation shall be made a party to an application to correct an assessment merely because the tax commissioner has ruled on it. 
(d)  On receipt of a notice of intent to file an appeal to the tax commissioner under subsection 14-7(c) above, the treasurer shall further suspend collection activity until a final determination is issued by the tax commissioner, unless the treasurer determines that collection would be jeopardized by delay or that the taxpayer has not responded to a request for relevant information after a reasonable time. Interest shall accrue in accordance with the provision of subsection 14-4(f), but no further penalty shall be imposed while collection action is suspended. The term "jeopardized by delay" shall have the same meaning as set forth in subsection 14-7(b) above. 
(e)  Any taxpayer may request a written ruling regarding the application of the tax to a specific situation from the treasurer. Any person requesting such a ruling must provide all the relevant facts for the situation and may present a rationale for the basis of an interpretation of the law most favorable to the taxpayer. Any misrepresentation or change in the applicable law or the factual situation as presented in the ruling request shall invalidate any such ruling issued. A written ruling may be revoked or amended prospectively if (i) there is a change in the law, a court decision, or (ii) the assessor notifies the taxpayer of a change in the policy or interpretation upon which the ruling was based. However, any person who acts on a written ruling which later becomes invalid shall be deemed to have acted in good faith during the period in which such ruling was in effect. 
(Ord. No. 42, 12-11-96) 
Sec. 14-8. - Recordkeeping and audits. 
    Every person who is assessable with a license tax shall keep sufficient records to enable the assessor to verify the correctness of the tax paid for the license years assessable and to enable the treasurer to ascertain what is the correct amount of tax that was assessable for each of those years. All such records, books of accounts and other information shall be open to inspection and examination by the treasurer in order to allow the treasurer to establish whether a particular receipt is directly attributable to the taxable privilege exercised within the town. The treasurer shall provide the taxpayer with the option to conduct the audit in the taxpayer's local business office, if the records are maintained there. In the event the records are maintained outside this jurisdiction, copies of the appropriate books and records shall be sent to the treasurer's office upon demand. 
(Ord. No. 42, 12-11-96) 
Sec. 14-9. - Exclusions and deductions from "gross receipts". 
(a)  General rule. Gross receipts for license tax purposes shall not include any amount not derived from the exercise of the licensed privilege to engage in a business or profession in the ordinary course of business or profession. 
(b)  The following items shall be excluded from gross receipts: 
(1)  Amounts received and paid to the United States, the Commonwealth or any county, city or town for the Virginia retail sales or use tax, or for any local sales tax or any local excise tax on cigarettes, for any federal or state excise taxes on motor fuels. 
(2)  Any amount representing the liquidation of a debt or conversion of another asset to the extent that the amount is attributable to a transaction previously taxed (e.g., the factoring of accounts receivable created by sales which have been included in taxable receipts even though the creation of such debt and factoring are a regular part of its business). 
(3)  Any amount representing returns and allowances granted by the business to its customer. 
(4)  Receipts which are the proceeds of a loan transaction in which the licensee is the obligor. 
(5)  Receipts representing the return of principal of a loan transaction in which the licensee is the creditor, or the return of principal or basis upon the sale of a capital asset. 
(6)  Rebates and discounts taken or received on account of purchases by the licensee. A rebate or other incentive offered to induce the recipient to purchase certain goods or services from a person other than the offeror, and which the recipient assigns to the licensee in consideration of the sale of goods and services shall not be considered a rebate or discount to the licensee, but shall be included in the licensee's gross receipts together with any handling or other fees related to the incentive. 
(7)  Withdrawals from inventory for purposes other than sale or distribution and for which no consideration is received and the occasional sale or exchange of assets other than inventory, whether or not a gain or loss is recognized for federal income tax purposes. 
(8)  Investment income not directly related to the privilege exercised by a licensable business not classified as rendering financial services. This exclusion shall apply to interest on bank accounts of the business, and to interest, dividends and other income derived from the investment of its own finds in securities and other types of investments unrelated to the licensed privilege. This exclusion shall not apply to interest, late fees and similar income attributable to an installment sale or other transaction that occurred in the regular course of business. 
(c)  The following shall be deducted from gross receipts or gross purchases that would otherwise be taxable: 
(1)  Any amount paid for computer hardware and software that are sold to a United States federal or state government entity provided that such property was purchased within two (2) years of the sale to said entity by the original purchaser who shall have been contractually obligated at the time of purchase to resell such property to a state or federal government entity. This deduction shall not occur until the time of resale and shall apply to only the original cost of the property and not to its resale price, and the deduction shall not apply to any of the tangible personal property which was the subject of the original resale contract if it is not resold to a state or federal government entity in accordance with the original contract obligation. 
(Ord. No. 42, 12-11-96) 
Sec. 14-10. - License fee and tax. 
    Every person or business subject to licensure under the ordinance shall be assessed and required to pay annually. 
(a)  A fee for the issuance of such license in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00); and 
(b)  In addition to the license fee specified in subsection (a) above, and except as may be otherwise provided in the Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3712, 58.1-3712.1 and 58.1-3713, every such person or business with annual gross receipts shall be assessed and required to pay annually a license tax on all the gross receipts of such persons includable as provided in this chapter at a rate set for the below for the class of enterprise listed: 
1.  For contractors and persons constructing for their own account for sale, sixteen cents ($0.16) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of gross receipts; 
2.  For retailers, twenty cents ($0.20) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of gross receipts; 
3.  For financial, real estate and professional services, forty-five cents ($0.45) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of gross receipts; 
4.  For repair, personal and business services and all other businesses and occupations not specifically listed or exempted in this chapter or otherwise by law, thirty-six cents ($0.36) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of gross receipts; 
5.  For wholesalers, twenty cents ($0.20) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of purchases; 
6.  For carnivals, circuses and speedways, one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each performance held in this jurisdiction; 
7.  For fortune tellers, clairvoyants and practitioners of palmistry, five hundred dollars ($500.00) per year; 
8.  For massage parlors, one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per year; 
9.  For itinerant merchants or peddlers, one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year; 
10.  For photographers, thirty dollars ($30.00) per year; 
11.  For permanent coliseums, arenas or auditoriums having a maximum capacity in excess of ten thousand (10,000) persons, open to the public, one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per year; 
12.  For savings and loan associations and credit unions, fifty dollars ($50.00) per year; and 
13.  For direct sellers as defined in the Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3719.1 with total annual sales in excess of four thousand dollars ($4,000.00), twenty cents ($0.20) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of total annual retail sales or five cents ($0.05) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of total annual wholesale sales, whichever is applicable. 
(Ord. No. 42, 12-11-96) 
Sec. 14-11. - Display of license. 
    Every person required to pay a license tax or to obtain any tag or sign under the provisions of this chapter shall keep the license tag or sign in a convenient place and whenever required to do so shall exhibit the same to any authorized representative of the town. No license measured by volume of business shall be required to be publicly displayed. 
(Ord. No. 42, 12-11-96) 
Sec. 14-12. - Location of business, etc., to conform to zoning law. 
    The treasurer shall not issue a license for conducting any business, trade or occupation at a location where the conducting of such business, trade or occupation at that location is prohibited by the zoning ordinance of the town. 
(Ord. No. 42, 12-11-96) 
Sec. 14-13. - Refusal to issue. 
    The town treasurer shall have the right and authority to refuse to issue any licenses, permit, decal, etc., as required by this chapter, to any person who is indebted to the town for personal property, food or lodging taxes. 
(Ord. No. 42, 12-11-96) 
Sec. 14-14. - Refusal to allow treasurer to audit books, etc.; penalty. 
    Any person who shall refuse to permit the treasurer to examine and audit his records, books, and papers pertaining to the gross receipts of that person shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned for not more than twelve (12) months, or both. This penalty shall likewise apply to any person who shall fail or refuse to bring his records, books, and papers pertaining to gross receipts to the office of the treasurer or examination and audit on request by the treasurer for such production. 
(Ord. No. 42, 12-11-96) 
Sec. 14-15. - Expiration and proration. 
(a)  All license taxes issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire on the first day of March of each year, except where it is otherwise specifically provided. There shall be not abatement from or proration of any license tax imposed hereunder; except, that any person who pays a flat rate annual license shall pay a prorated fee according to the following schedule: 
(1)  If the license is secured on or after April first but before July first of any year, three-fourths (3/4) of the total license fee shall be paid. 
(2)  If on or after July first but before October first of any year, one-half (1/2) of the total license fee shall be paid. 
(3)  If on or after October first but before December thirty-first of any one (1) year, one-fourth (1/4) of the license fee shall be paid. 
This schedule shall not apply to any annual license fee which is not over ten dollars ($10.00). No proration of any license tax imposed hereunder shall be so applied as to permit the payment of any sum less than ten dollars ($10.00) for the issuance of any license which shall run less than the full calendar year. The foregoing provision shall not apply to any gross receipts licenses issued under this chapter or to any license computed upon the amount of sales or contracts made or done by the licensee during the preceding year nor shall this provision apply to any license taxes, the proration of which is expressly prohibited under other provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Motor vehicle license taxes shall be prorated as provided in section 14-27. 
(Ord. No. 42, 12-11-96) 
Sec. 14-16. - License inspector. 
    The town manager shall designate some person to act as license inspector for the town and shall designate such persons to act as deputy license inspectors as he may deem necessary and proper and they shall at all times be under the supervision and control of the town manager. Police powers are hereby conferred upon the license inspector and all deputy license inspectors while engaged in performing their duties as such under the provisions of this chapter and they shall exercise all the powers and authority of police officers in performing those duties. The license inspector or deputy license inspectors shall ascertain the name of each person engaged in conducting any business, occupation or profession in the town without having obtained a license therefore and the name of each person having a slot machine in any place mentioned in this chapter without having obtained a license therefor. The license inspector or deputy license inspector may have a warrant of arrest issued for any such person charging him with a violation of the provisions of this chapter and may execute the warrant upon that person in the manner provided by law. When in the presence of the license inspector or deputy license inspector any person conducts any business, occupation or profession or has a slot machine in his possession or under his control without a license required by this chapter, the license inspector or deputy license inspector may arrest such person and take him before the nearest or most accessible magistrate. 
(Ord. No. 42, 12-11-96) 
Sec. 14-17. - Designation of assistants. 
    The town manager shall designate such persons in his department as may be necessary to serve as assessors, collectors and clerks in the assessing, collection and issuance of licenses under the provisions of this chapter and such person within his department in all respects shall be acting as agents of the town manager and under his supervision and control fulfilling the terms and conditions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 42, 12-11-96) 
Sec. 14-18. - Statutes adopted. 
(a)  As to all questions in regard to the duty and conduct of officers of the town in collecting and enforcing the taxes imposed by this chapter and in regard to questions of constructions and for definitions of terms used in this chapter and the rules and regulations applicable to putting the same in operation, reference is hereby made to the laws of the state for the assessment, levy and the collection of taxes for the current year or to so much thereof as is applicable to this chapter and is not inconsistent with it and the general ordinances of the town; and for the conduct and guidance of the officers of the town and other parties affected by this chapter and for fixing their powers, rights, duties and obligations, the provisions of these laws, so far as applicable, are hereby adopted, without being specifically herein quoted. 
(b)  The town attorney is authorized by general regulation duly recorded with the clerk of the council to determine the construction or application of any doubtful or disputed provision of this chapter; provided, that such determination shall be subject to judicial review as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 42, 12-11-96) 
Sec. 14-19. - Subjects not specifically mentioned. 
    Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to repeal any tax imposed by this chapter upon person, property, admissions or any subject not herein mentioned. In case any business, employment or profession is not specifically mentioned in this chapter, a town license tax of thirty dollars ($30.00) or thirty-six cents ($0.36) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of gross receipts, whichever is larger, is hereby imposed for the privilege of conducting such business, employment or profession in the town. 
(Ord. No. 42, 12-11-96) 
Sec. 14-20. - Penalties and fines-Generally. 
(a)  Any person conducting a business, trade or occupation or doing other things for which a license tax is required under this chapter without first obtaining such license or who shall fail to obtain any tag or sign required under this chapter shall be liable to a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1000.00), or imprisonment for not more than twelve (12) months, or both, and each day of default shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Such conviction shall not relieve any person from the payment of any license as imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 42, 12-11-96) 
Sec. 14-21. - Same-Failure to file required statement; making false statements. 
    If any person subject to the payment of a license tax required under this chapter shall fail or refuse to file the statement required by this chapter or shall make a false statement in the affidavit required by this chapter, he shall on conviction thereof be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or be confined to jail not more than twelve (12) months, or both, in the discretion of the mayor, court or jury. 
(Ord. No. 42, 12-11-96) 
Sec. 14-22. - Same-Failure to appear before town officer; produce records, etc. 
    Any person who shall fail to appear before the proper enforcement officer of the town and produce the records, books and papers when duly summoned or shall refuse to permit the proper enforcement officer to make or cause to be made such other and further investigation and audit of the books and papers shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned for not more than twelve (12) months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 42, 12-11-96) 
Secs. 14-23-14-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE TAX SCHEDULE AND GENERAL REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO CERTAIN BUSINESSES NOT COVERED IN ARTICLE I[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 42, adopted December 11, 1996, repealed §§ 14-51-75 and added new §§ 14-51-14-60. Formerly, such sections pertained to similar provisions and derived from §§ 15-35-15-37, 15-41, 15-45, 15-48, 15-50, 15-53, 15-55, 15-56, 15-62, 15-64-15-68, 15-70, 15-71, 15-74-15-77, 15-79; Ord. of 5-10-90(2); Ord. No. 10, 2-12-92. 

Sec. 14-51. - Alcoholic beverages. 
    License tax shall be assessed and collected by the same officer assessing and collecting other municipal licenses from persons licensed by the state alcoholic beverage control board to manufacture, bottle, or sell within this town in the following sum: 
(1)  For each distiller's license five hundred dollars ($500.00) per year. No such license tax shall be prorated or required for any person who shall manufacture not more than five thousand (5,000) gallons of alcohol or spirits, or both, during the license year. 
(2)  For each winery license, if to manufacture not in excess of five thousand (5,000) gallons of wine during the year in which the license is issued, five hundred dollars ($500.00); if to manufacture more than five thousand (5,000) gallons during such year, five hundred dollars ($500.00) with no proration. 
(3)  For each brewery license, five hundred dollars ($500.00) per year, not prorated. 
(4)  For each bottler's license, one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year, not prorated. 
(5)  For each wholesale beer merchant license, seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
(6)  For each wholesale wine merchant license, fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(7)  For each retail on-premises wine and beer license, thirty-seven dollars and fifty cents ($37.50), not prorated. 
(8)  For each retail on-premises beer licenses, twenty-five dollars ($25.00), not prorated. 
(9)  For each retail on-premises wine licenses, thirty dollars ($30.00), not prorated. 
(10)  For each retail off-premises wine and beer licenses, thirty-seven dollars and fifty cents ($37.50), not prorated. 
(11)  For each retail off-premises beer license, twenty-five dollars ($25.00), not prorated. 
(12)  For each retail off-premises wine license, thirty dollars ($30.00), not prorated. 
(13)  For each combined wine and beer off-premises and on-premises license, seventy-five dollars ($75.00), not prorated. 
(14)  These terms, wherever used or referred to in this chapter shall have the same meanings as set forth in Code of Virginia, § 4-2, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context. 
(15)  No license under this chapter shall be issued unless such person shall hold or shall secure simultaneously therewith the proper state license provided for in The Alcoholic Beverage Control Act (Code of Virginia, § 4-1 et seq.). If any person shall hold any local license without at the same time holding the proper state license provided for by such Act, the local license shall, during the period when the person does not hold the proper state license, confer no right, powers or privileges under the provisions of this chapter. 
(16)  In imposing local wholesale merchant's license taxes measured by purchases, local retail merchant's license taxes measured by sales, and local restaurant license taxes measured by sales, alcoholic beverages shall be included in the base for measuring such local license taxes the same as if the alcoholic beverages were nonalcoholic. No local alcoholic beverage license levied under this section shall be construed as exempting any licensee from any local merchants' or local restaurant license tax, but such local merchants' and local restaurant license taxes shall be in addition to the alcoholic beverage license taxes levied hereby. In ascertaining the liability of a beer wholesaler to local merchants' license taxation under this section, and in computing the local wholesale merchants' license tax on such beer wholesaler, purchases of beer up to a stated amount shall be disregarded, which stated amount shall be the amount of beer purchases which would be necessary to produce a local wholesale merchants' license tax equal to the local wholesale beer license tax paid by such wholesaler. In ascertaining the liability of a wholesale wine distributor to local merchants' license taxation under this section, and in computing the local wholesale merchants' license tax on such wholesale wine distributor, purchases of wine up to a stated amount shall be disregarded, which stated amount shall be the amount of wine purchases which would be necessary to produce a local wholesale merchants' license tax equal to the local wholesale wine distributors' license tax paid by such wholesale wine distributor. If any such beer wholesaler or wholesale wine distributor pays no separate beverage license tax under Code of Virginia, Tit. 4, Ch. 2 (§ 4-99 et seq.) by reason of Code of Virginia, § 4-39, the words "beer" and "wine" as used in the preceding sentence shall be construed to include the beverages covered by such chapter. 
(Ord. No. 42, 12-11-96) 
Sec. 14-52. - Mixed beverages. 
(a)  Every person holding mixed beverage, restaurant and caterers' licenses for establishments located within the town shall be taxed the following sums: 
(1)  Persons operating restaurants, including restaurants located on premises of and operated by hotels or motels: 
(a)  Two hundred dollars ($200.00) per annum for each restaurant with a seating capacity at tables for one (1) to one hundred (100) persons. 
b.  Three hundred fifty ($350.00) per annum for each restaurant with a seating capacity at tables for more than one hundred (100) but not more than one hundred fifty (150) persons. 
c.  Five hundred dollars ($500.00) per annum for each restaurant with a seating capacity at tables for more than one hundred fifty (150) persons. 
d.  Five hundred dollars ($500.00) per annum for each caterer. 
e.  Mixed beverage special events licenses, ten dollars ($10.00) for each day of each event. 
(b)  No license under this section shall be issued unless such person shall hold or shall secure simultaneously therewith the proper state license provided for in The Alcoholic Beverage Control Act (Code of Virginia, § 4-1 et seq.). If any person shall hold any local license without at the same time holding the proper state license, the local license shall, during the period when the person does not hold the proper state license, confer no right, powers or privileges under the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  In imposing retail merchants' license taxes measured by gross receipts under any other section of this chapter, there shall be included mixed beverages in the base for measuring such license taxes. No mixed beverage license levied under this section shall be construed as exempting any licensee from any merchant's license tax and such merchant's license tax shall be in addition to the mixed beverage taxes levied hereby. 
(Ord. No. 42, 12-11-96; Ord. No. 128, 3-10-2010) 
Sec. 14-53. - Auction sales by retailers, wholesalers or manufacturers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any retail merchant, wholesale merchant or manufacturer to sell, dispose of or offer for sale at public auction or cause or permit to be sold, disposed of or offered for sale at public auction any merchandise, product or commodity whatsoever, whether the same be their property or whether they sell the same as agents or employees for others; provided, that this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Sales by trustees or receivers of a retailer, wholesaler or manufacturer who is actually going out of business or where the sale by such trustee or receiver is a bona fide sale to subject the property sold for the benefit of the creditors of the retailer, wholesaler or manufacturer. 
(2)  Sales in judicial proceedings or sales on behalf of licensed pawnbrokers or unredeemed pledges in the manner provided by law. 
(3)  Sales of household or kitchen furniture or other personal property which has been in use, except that where any local or nonresident merchant shall purchase or take on consignment any used or secondhand articles for the purpose of reselling the same, the sale thereof at public auction in the town is expressly prohibited under the terms of this section. 
(4)  Sale of the stock on hand of any person who shall have held a merchant's license for a period of one (1) year preceding the sale and shall have been continuously in business in the town as a retail or wholesale merchant or manufacturer and who is going out of business in the town. 
(b)  The sale at public auction of the stock on hand of such merchant or manufacturer shall be held on successive days, Sundays and legal holidays excepted, and shall not continue for more than thirty (30) days in all; provided that: 
(1)  The merchandise shall be sold at public auction for cash only. 
(2)  The merchant shall publicly and conspicuously advertise on the front of the storehouse or building in which the auction sale is held the fact that the merchant is going out of business. 
(3)  At the auction sale no merchandise shall be offered except what has been a bona fide part of the stock of merchandise of the merchant for more than sixty (60) days preceding the commencement of the auction sale. 
(4)  The merchant before the commencement of the auction sale shall file with the treasurer an inventory of the merchandise to be offered at the auction sale, with the cost price to the merchant of each article shown thereon and with an affidavit thereto attached made by the merchant or his duly authorized representative to the effect that the inventory is true and correct, that the merchant is going out of business and that the merchandise to be offered at the auction sale is listed on the inventory and has been a bona fide part of the merchant's stock of merchandise for more than sixty (60) days preceding the commencement of the auction. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, dispose of or offer for sale at public auction or cause or permit to be sold, disposed of or offered for sale at public auction, any merchandise whatsoever, whether the same be his property or whether he sells the same as agent or employee of others between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. or at any time, except in a well-lighted place so that each article offered for sale may be plainly seen by all parties bidding thereon and all announcements made relating to the character, make or value of the article offered must be true and be made in a voice loud enough to be distinctly heard by all parties bidding thereon. 
(c)  Each article sold or offered for sale shall constitute a separate offense under this section. 
(Ord. No. 42, 12-11-96) 
Sec. 14-54. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 130, adopted Sept. 29, 2010 rescinded the former § 14-54 which pertained to motor carriers and derived from Ord. No. 42, 12-11-96. 
Sec. 14-55. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 130, adopted Sept. 29, 2010 rescinded the former § 14-55 which pertained to motor vehicles and derived from Ord. No. 42, 12-11-96; Ord. No. 63, 6-12-2002. 
Sec. 14-56. - Public utilities. 
    Any person who shall engage in the business of furnishing heat, light and power in town, whether by electricity or gas, shall pay a license tax equal to one-half (1/2) of one (1) percent of the gross annual receipts accruing to that person from such business in the town; provided, that there shall be deducted any sum paid by the person to the town as merchant's license tax; further provided, that this deduction shall not include motor vehicle license taxes. 
(Ord. No. 42, 12-11-96) 
Sec. 14-57. - Soliciting subscriptions and contributions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or his agents to solicit subscriptions in money or contributions of any kind whatsoever to any cause or object without first securing a permit from the mayor, or in the absence of the mayor, from the town manager; provided, that this section shall not apply to any subscribers or contributors solicited by any person by authority of any church, hospital, community chest or purely religious body, congregation or political party. 
(b)  Any person violating a provision of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-6 for each time such subscription or contribution is made by any such person. 
(Ord. No. 42, 12-11-96) 
Sec. 14-58. - Taxicabs. 
(a)  Except as provided in Code of Virginia, § 56-291.3:3, every person operating a taxicab for hire on the streets of the town shall pay a license tax as follows: 
(1)  Vehicle of five-passenger capacity or less ..... $ 50.00 
(2)  Vehicle of six- or seven-passenger capacity ..... 60.00 
(3)  Vehicle of eight-, nine- or ten-passenger capacity ..... 75.00 
(4)  Vehicle of more than ten-passenger capacity ..... 100.00 
(b)  Each licensee shall have complied with all the provisions of the Code relative to taxicabs before any taxicab operator's license is issued. 
(Ord. No. 42, 12-11-96) 
Sec. 14-59. - Telegraph companies. 
(a)  Every person engaged in the telegraph business in the town shall pay an annual license tax of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the privilege of doing business in the town; provided, that this license shall not be construed as including any business done to or from points without the state or any business done for the United States, the state, their officers or agents. 
(b)  The tax levied by this chapter on telephone and telegraph companies is for the use of the streets and alleys of the town and for the police protection and for business done wholly within the town and other points in this state. 
(Ord. No. 42, 12-11-96) 
Sec. 14-60. - Telephone companies. 
    The license tax on telephone companies shall be an amount equal to one-half (1/2) of one (1) percent of the gross annual receipts, excluding charges for long distance telephone calls, from the rentals received from subscriptions or stations located within the town during the last preceding calendar year, but excluding business done between the town and points without this stated and messages sent by the United States, this state, their agents or officers. 
(Ord. No. 42, 12-11-96) 
Secs. 14-61-14-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TAX SCHEDULE AND GENERAL REGULATIONS FOR COIN-OPERATED MACHINES OR DEVICES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Amusement machines, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3720 et seq. 

Sec. 14-91. - Licenses-Tax. 
    Any person selling, leasing, owning, renting or otherwise furnishing or providing a coin-operated machine or device operated on the coin-in-slot principle shall be deemed a "retail merchant" and shall pay an annual license tax, not prorated, as imposed on other retail merchants under section 14-70. This section shall not apply to pay telephones, stamp machines, machines vending sanitary napkins or coin-operated locks on toilets. 
(Code 1973, § 15-80) 
State Law reference- Amusement machines, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3720, 58.1-3721. 
Sec. 14-92. - Same-Transferability; payment. 
    The licenses provided for in this article are not transferable and shall not be prorated. The total license tax assessed shall be paid in one (1) sum at the time the license is issued. 
(Code 1973, § 15-81) 
Sec. 14-93. - Same-Oath of applicant. 
    Before issuing any license under this article, the town treasurer shall require the applicant to state an oath that no element of chance enters into the operation of the machine for which a license is desired and that all information given on the application is true and correct. The applicant shall also provide the treasurer a list of the machines and their location. 
(Code 1973, § 15-82) 
Sec. 14-94. - Unlawful to keep unlicensed machines. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person other than one duly licensed as a slot machine operator to have on his premises or on any premises under his control, or to keep or place or permit to be placed or kept on such premises any machine or device for which a license is required by this article, unless such machine or device has been licensed and the proper license tax paid therefor. 
(Code 1973, § 15-83) 
Sec. 14-95. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-6. The slot machine or other device shall be forfeited to the town to be disposed of at public auction after having been advertised in the local newspaper, with the proceeds from the sale to be paid into the town treasury. 
(Code 1973, § 15-85) 
Secs. 14-96-14-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS 

Sec. 14-111. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section: 
    Dealer means any person engaged at any location in the town in the business of (1) purchasing precious metals or gems; (2) making loans for which precious metals or gems are received and held as security; (3) removing in any manner precious metals or gems from manufactured articles not then owned by the person; or (4) buying, acquiring, or selling precious metals or gems removed from manufactured articles, provided, however, that retail merchants personally located within the town shall be exempt insofar as they make precious metals or gems for their inventories. "Dealers" shall include merchants whose business is itinerant in the town. As used herein "dealer" includes employers and principals on whose behalf the purchase or loan was made and all employees and agents who make such purchases and loans. When any act is required of a corporation, it shall be performed by its president. 
    Gems means any item containing or having any precious or semiprecious stones customarily used in jewelry or ornamentation. 
    Precious metals means any item containing as part of its composition in any degree gold, silver, platinum, platinum alloys or pewter. 
(Code 1973, § 15-93) 
Sec. 14-112. - Permit required. 
    No dealer shall purchase precious metals or gems, make loans for which precious metals or gems are received and held as security or otherwise engage in the activities of a dealer without first obtaining a permit from the chief of police as provided herein and without complying with all other provisions of this chapter. Possession of a permit issued in another locality shall not relieve a dealer of the obligation to obtain a permit from the chief of police. 
(Code 1973, § 15-94) 
State Law reference- Permit generally, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4108. 
Sec. 14-113. - Method of obtaining permit. 
(a)  The permit required herein shall be issued by the chief of police or his designee upon payment of a two-hundred-dollar application fee and satisfaction of the requirements herein. The application fee shall not be imposed on subsequent applications so long as the business has been operated continuously without interruption since the issuance of the previous permit. The applicant shall be issued a permit if he satisfies the chief of police of his good character and he has not been convicted within the past seven (7) years of a felony or a crime of moral turpitude. The permit shall be denied if the applicant has been denied a permit or has had a permit revoked under this article. 
(b)  Information required on the application shall include the applicant's full name, any aliases, address, age, date of birth, sex and fingerprints, and the name, address and telephone number of the applicant's employer, if any, and the location of the place of business of the dealer. No permit shall be valid for more than six (6) months from the date of issuance but may be renewed in the same manner as the initial permit is obtained with an annual permit fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(c)  Before a permit may be issued, the dealer must have all weighing devices used in his business inspected and approved by local or state weights and measures officials and present written evidence of such approval to the chief of police. 
(d)  If the dealer does not operate continuously from the date of obtaining his permit, he shall notify the chief of police of any ceasing or renewing of business or change in location. Failure to operate on weekends or recognized holidays shall not be construed as a ceasing or disruption. 
(e)  The business of a dealer shall be conducted only from the fixed and permanent location specified in his application for a permit. 
(Code 1973, § 15-95) 
Editor's note- Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4108 requires a $200.00 fee. 
Sec. 14-114. - Permit nontransferable, display. 
    The license issued under this article shall be a personal privilege and shall not be transferable, nor shall there be any abatement of the fee for such license by reason of the fact that the dealer shall have exercised the privilege for any period of time less than for which it was granted. The license shall at all times be displayed prominently by the dealer on his business premises. 
(Code 1973, § 15-96) 
Sec. 14-115. - False statements. 
    Any false statement made on the application form voids the license ab initio. 
(Code 1973, § 15-97) 
Sec. 14-116. - Information from sellers. 
    Dealers shall ascertain the name, address and age of sellers of precious metals or gems and shall require the seller to verify same by some form of identification issued by a governmental agency, which identification must show as a part of it the picture of the person so identified. 
(Code 1973, § 15-98) 
Sec. 14-117. - Records to be kept; copy furnished to local authorities; inspection of records. 
(a)  Every dealer shall keep at his place of business an accurate and legible record of each purchase or loan of precious metals or gems. The record of each purchase shall be retained by the dealer for at least twenty-four (24) months. The information in such records shall also appear on bills of sale, the form of which shall be provided by the dealer, one (1) copy of which is to be retained by the dealer, one (1) copy to be delivered during regular town work hours to the chief of police at his office within twenty-four (24) hours of the sale, and one (1) copy to be delivered to the seller of such precious metals or gems. If the purchase or loan occurs during a weekend then the delivery to the chief of police shall be made no later than 10:00 a.m. of the next regular town workday. The required information is as follows: 
(1)  The name of the dealer and his employer or principal if any. 
(2)  A complete description of each item purchased including weight of the precious metals or gems purchased by the dealer such description to include all names, initials, serial numbers or other identifying marks or monograms appearing on the item in question and the price paid for each item. 
(3)  The date, time and place of receiving the items purchased. 
(4)  The full name, residence address, work place, home and work telephone numbers, age, date of birth, sex, race, height, weight, hair and eye color and other identifying marks of the seller. 
(5)  Verification of the identification by the exhibition of a government-issued identification card such as a driver's license or military identification card. The record shall contain the type of identification exhibited, the issuing agency and the number thereon. 
(6)  A statement of ownership from the seller. 
(b)  The information required by subsection (a)(2) through (4) above shall appear on each bill of sale for all precious metals and gems purchased by a dealer, and a copy shall be mailed or delivered within twenty-four (24) hours of the time of purchase to the chief of police. 
(c)  Every dealer shall admit to his place of business during regular business hours the chief of police or his designee, or any law enforcement officer of the state or federal government, and shall permit such officer to examine all records required by this article and any article listed in a record which is believed by the officer to be missing or stolen. 
(Code 1973, § 15-99) 
Sec. 14-118. - Prohibited purchases. 
    No dealer shall purchase or make a loan of precious metals or gems from any seller who is under the age of eighteen (18). No dealer shall purchase or make a loan of precious metals or gems from anyone whom the dealer believes or has reason to believe is not the owner of such precious metals or gems. 
(Code 1973, § 15-100) 
Sec. 14-119. - Dealer to retain purchases. 
(a)  The dealer shall retain all precious metals or gems purchased for a minimum of ten (10) calendar days from the date on which a copy of the bill of sale is received by the chief of police. Until the expiration of this period, the dealer shall not sell, alter, or dispose of a purchased item in whole or in part, or remove it from the town. 
(b)  If a dealer performs the service of removing precious metals or gems, he shall retain the metals or gems removed and the article from which the removal was made for a period of ten (10) calendar days after receiving such article and precious metals or gems. 
(Code 1973, § 15-101) 
Sec. 14-120. - Bond or letter of credit required of dealers when permit obtained. 
(a)  Every dealer shall secure a permit as required by section 14-112, and each dealer at the time of obtaining such permit shall enter into a recognizance to the council secured by a corporate surety authorized to do business in this town, in the penal sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), conditioned upon due observance of the terms of this chapter. In lieu of a bond, a dealer may cause to be issued by a bank authorized to do business in the commonwealth a letter of credit in favor of the council for ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). 
(b)  A single bond upon an employer or principal may be written or a single letter of credit issued to cover all employees and all transactions occurring at a single location. 
(Code 1973, § 15-102) 
Sec. 14-121. - Private action on bond or letter of credit. 
    Any person aggrieved by the misconduct of any dealer who violated the provisions of this article may maintain an action for recovery in any court of proper jurisdiction against the dealer and his surety. Recovery against the surety shall be only for that amount of the judgment which is unsatisfied by the dealer. 
(Code 1973, § 15-103) 
Sec. 14-122. - Penalties; first and subsequent offenses. 
(a)  Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this article for the first offense shall be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned for not more than six (6) months. Upon conviction of any subsequent offense he shall be punished as provided in section 1-6. 
(b)  Upon the first conviction of a dealer for violation of any provision of this article, the chief of police may revoke the dealer's permit for one (1) full year from the date the conviction becomes final. Such revocation shall be mandatory upon a second conviction. 
(Code 1973, § 15-104) 
Secs. 14-123-14-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - INSURANCE, BANKRUPTCY, LIQUIDATION, FIRE, ETC., SALES 

Sec. 14-141. - Permit required, fee, etc. 
    No person shall advertise, represent or hold out in the town that any sale at retail of goods, wares or merchandise (hereinafter referred to as "goods") is an insurance, bankruptcy, insol 
vent, liquidation, assignee's, receiver's, trustee's, adjuster's, wholesaler's, manufacturer's, "going out of business," "closing out" sale or a "sale of goods" damaged by fire, smoke, water or otherwise, nor shall any person conduct such a sale, unless he shall have first obtained a permit to conduct such sale from the town treasurer. The applicant shall pay a permit fee therefor of thirty-two dollars and fifty cents ($32.50) per thirty-day period, and there shall be no abatement of such tax for any reason whatsoever. Any merchant who has been conducting a business in the town continuously for at least one (1) year immediately prior to filing such application shall pay a permit fee therefor of thirty dollars ($30.00) per thirty-day period in lieu of the tax prescribed above. 
(Code 1973, § 15-110) 
State Law reference- Permit required, maximum fee, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-223, 18.2-224. 
Sec. 14-142. - Applicability of article. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall apply to any person who shall advertise, represent or hold out in the town that any sale at retail of goods, wares or merchandise (hereinafter referred to as "goods") is an insurance, bankruptcy, insolvent, liquidation, assignee's, receiver's, trustee's, adjuster's, wholesale, manufacturer's, "going out of business" or "closing out" sale or sale of goods damaged by fire, smoke or water or otherwise. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to trustees selling under deeds of assignment or mortgages or to sheriffs, constables or other public or court officers or to any other persons acting under the license, direction or authority of any court, state or federal, selling goods in the course of their official duties. 
(Code 1973, § 15-111) 
Sec. 14-143. - Violations of article. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 15-112) 
Sec. 14-144. - License required. 
    No person shall advertise, represent, hold out, conduct, hold or carry on any sale of the character referred to in section 14-142(a), without having first obtained a license therefor pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and this article. 
(Code 1973, § 15-113) 
Sec. 14-145. - Application for license. 
(a)  The applicant for a license required by section 14-144 shall make application therefor to the treasurer, in writing and under oath, giving all the facts in regard to such sale and particularly the place and manner of conducting same, a complete inventory of the goods to be sold at such sale, the names of the persons for whom such goods were obtained, the date of delivery thereof to the person applying for the license, the place from which the same were last taken and any and all of the details necessary to fully identify the goods to be sold. Such application shall also specify the proposed period of time during which such sale shall continue. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the applicant to list on the inventory required by subsection (a) above any goods which are not part of the regular stock of the store or business, the goods of which are to be closed out at such sale, or which have been purchased by the applicant with return privileges or on consignment. 
(c)  The town treasurer shall, upon request, allow any person to inspect an application filed pursuant to this section. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make any false statement in an application filed pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1973, § 15-114) 
Sec. 14-146. - Issuance and effect of license. 
(a)  If the town treasurer shall be satisfied from the application for a license filed pursuant to section 14-145 that the proposed sale is of the character, as to all goods to be sold, which the applicant desires to advertise and conduct, and the applicant pays the license tax required, the treasurer shall issue a license to the applicant, authorizing him to advertise and conduct a sale of the particular kind mentioned in the application in accordance with the requirements of this article, for the period of time stated in the application and for which the license tax is paid. 
(b)  A license issued under this section shall be valid only for a sale of the goods in the manner and at the time and place set forth and described in the application. 
(Code 1973, § 15-115) 
Sec. 14-147. - License not assignable. 
    A license issued under this article shall not be assignable. 
(Code 1973, § 15-116) 
Sec. 14-148. - Limitation on goods to be sold. 
    At a sale conducted pursuant to a license issued under this article, no goods other than those listed in the inventory required by section 14-145 shall be sold. It shall be unlawful for any person to add to, supplement or replenish such goods from any source whatsoever, after the filing of the inventory, and thereafter to advertise the sale as being of the character set out in the application filed under this article; and each and every addition to such stock of goods and each sale of goods added thereto shall constitute a separate offense under this section. 
(Code 1973, § 15-117) 
Secs. 14-149-14-154. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BEER KEG REGISTRATION 

Sec. 14-155. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section: 
    Keg means any container capable of holding four (4) gallons or more of beer, wine or intoxicating liquor which is designed to dispense beer, wine or intoxicating liquor directly from the container for purposes of consumption. 
    Licensee shall mean any person holding a license within the town to sell beer, wine or intoxicating liquor. 
    Registration seal means any document, stamp, declaration, seal, decal, sticker or device approved by the town which is designed to be affixed to kegs and which displays a registration number and such other information as may be prescribed by the town. 
(Ord. No. 58, 9-29-2000) 
Sec. 14-156. - Registration declaration/seal requirement. 
    No licensee shall sell or lose control of any beer, wine or intoxicating liquor in a keg without having registered the sale on a form prescribed by the town and affixing a registration seal on the keg at the time of sale. 
(Ord. No. 58, 9-29-2000) 
Sec. 14-157. - Registration declaration. 
    The registration declaration shall at least contain the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the purchaser verified by valid identification as determined by rules and regulations promulgated by the town. 
(2)  The type of identification presented by the purchaser. 
(3)  A statement signed by the purchaser indicating that the purchaser is twenty-one (21) years of age or older, does not intend to allow persons under twenty-one (21) years of age to consume the alcoholic beverages purchased, that the purchaser acknowledges the penalty for providing alcohol to minors is a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, and that the purchaser will not remove or obliterate the keg registration tax affixed to the keg or allow its removal or obliteration. 
(4)  A statement signed by the purchaser indicating the physical location of where the contents of the keg will be consumed and acknowledging that the keg will be kept at that registered location until it is returned to the place of purchase. The purchaser will acknowledge that the penalty for serving the contents of the keg at a location other than shown on the registration is a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 58, 9-29-2000) 
Sec. 14-158. - Keg return-Procedure to be followed by licensee. 
    When a registered keg is returned to the licensee, the registration seal shall be removed or obliterated and note of such action shall be made on the registration records of the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 58, 9-29-2000) 
Sec. 14-159. - Violations. 
    It shall be a violation of this article for any person, except as provided above, to remove, alter, deface or obliterate any registration seal affixed to a keg, except that disposing of empty kegs made of disposable packaging shall not constitute a violation. 
(Ord. No. 58, 9-29-2000) 
Sec. 14-160. - Seizure of forfeiture of keg. 
    If any person is in possession of a keg used for or containing beer, wine or intoxicating liquor in violation of this article, then the keg and its contents shall be subject to seizure or forfeiture. 
(Ord. No. 58, 9-29-2000) 
Sec. 14-161. - Responsibility to maintain records. 
    Any licensee shall maintain a complete and accurate record of all registration forms and other documentation of the sale of kegs at the place of business designated in the permit for a period of one (1) year. Such records regarding keg sales shall be open to inspection by the town or other law enforcement officers at a reasonable date and time. 
(Ord. No. 58, 9-29-2000) 
Sec. 14-162. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates the terms of this article shall upon conviction thereof be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 58, 9-29-2000) 
Secs. 14-163-14-169. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME LICENSES 

Sec. 14-170. - Mobile homes or mobile home parks. 
(a)  All mobile home parks and all mobile homes placed or parked in or around mobile home parks shall comply with all applicable town ordinances. 
(b)  Water and/or sewer connections to mobile homes from existing water and sewer lines on private property are prohibited, unless otherwise approved by the town council. 
(c)  Every owner of a mobile home located in the town, whether in a mobile home park or outside a mobile home park, shall pay an annual license tax of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per mobile home. Every owner or manager of a mobile home park shall pay an annual business service tax of thirty-six ($.36) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of his gross receipts, plus a ten dollars ($10.00) issuance fee. 
(d)  Any person desiring to place a mobile home in the town or any person having a mobile home in the town shall apply to the town treasurer according to section 14-4. 
(e)  Upon payment of the license tax, the town treasurer shall issue the taxpayer a license plate or decal. This license plate or decal shall be attached to the mobile home in such a manner as to be plainly visible at a location nearest to a street, road or driveway. 
(f)  This section shall not apply to transient trailers, camping trailers or camping trailer parks used for recreational purposes only, nor to a dealer in new or used trailers. This section does not exempt a mobile home that is used as a business office. 
(g)  Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall upon conviction be punished by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) or more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense, and each day's failure of compliance shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 72, 5-14-2003) 
Chapter 15 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Airport, Ch. 4; animals, Ch. 5; cemeteries, Ch. 8; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 12; junkyards, car lots and automobile graveyards, Ch. 13; licenses and permits, Ch. 14; noise control, Ch. 16; peddlers and solicitors, Ch. 19; police department, Ch. 21; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23; taxicabs, Ch. 26; moving of buildings, § 6-3; driving over fire hose, § 12-6; buying or selling vehicles or parts from which identification has been removed, § 13-4; loitering, § 18-29; offenses relating to public improvements, § 18-36 et seq. 
State Law reference- Municipal powers as to the use of streets, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-14; limited access streets in municipalities, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-16; motor vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100 et seq.; local regulation of traffic, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1300 et seq.; local regulation of parking, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 15-1. - Definitions. 
    Words and phrases used and contained in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them by Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100, except where the context clearly requires a different meaning. 
(Code 1973, § 16-1) 
Sec. 15-2. - Chapter applicable to drivers of all vehicles regardless of ownership. 
    The provisions of this chapter applicable to the drivers of vehicles shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles, regardless of ownership, subject to such specific exceptions as are set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 16-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-801. 
Sec. 15-3. - Adoption of state law. 
    Pursuant to the authority of Virginia Code (1950) §46.2-1313, as amended, all of the provisions and requirements of the laws of the state contained in the Virginia Code, Title 46.2, and all of the provisions and requirements of the laws of the state contained in Virginia Code, Title 16.1, Chapter 11, Article 9, except those provisions and requirements, the violation of which constitutes a felony, and except those provisions and requirements which, by the very nature, can have no application to or within the town, are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference and made applicable within the town. References to "highways of the state" contained in such provisions and requirements hereby adopted shall be deemed to refer to the streets, highways, and other public ways within the town. Such provisions and requirements, as may be amended from time to time, are hereby adopted with necessary changes and made part hereof as fully as though set forth at length herein, and it shall be unlawful for any person, within the town, to violate or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any such provision; provided, however, that in no event shall the penalty imposed for the violation of any provision or requirement hereby adopted exceed the penalty imposed a similar offense under the Code of Virginia. 
(Code 1973, § 16-3.1; Ord. No. 172 , 7-9-2014) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1313. 
Sec. 15-4. - Powers of town manager. 
    The town manager shall have general supervision and control of the management and direction of all vehicular and pedestrian traffic and of the parking and routing of vehicles in the interest of the public safety, comfort and convenience not inconsistent with the provisions of Code of Virginia, Tit. 46.2. He may cause appropriate signs to be erected and maintained, designating school, hospital, safety zones, railway crossings, arterial streets, arterial stops, turns at intersections, traffic lanes, yield-right-of-way and such other signs as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. He shall have power to regulate traffic by means of traffic officers or semaphores or other signaling devices on any portion of the highway where traffic is heavy or continuous, or where in his judgment conditions may require, and may prohibit other than one-way traffic upon certain highways, and may regulate the use of the highways by processions and assemblages. He may adopt any such regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter as he shall deem advisable and necessary, and repeal, amend or modify any such regulation; provided, however, that such regulations, laws or rules shall not be deemed to be violated, if at the time of the alleged violation any sign or designation required under the terms of this chapter is missing, effaced, mutilated or defaced so that an ordinarily observant person under the same circumstances would not be apprised of or aware of the existence of such rule. 
(Code 1973, § 16-4) 
State Law reference- Parking regulations in towns, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220; powers of local authorities generally, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1300; designation of stop and yield right-of-way intersections, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1301. 
Sec. 15-5. - Breaking, injuring, defacing, destroying or preventing the operation of vehicle, aircraft or boat. 
    No person shall individually or in association with one (1) or more others willfully break, injure, tamper with or remove any part or parts of any vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel for the purpose of injuring, defacing or destroying such vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel, or temporarily or permanently preventing its useful operation, or for any purpose against the will or without the consent of the owner of such vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel, or shall in any other manner willfully or maliciously interfere with or prevent the running or operation of such vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel. 
(Code 1973, § 16-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-146. 
Sec. 15-6. - Entering or setting in motion, vehicle, aircraft, boat, locomotive or rolling stock of railroad; exceptions. 
    No person shall, without the consent of the owner or person in charge of a vehicle, aircraft, boat, vessel, locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad, climb into or upon such vehicle, aircraft, boat, vessel, locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad, with intent to commit any crime, malicious mischief, or injury thereto, or while a vehicle, aircraft, boat, vessel, locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad is at rest and unattended, shall attempt to manipulate any of the levers and starting crank or other device, brakes or mechanism thereof or to set into motion such vehicle, aircraft, boat, vessel, locomotive or other rolling stock of a railroad, with the intent to commit any crime, malicious mischief, or injury thereto, except that the foregoing provision shall not apply when any such act is done in an emergency or in furtherance of public safety or by or under the direction of an officer in the regulation of traffic or performance of any other official duty. 
(Code 1973, § 16-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-147. 
Sec. 15-7. - Washing or greasing vehicle on highway or sidewalk prohibited. 
    No person shall, for compensation, wash, polish or grease a vehicle upon a highway or sidewalk, nor shall the owner of a vehicle permit it to be washed, polished or greased, for compensation, upon a highway or sidewalk. 
(Code 1973, § 16-6) 
Sec. 15-8. - Authority of fire department officials to direct traffic. 
    While any fire department or volunteer fire department is in the process of answering an alarm of fire or extinguishing a fire and returning to station, the fire chief or other officer in charge of such fire department at that time shall have the authority to maintain order at the fire or its vicinity, direct the actions of the firefighters at the fire, keep bystanders or other persons at a safe distance from the fire and fire equipment, facilitate the speedy movement and operation of firefighting equipment and firefighters and, until the arrival of a police officer, direct and control traffic in person or by deputy and facilitate the movement of traffic. The fire chief or other officer in charge shall display his firefighter's badge. Any person refusing to obey the orders of the fire chief or his deputies or other officer in charge at that time shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The fire chief or other officer in charge shall have the power to make arrests for violation of the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1973, § 16-7) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 12. 
Sec. 15-9. - Truck routes through town. 
    All motor trucks passing through the town on U.S. Highway No. 15 shall, within the town, proceed on the following streets: 
(1)  Northbound. North on Main Street from the town limits to Third Street; thence west on Third Street to the town limits. 
(2)  Southbound. 
a.  During daylight hours. From the town limits east on Oak Street to High Street; thence east on High Street to Main Street; thence south on Main Street to the town limits. 
b.  During the nighttime. East on Third Street to Main Street; thence south on Main Street to the town limits. 
(Code 1973, § 16-8) 
State Law reference- Local regulation of trucks and carriers, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1304. 
Sec. 15-10. - Driving through funeral or other processions; manner of driving in funeral processions. 
(a)  No operator of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles, persons or animals comprising a funeral or other authorized procession, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. This provision shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles. 
(b)  Each driver in a funeral procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as is practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practicable and safe. 
(Code 1973, § 16-9) 
Sec. 15-11. - Identification of vehicles in funeral processions; right-of-way. 
(a)  All motor vehicles participating in a funeral procession, when proceeding to any place of burial, shall display illuminated headlamps thereon and such other identification as the chief of police may prescribe. 
(b)  All motor vehicles so designated shall have the right-of-way over all other vehicles, except fire apparatus, ambulances and police vehicles at any street or highway intersection within the town and may proceed through a stop street or signalized intersection with proper caution and safety. 
(Code 1973, § 16-10) 
Sec. 15-12. - Boarding or alighting from vehicles. 
    No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. 
(Code 1973, § 16-11) 
Sec. 15-13. - Unlawful riding. 
    No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. 
(Code 1973, § 16-12) 
Sec. 15-14. - Unnecessary noise in the operation of motor vehicles. 
(a)  No vehicle shall be loaded with materials likely to create loud noises by striking together, without using every reasonable effort to deaden the noise. 
(b)  The use in, upon or attached to any motor vehicle operating on any street of the town, of any radio, phonograph, musical instrument, bell, whistle, loudspeaker, amplifier or device of any kind whatsoever whereby sound therefrom is cast upon any street to promote or advertise the sale of goods, wares or merchandise, or for the purpose of advertising auction sales, sporting events or other business or things advertised thereby, is prohibited. The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to motor vehicles driven in a duly authorized parade; and, further, provided, that the use of loudspeaker on a motor vehicle for making auction sales in streets directly in front of the property then being sold, and entirely outside of the business districts of the town, shall not be construed as a violation of this paragraph when such use is limited strictly to the selling at auction of such property. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person in operating a motorcycle within the town to create in the operation thereof any unreasonably loud, disturbing or unnecessary noise. In operating a motorcycle the following acts among others are declared to create loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this section, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  The use of a motorcycle so out of repair as to cause thereby loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or any of such noises, or any other unnecessary noise. 
(2)  The practice of unnecessarily racing the motor of a motorcycle while standing or moving thereby causing unnecessary noise from such motor. 
(3)  The practice of unnecessarily retarding the spark to the motor and thereby causing unnecessary, loud and explosive noise from the motor. 
(4)  In starting a motorcycle off from a standing position, the practice of gaining speed unnecessarily quickly and thereby causing unnecessary and loud noise from the motor. 
(5)  The practice of coming to an unreasonably quick stop with a motorcycle and thereby causing unnecessary grinding of brakes and screeching of tires or either of such noises. 
(Code 1973, § 16-13) 
Cross reference- Noise control, Ch. 16. 
Sec. 15-15. - Railroad cars obstructing street or road; standing vehicle on railroad track. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any railroad company, or any receiver or trustee operating a railroad, to obstruct for a longer period than five (5) minutes the free passage on any street or road by standing cars or trains across the same, except a passenger train while receiving or discharging passengers, but a passway shall be kept open to allow normal flow of traffic; nor shall it be lawful to stand any wagon or other vehicle on the track of any railroad which will hinder or endanger a moving train; provided, that when a train has been uncoupled, so as to make a passway, the time necessarily required, not exceeding three (3) minutes, to pump up the air after the train has been recoupled shall not be included in considering the time such cars or trains were standing across such street or road. Any such railroad company, receiver or trustee, violating any of the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00); provided that the fine may be one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each minute beyond the permitted time but the total fine shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(b)  This section shall not apply when the train is stopped due to breakdown, mechanical failure or emergency. 
(Code 1973, § 16-15) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 56-412.1. 
Sec. 15-16. - Throwing or depositing certain substances upon highway; removal of such substances. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit or cause to be deposited upon any street in the town any glass bottle, glass, nail, tack, wire, can or any other substance likely to injure any person or animal, or damage any vehicle upon such street, nor shall any person throw or deposit or cause to be deposited upon any street any soil, sand, mud, gravel or other substances so as to create a hazard to the traveling public. 
(b)  Any person who drops, or permits to be dropped or thrown, upon any street any destructive, hazardous or injurious material shall immediately remove the same or cause it to be removed. Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a street shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the street from such vehicle. 
(Code 1973, § 16-16) 
Cross reference- Solid waste and weeds, Ch. 22. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-324. 
Sec. 15-17. - Riding bicycles without using handlebars. 
    No person shall ride a bicycle upon any street without having his hands upon the handlebars. 
(Code 1973, § 16-17) 
Sec. 15-18. - Backing. 
    The operator of any vehicle in the town shall not back such vehicle unless such movement can be made with safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(Code 1973, § 16-18) 
Sec. 15-19. - Blocking intersections. 
    No operator of a vehicle shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space beyond such intersection or crosswalk in the direction in which such vehicle is proceeding to accommodate the vehicle without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. 
(Code 1973, § 16-19) 
Sec. 15-20. - Snow tires or chains. 
(a)  Whenever snow, sleet, hail or freezing rain is falling or has fallen and such snow, sleet, hail or freezing rain is causing slippery or hazardous conditions upon any thoroughfare, street or alley of the town, no person shall operate a motor vehicle on any thoroughfare, street or alley of the town in such a manner as to become stalled or impede traffic when such stalling or impeding of traffic is due to the failure of such person to equip the driving wheels of the vehicle with effective tire chains or effective snow tread tires. 
(b)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle on any of the thoroughfares, streets or alleys of the town under weather conditions as above set forth without equipping the vehicle with effective tire chains or effective snow tread tires when it is apparent that failure to so equip the vehicle will likely cause such vehicle to stall or impede traffic. Any violation of this section shall be punished as provided in section 15-23. The town manager or his duly authorized representative may have any vehicles which have become stalled, stuck or abandoned and are impeding the orderly flow of traffic in violation of this section, towed away to a storage lot or garage, and such storage charges shall be in addition to the fines levied pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1973, § 16-20) 
Sec. 15-21. - Tailgates on vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for the operator of any truck, trailer or other vehicle equipped with a tailgate to lower or open the tailgate thereon, or to suffer or permit such tailgate to be lowered or opened, except during the time the vehicle is being loaded or unloaded, and except during the time the load on the vehicle necessitates a lowered or opened tailgate as a support for the load. It shall be the duty of the operator of any such vehicle to see that the tailgate on such vehicle is kept closed or raised, except during the times hereinbefore specified. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than twenty dollars ($20.00) for each offense. 
(Code 1973, § 16-21) 
Sec. 15-22. - Pedestrians to obey signs, signals, etc. 
    Pedestrians shall obey signs and signals erected on highways or streets for the direction and control of travel and traffic and they shall obey the orders of police officers engaged in directing travel and traffic on the highways and streets. Violations of this section shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five dollars ($5.00) for each offense. 
(Code 1973, § 16-22) 
Sec. 15-23. - Compliance with chapter; penalty for violation of chapter. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse, fail or neglect to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter. Unless otherwise stated, any such violation shall constitute a traffic infraction. 
(b)  Every person convicted of a traffic infraction for a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter for which no other penalty is provided shall, for a first conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00); for a second such conviction within one (1) year such person shall be punished by a fine of not less than twenty dollars ($20.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00); for a third or subsequent conviction within one (1) year such person shall be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Code 1973, § 16-23) 
State Law reference- Violations of motor vehicle law, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-113. 
Secs. 15-24-15-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - YIELD-RIGHT-OF-WAY, STOP, ARTERIAL AND ONE-WAY STREETS 

Sec. 15-41. - One-way streets-Establishment. 
(a)  The town council may, by resolution, designate certain streets or portions of streets, as one-way streets, specifying in such resolution the direction of vehicular travel upon such streets, or portions of streets. 
(b)  When such one-way streets, or portions of streets, are so designated, the town manager shall erect signs at intersections, indicating the direction of vehicular travel thereon and when such signs are erected pursuant to such resolution, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to proceed upon such streets, or portions of streets, in other than the direction indicated by such signs. 
(Code 1973, § 16-24) 
Sec. 15-42. - Same-Powers of town manager or chief of police to vary. 
    When it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the town manager or chief of police, or their duly authorized representative, that the strict enforcement of one-way streets designated in accordance with section 15-41 will cause an unreasonable hardship on some particular person relative to the loading or unloading of trucks or other vehicles on such one-way streets, the town manager or chief of police, or their duly authorized representative, is authorized to issue a special permit to such person permitting a variance from the provisions of section 15-41. Any such special permit shall be in writing and shall specify the nature of such variance and the place and period of time when such variance shall be permitted. Such permit shall only be issued when it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the town manager or chief of police, or their duly authorized representative, that the granting of such permit will alleviate a clearly demonstrable hardship as distinguished from a special privilege or convenience to the person who seeks such permit. 
(Code 1973, § 16-25) 
Sec. 15-43. - Designation of stop and yield-right-of-way intersections. 
(a)  The town council may, by resolution, designate certain intersections as stop intersections. When such intersections are so designated, pursuant to this section, the town manager shall erect stop signs thereat, clearly visible to an ordinarily observant person. 
(b)  The town council may, by resolution, designate certain intersections as yield-right-of-way intersections. When such intersections are so designated, pursuant to this section, the town manager shall erect signs thereat, clearly visible to an ordinarily observant person. 
(Code 1973, § 16-26) 
State Law reference- Vehicles before entering certain highways shall stop or yield right-of-way, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-821; designation of stop and yield right-of-way intersections, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1301. 
Sec. 15-44. - Designation of through streets; erection of signs, signals and markings. 
(a)  For the purpose of promoting the safe use of the streets of the town, the town council shall designate certain streets as through streets, and all traffic proceeding regularly along such designated through streets shall have the right-of-way over traffic entering such streets. All motor vehicles, horse-drawn vehicles, buses and bicycles shall upon arrival at and before entering such through streets or designated intersections, obey the traffic signs posted at or near such intersections. Where there is a traffic officer or signal device at any intersection, the traffic officer or signal device when in operation shall control traffic. 
(b)  After such signs or signal devices have been erected, or the streets otherwise marked, it shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with the requirements of such signs, markings or signal devices; provided, however, that the failure to comply with the requirements of such signs, markings or signal devices shall not be deemed a violation if, at the time of the alleged violation, the designation, markings, signs or other signal devices placed in conformity with this section were missing, out of order, effaced, mutilated or defaced, so that an ordinarily observant person under the same circumstances would not be apprised or aware of the existence of such signs, markings or signal devices. 
(Code 1973, § 16-27) 
State Law reference- Vehicles before entering certain highways shall stop or yield right-of-way, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-821. 
Secs. 15-45-15-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Fire lanes, § 12-101 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 15-61. - Restricted and no parking areas. 
(a)  The town council is hereby authorized and directed to determine and define street areas within which the volume of vehicular traffic is such as to require restrictions upon parking of vehicles; to classify vehicles with reference to parking; to designate the time, place and manner in which such vehicles may be allowed to park upon the highways and to make such rules and regulations as traffic conditions may require in various areas and under the varying conditions which may prevail at different times. It shall be the duty of the town manager, upon the promulgation of such regulations, and before the same shall become effective, to give such public notice thereof, by establishing and posting signs, or otherwise, as may be reasonably adequate to make clear to the operators of vehicles "no parking" or "restricted parking" areas, the existence, nature and requirements of such regulations. From and after the effective date of regulations imposed in any area by virtue of the provisions of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to stop or park any vehicle in any restricted or prohibited area otherwise than in accordance with these regulations. 
(b)  In any prosecution charging a violation of any such ordinance, regulation or rule, proof that the vehicle described in the complaint, summons or warrant was parked in violation of such ordinance, regulation or rule, together with proof that the defendant was at the time of such parking the registered owner of the vehicle, as required by Code of Virginia, Tit. 46.2, Ch. 6 (§ 46.2-600 et seq.) shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that such registered owner of the vehicle was the person who parked the vehicle at the place where, and for the time during which such violation occurred. 
(Code 1973, § 16-28) 
State Law reference- Parking regulations in towns, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220. 
Sec. 15-62. - Parking prohibited in specified places. 
(a)  No person shall park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk. 
(2)  In front of a public or private driveway. 
(3)  Within an intersection. 
(4)  Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant. 
(5)  On a crosswalk. 
(6)  In a zone marked in yellow unless otherwise designated. 
(b)  No person other than a police officer shall move a vehicle into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful, or start or cause to be started the motor of any motor vehicle, or shift, change or move the levers, brake, starting device, gears or other mechanism of a parked motor vehicle to a position other than that in which it was left by the owner or driver thereof, or attempt to do so. 
(Code 1973, § 16-29) 
State Law reference- Parking in certain locations, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1239. 
Sec. 15-63. - Parking on private property. 
    No person shall stand or park a vehicle on any private lot or lot area without the express or implied consent of the owner thereof. Whenever signs or markings have been erected on any lot or lot area, contiguous or adjacent to a street, thoroughfare or alley indicating that no vehicles are permitted to stand or park thereon, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle across any curb or lot line or over any driveway from a street or alley into such lot or area for the purpose of standing or parking such vehicle, or for any person to stop, stand or park any vehicle in such lot or lot area. 
(Code 1973, § 16-30) 
Sec. 15-64. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or place any automobile, truck, trailer or other vehicle upon or in any street, alley or parkway for the purpose of selling or offering the same for sale or rent. No sign or lettering shall be attached or placed upon any automobile, truck, trailer or other vehicle parked in or upon any public street, alley or parkway of the town indicating that such vehicle is offered for sale or for rent. It shall also be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street in a business district from which any merchandise is being sold. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to stop a vehicle at any time upon the highway for the purpose of advertising any article of any kind, or to display thereupon advertisements of any article or advertisement for the sale of the vehicle itself. 
(Code 1973, § 16-31) 
Sec. 15-65. - Backing up to curbs. 
    No vehicle shall be backed up to a curb, except during the time actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise therefrom. 
(Code 1973, § 16-32) 
Sec. 15-66. - Angle parking. 
    Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this chapter, the town council may, when in its discretion the public interest so requires, provide for angle parking on any street or portion thereof; provided, however, that such streets are marked so as to apprise an ordinarily observant person of the regulation. 
(Code 1973, § 16-33) 
Sec. 15-67. - Parking vehicles without state licenses on highways. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or store for more than twenty-four (24) hours, on any highway, street, alley or parking lot belonging to or operated by the town, any motor vehicle which is incapable of being operated. It shall also be unlawful for any person to park or store, on any highway, street, alley or parking lot belonging to or operated by the town, any motor vehicle on which currently legal license plates are not properly displayed. 
(b)  Any vehicle parked or stored in violation of this section may be entered and removed or may be impounded by the town, as directed by the chief of police as provided in section 15-71. 
(Code 1973, § 16-34) 
Sec. 15-68. - Parking prohibitions, time limitations within certain areas. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them below, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Parking limited, followed by a specified time limit, means that no vehicle of any kind shall be parked or left standing for any purpose, either with or without the driver therein, in the area or areas designated, for a longer period of time than is so specified; such parking limitations to apply at all times unless otherwise stated herein. 
(2)  Parking prohibited means that no vehicle of any kind shall be parked or left standing for any purpose, either with or without the driver therein, in the area or areas designated; such parking prohibitions to apply at all times unless otherwise stated herein. Any vehicle parked in the area or areas designated shall be subject to a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00). 
(b)  Designating and signing streets. The town council may, by resolution, designate certain streets, or parts of streets, as prohibited parking or limited parking zones. When such designations are made, the town manager shall erect signs in accordance with such resolution, visible to an ordinarily observant person, indicating that parking is prohibited or limited, as the case may be, in such zones. When such signs are erected, it shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle in violation of such signs. 
(c)  Loading, unloading, bus stops, etc., zones. Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter, the town manager is hereby authorized, when in his judgment it is in the public interest so to do, to set apart on any of the streets of the town, spaces for loading and unloading merchandise, bus stops, taxi stands and other places in which no general parking shall be permitted, and he is further authorized to set aside spaces in which parking time shall be further limited; provided, however, that such signs are present within or near such spaces as to apprise an ordinarily observant person of such parking prohibitions or regulations. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with the requirements of such signs. 
(Code 1973, § 16-35) 
Sec. 15-69. - Manner of using loading zone. 
    Where a loading and unloading zone has been set apart by the town council in accordance with applicable provisions of this chapter, the following regulations shall apply with respect to the use of such areas: 
(1)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time, other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials, in any place marked as a curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. All delivery vehicles, other than regular delivery trucks, using such loading zones shall be identified by the owner's or company's name in letters three (3) inches high on both sides of the vehicle. 
(2)  The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily in a space marked as a curb loading zone for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading passengers or bundles when such stopping does not interfere with any vehicle used for the transportation of materials which is waiting to enter or is about to enter such loading space. 
(Code 1973, § 16-36) 
Sec. 15-70. - Open storage of inoperative vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, except within a fully enclosed building or structure or otherwise shielded or screened from view on any property zoned for residential, business, or industrial purposes any inoperative motor vehicle. However, the provisions of this section shall not apply to a licensed business which, on June 26, 1970, was regularly engaged in business as an automobile dealer, salvage dealer, or scrap processor. 
(1)  As used in this section "inoperative motor vehicle" means any motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer which: (i) is not in operating condition (including, without limitation any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer which, for a period of sixty (60) days or longer, has been partially or totally disassembled by the removal of tires or wheels, the engine, or other essential parts required for operation); (ii) does not display a valid license plate; or (iii) does not display a valid inspection decal. 
(2)  As used in this section, "otherwise shielded or screened from view" shall mean not visible to the unaided eye from street or ground level outside the boundaries of the lot on which the vehicle is kept. Car covers or tarps do not meet the requirements of "shielded or screened from view". 
(b)  No person shall keep more than one (1) inoperative motor vehicle outside of a fully enclosed building or structure. The one (1) vehicle allowed outside of a fully enclosed building or structure shall still be subject to the requirement of being shielded or screened from view, as defined in subsection (a)(2) above. 
(c)  Whenever a violation of this section is determined by the town manager or his designee, the town shall serve notice on the owner of the property whereon the inoperative motor vehicle is located, requiring the owner to remove or cause the removal of such vehicle. 
(1)  All notices sent pursuant to this section shall be served to an owner as follows: 
a.  By hand-delivery to the owner of record; 
b.  By regular, first-class mail, to the owner of record at the address listed in the town's real estate tax records, or to any occupant of the property at the address where the violation exists; 
c.  To a person who has charge of real estate as an executor, administrator, trustee, guardian or agent, by hand delivery, or by regular mail to the last known address of such person; or 
d.  To a person who is the beneficiary of any easement or right of use of a parcel of real estate, by hand delivery, or by regular first-class mail to the person's last known address. If the real estate parcel on which the violation exists is undeveloped or vacant, the notice shall also be posted in a conspicuous place on the property. 
(2)  Such notice shall require the owner to correct the condition within ten (10) days from the date of delivery or mailing of the notice. 
(d)  Should the owner of the premises fail to remove or cause the removal of an inoperative motor vehicle as directed within the town's notice, and if the owner also fails within the ten-day period to request an informal administrative hearing with the town manager or an official designated by the town manager for the purpose of challenging the validity of the violation determination or the necessity for removing the vehicle, then the town may take action to remove the inoperative motor vehicle(s). The costs and expenses of such removal by the town shall be assessed and billed to the property owner. In the event the charges billed to the property owner remain unpaid for more than thirty (30) days, such charges shall constitute a lien against such property, ranking on a parity with liens for unpaid local taxes and enforcement shall be in the same manner. 
(e)  After removing an inoperative motor vehicle from property, the town may then dispose of the vehicle after giving an additional ten (10) days written notice to the owner of the vehicle and, if different, also to the owner of the property from which the vehicle was removed. However, if a timely request for an administrative hearing has been made to challenge the validity of the violation determination, then disposal by the town shall not be made unless and until the matter is resolved in favor of the town. 
(f)  Any person convicted of violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-6 of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 161, 3-13-2013 ) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 161, adopted Mar. 13, 2013 , repealed the former § 15-70, and enacted a new § 15-70 as set out herein. The former § 15-70 pertained to Parking or storing inoperative vehicles on property located within the town and derived from the Code of 1973, § 16-67; Ord. No. 40, adopted 12-11-96. 
State Law reference- Authority to restrict keeping of inoperative motor vehicles, etc., on residential or commercial property, removal of such vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-11.1. 
Sec. 15-71. - Removal and disposition of certain unattended vehicles; sale; disposition of proceeds. 
(a)  Whenever any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer or a part thereof: 
(1)  Is left unattended on a public highway or other public property and constitutes a traffic hazard; 
(2)  Is illegally parked; 
(3)  Is left unattended for more than ten (10) days either on public property or on private property without the permission of the property owner, lessee, or occupant; or 
(4)  Is immobilized on a public roadway by weather conditions or other emergency situation; 
Any such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer or part thereof may be removed for safekeeping by or under the direction of a police officer to a storage garage or area. This section, however, shall not authorize removal of motor vehicles, trailers, semitrailers, and parts thereof from private property without the written request of the owner, lessee, or occupant of the premises. The person at whose request the motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, or part of a motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer is removed from private property shall indemnify the town against any loss or expense incurred by reason of removal, storage, or sale thereof. 
(b)  It shall be presumed that such motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, or part thereof is abandoned if it lacks either a current license plate; or a current town license plate or sticker; or a valid state safety inspection certificate or sticker; and it has been in a specific location for four (4) days without being moved. As promptly as possible, each removal shall be reported to the chief of police, who shall give notice to the owner of the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer as promptly as possible. The owner, before obtaining possession of the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer or part thereof, shall pay to the persons entitled thereto all costs incidental to the removal, storage and locating the owner. Should the owner fail or refuse to pay the costs or should the identity or whereabouts of the owner be unknown and unascertainable after a diligent search has been made, and after notice to the owner at his last-known address and to the holder of any lien of record in the office of the state department or part thereof, of motor vehicles against the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, the vehicle shall be treated as an abandoned vehicle under Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1200 et seq. 
(Code 1973, § 16-37) 
State Law reference- Authority for above section, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1213. 
Sec. 15-72. - Contracts with private persons for removal, etc., of vehicles. 
    The town council shall have the power to enter into contracts with the owner or operator of garages or places for the removal or storage of vehicles referred to in section 15-71. The contracts shall provide for the payment of the town of reasonable charges for the removal and storage of such vehicles, shall require such owners or operators to deliver such vehicles to the owners thereof or their agents upon demand therefor upon furnishing satisfactory evidence of identity and ownership or agency, and that the owners or operators of such garages or places of storage will indemnify the owners of such vehicles for injury or damage thereto resulting from the negligent removal or storage thereof, and such owners or operators shall be required to provide themselves with adequate liability insurance to cover such indemnity. 
(Code 1973, § 16-38) 
Sec. 15-73. - Parking in spaces reserved for handicapped persons. 
    It shall be unlawful for a vehicle not displaying a license plate, decal or special parking permit, issued under Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-731, 46.2-739 or 46.2-1238, to be parked in a parking space reserved for the handicapped on public property or on privately owned parking areas open to the public. The immediate operator or custodian of the vehicle at the time of a violation of this section shall be subject to a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). A summons for a violation of this section may be issued by police officers without the necessity of a warrant being obtained by the owner of such private parking area. Parking spaces reserved for the handicapped shall be identified by above grade signs. 
(Code 1973, § 16-38.1) 
Sec. 15-74. - Parking of vehicles with left side to curb. 
    It shall be unlawful for a vehicle to be parked with the left side to the curb on a town street, so that the front of the vehicle is facing toward the direction of on-coming traffic. This section shall not apply to vehicles parked on one-way streets. 
(Ord. No. 39, 11-6-96) 
Secs. 15-75-15-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESIDENTIAL PARKING PERMITS 

Sec. 15-91. - Definition. 
    For the purposes of this division, the word "resident" shall mean any person who owns and occupies any dwelling, along with the members of his household, any person who operates a business office, or any person who rents on a predetermined basis any apartment or room within the areas outlined in section 15-92. 
(Code 1973, § 16-35.5) 
Sec. 15-92. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle without a valid parking sticker except commercial vehicles loading or unloading on any street, alley, or public way in those residential sections of town that are designated by the town council and so marked with proper signs. 
(Code 1973, § 16-35.1; Ord. No. 86, 8-11-2004) 
Sec. 15-93. - Issuance generally, expiration. 
    Residential parking permits shall be issued to those residents of the area designated in section 15-92 wishing to park motor vehicles at curbside on the streets within such area. Permits will be issued for the period of July 1 through June 30 of each year and shall go on sale thirty (30) days prior to the issue date. 
(Code 1973, § 16-35.2; Ord. No. 174 , 4-13-2016) 
Sec. 15-94. - Issuance upon application. 
    Upon application to the town treasurer on the form provided by his office, and upon presentation to him of a valid town auto tag for a motor vehicle from the town, residential parking permits shall be issued by the town treasurer. 
(Code 1973, § 16-35.3) 
Sec. 15-95. - Sale, transfer of vehicle; issuance of duplicate. 
    Upon the sale or transfer of the motor vehicle for which a parking permit has been issued, the owner shall remove such permit. Upon application for a permit to replace the one so removed such owner shall present the original permit, or enough of the mutilated permit to identify it, and a duplicate permit shall be issued by the treasurer. 
(Code 1973, § 16-35.4) 
Sec. 15-96. - Proof of residency. 
    Any person who is not a permanent resident of the town shall show to the treasurer a receipt of rent paid for an apartment or room within the area outlined in section 15-92, or a signed statement from his landlord that he is a tenant within such area. 
(Code 1973, § 16-35.6) 
Sec. 15-97. - Guest cards. 
    Each dwelling house or apartment building in which there is a household living on a year-round basis shall be eligible to receive two (2) residential parking permits and two (2) guest cards, as needed. 
(Code 1973, § 16-35.7; Ord. No. 86, 8-11-2004) 
Sec. 15-98. - Penalty for violation of division. 
    Any person convicted of violating the terms of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor with a fine imposed of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Each day a vehicle is parked in violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. Any vehicle parked in this area for more than three (3) days will be subject to being towed away at owner's expense. 
(Code 1973, § 16-35.8; Ord. of 8-4-2004 ) 
Sec. 15-99. - Placement of stickers and guest cards. 
    The stickers issued under this division shall be affixed to the left side of the rear bumper so as to be easily viewed. 
(Code 1973, § 16-35.9) 
Sec. 15-100. - Passenger and commercial vehicles in front of residence. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator or driver of any motor vehicle, passenger bus, for-hire car, truck, trailer or semitrailer to park the same or to permit the same to be parked on any of the streets, alleys or other public ways in the town in front of, or adjacent to, any portion of any lot upon which any residence is constructed, for a period longer than two (2) hours, unless such owner, operator or driver is actually conducting business, or has the written consent of the owner or tenant of such lot so to do; provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any vehicle while actually engaged in loading or unloading. 
(Code 1973, § 16-35.10) 
Sec. 15-100.1. - Storage trailer parking in residential zones. 
    It shall be unlawful for anyone to allow a storage trailer, semi-trailer or storage POD to park or permit to be placed on any lot in any residential zone without a permit from the town manager's office. 
    No such permit shall be allowed for a period of over sixty (60) days without permission of the town council. 
(Ord. No. 137, 6-8-2011) 
Sec. 15-101. - Passenger cars in front of residences-At night. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator or driver of any motor passenger car or automobile to park the same or to permit the same to be parked for a continuous period of more than three (3) hours on any of the streets, alleys or public ways of the town in front of or adjacent to any portion of any lot on which a residence is constructed, and located in a residential zone, other than such zones located within the area outlined in section 15-92, for the period between one (1) hour after sunset and one (1) hour before sunrise of the following day, unless such person so parking such vehicle is the owner or tenant of the residence and lot in front of any part of which such vehicle is so parked, or unless the owner, operator or driver of the vehicle has first obtained the consent of the owner or tenant of the lot in front of which, or any part of which, such vehicle is so parked during the nighttime. 
(Code 1973, § 16-35.11) 
Sec. 15-102. - Same-Daytime. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator or driver of any motor passenger car or automobile to park the same or to permit the same to be parked between one (1) hour before sunrise and one (1) hour after sunset of any day, on any street, alley or other public way in the town in front of or adjacent to any portion of any lot on which a residence is constructed and located in a residential zone, other than such zones located within the area outlined in section 15-92, for a period longer than two (2) hours, unless such person so parking such vehicle is the owner or tenant of the residence and lot in front of any part of which such vehicle is so parked, or unless the owner, operator or driver of such vehicle has first obtained the consent of the owner or tenant of the lot in front of which, or any part of which, such vehicle is so parked. 
(Code 1973, § 16-35.12) 
Secs. 15-103-15-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PARKING METERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Parking meters in towns, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220. 

Sec. 15-121. - Establishment of zones. 
    The town council shall, by resolution, establish parking meter zones, designating the parking time permitted in each of such zones. 
(Code 1973, § 16-39) 
Sec. 15-122. - Time of operation. 
    The provisions of this division shall apply to metered parking on the streets only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. and on days other than Sundays and the following holidays: Christmas Day, Easter Monday, July Fourth and Thanksgiving Day. Should Christmas Day or the Fourth of July in any year fall on Sunday, the Monday following shall be taken as the holiday for the purpose of the division. 
(Code 1973, § 16-40; Ord. No. 123, 8-12-2009) 
Sec. 15-123. - Installation, operation and maintenance. 
    In the parking meter zones established pursuant to section 15-121, the town manager is directed to provide for the installation or placing of parking meters, and the regulation, control, operation and use thereof in accordance with the provisions of this division, and to maintain such meters in good working condition. Such parking meters installed in a parking meter zone shall be placed upon the curbing immediately adjacent to individual parking spaces, which are to be designated as provided in section 15-124. Each parking meter shall be placed or set in such a manner as to show or display a signal that the parking space assigned to it is or is not legally in use. Each parking meter installed upon any street shall be installed and set to display, upon deposit of a United States of America coin or coins in accordance with the schedule of charges for the metered parking attached to the meter, a signal indicating legal parking time for the time purchased in depositing such coin for the part of the street upon which such meter is placed. Each meter shall be so arranged that, upon the expiration of such parking limit, or the portion thereof for which the necessary coin has been deposited, it will indicate by mechanical operation and proper signal that the lawful parking period has expired. 
(Code 1973, § 16-41) 
Sec. 15-124. - Marking parking spaces adjacent to meters. 
    The town manager, or such officers and employees of the town as he shall select, shall place lines or markings in the curb or on the street about or alongside of each parking meter to designate the parking space for which such meter is to be used. 
(Code 1973, § 16-42) 
Sec. 15-125. - Manner of parking. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle in the spaces referred to in section 15-124 except within the lines and markings so established. 
(b)  When a parking space in any parking meter zone is parallel with the adjacent curb or sidewalk, any vehicle parked in such parking space shall be parked so that the foremost part of such vehicle shall be alongside of and nearest to the parking meter; when a parking space in any parking meter zone is diagonal to the curb or sidewalk, any vehicle parked in such parking space shall be parked with the foremost part of such vehicle directed at and nearest to such meter. 
(Code 1973, § 16-43) 
Sec. 15-126. - Deposit of coin; meter to indicate expiration of parking time. 
    When any vehicle shall be parked in any space alongside of or next to which a parking meter is located, the operator of such vehicle shall, upon entering the parking space, immediately deposit, or cause to be deposited, one (1) or more coins of the United States of America, as indicated on such meter, in such parking meter, and the parking space may then be lawfully occupied by such vehicle during the period prescribed as the parking time allowed in such zone, or the portion thereof for which the necessary coin has been deposited. If such vehicle shall remain in such parking space beyond the parking limit prescribed for such parking space, then upon the expiration of the parking limit, or the portion thereof for which the necessary coin has been deposited, the parking meters shall display a sign or signal showing illegal parking and, in which event, the vehicle parked in such parking space shall be considered as parked overtime and beyond the period, and the parking of a vehicle overtime in any such part of a street where any such meter is located shall be a violation of this section and punished as provided in section 15-135. 
(Code 1973, § 16-44) 
Sec. 15-127. - Parking overtime. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a vehicle to remain or to be parked in any parking space adjacent to any parking meter while such meter is displaying a signal indicating that the vehicle occupying such parking space has already been parked beyond the period of time prescribed for such parking space. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle to be parked overtime or longer than two (2) hours for any parking meter zone; enforceable twenty-four (24) hours a day. 
(Code 1973, § 16-45; Ord. No. 11, 4-9-92; Ord. No. 167, 3-12-2014 ) 
Sec. 15-128. - Depositing slugs, etc., in meters. 
    It shall be unlawful to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug, device or metallic substitute for a coin of the United States. 
(Code 1973, § 16-46) 
Sec. 15-129. - Injuring, defacing, etc., meters. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter. 
(Code 1973, § 16-47) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-152. 
Sec. 15-130. - Violations; duty of officers; payment of fine. 
(a)  Each police officer charged with the duty of enforcing this division shall take the number of any meter at which any vehicle is overparked, the vehicle tag number of such vehicle, and report the same to the police department and make proper complaint touching such violation. 
(b)  Each officer shall attach to such vehicle a notice to the owner thereof that such vehicle has been parked in violation of a provision of the parking meter regulations and instructing such owner when and where to report with reference to such violation. Each such owner may, within fifteen (15) days of the time when such notice was attached to such vehicle, pay to the treasurer's office a penalty for and in full satisfaction of such violation, the sum of twenty-five ($25.00) for each violation, or fraction thereof, during which such vehicle occupied such parking space illegally. The failure of such owner to make such payment to the treasurer's office within fifteen (15) days of the time when such notice was attached to such vehicle shall render such owner subject to the penalties provided for in section 15-135. 
(c)  Vehicles parked in violation of this ordinance are subject to towing. 
(Code 1973, § 16-48; Ord. No. 167, 3-12-2014 ) 
Sec. 15-131. - Deposits required levied as fees for certain purposes. 
    Coins required to be deposited in parking meters, as provided in this division, are hereby levied and assessed as fees to provide for the proper regulation and control of traffic on the public streets and to cover the cost of the supervision, inspection, installation, operation, maintenance, control and use of parking spaces and regulating the parking of vehicles in the parking meter zones hereby created. 
(Code 1973, § 16-49) 
Sec. 15-132. - Taxicab stands, etc., in meter zones. 
    The town manager is authorized to set apart, within the parking meter zones, bus stops, taxicab stands and other places in which no parking shall be permitted except by the drivers of buses or taxicabs. 
(Code 1973, § 16-50) 
Cross reference- Taxicabs, Ch. 26. 
Sec. 15-133. - Loading and unloading; receiving and discharging passengers. 
    Operators of delivery vehicles may use, without deposit, any parking meter space during the actual loading and unloading of such delivery vehicles. Operators of passenger vehicles, commercial or private, may use without deposit a parking meter space for the purpose of promptly receiving or discharging any passenger. 
(Code 1973, § 16-51) 
Sec. 15-134. - Presumption of guilt. 
    In any prosecution charging a violation of this division, proof that the vehicle described in the complaint, summons, parking ticket citation, or warrant was parked in violation of this division, together with proof that the defendant was at the time the registered owner of the vehicle, as required by Code of Virginia, § 46.2-600 et seq., shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle was the person who committed the violation. 
(Code 1973, § 16-52) 
Sec. 15-135. - Penalty for non-payment. 
    Any person who does not pay the fine within fifteen (15) days from time when such notice was attached to such vehicle shall pay double the amount for all fines, with the exception of parking in a handicap space which will be two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Code 1973, § 16-53; Ord. No. 167, 3-12-2014 ) 
Sec. 15-136. - Effect of parking meter regulations upon other parking regulations. 
    Nothing in this division shall alter or affect any existing ordinance, rule or regulation, or any ordinance, rule or regulation hereafter adopted, relating to traffic or parking on any other street, alley, lane or highway, within the town, other than those included within the parking meter zones herein established. 
(Code 1973, § 16-54) 
Sec. 15-137. - Four hours' free parking exemption. 
(a)  Code of Virginia 1950, as amended, § 46.2-1245, providing for four-hours' free parking for the disabled person, vehicle owner, or volunteer for an institution or organization to which disabled parking license plates, organizational removable windshield placards, permanent windshield placards, or temporary removable windshield placards are issued or any person to whom disabled parking license plates have been issued under Code of Virginia 1950, as amended, § 46.2-739 subsection B shall not apply within the boundaries of the town. The disabled are subject to the time restrictions applicable to parking. 
(b)  There shall be posted within the town signs or other means of giving reasonable notice that the provisions of Code of Virginia § 46.2-1245 do not apply within the town. Such signs or other means of notice shall include the following: 
NO FREE PARKING FOR HANDICAP PERSONS. SECTION 46.2-1245 DOES NOT APPLY WITHIN THE TOWN OF FARMVILLE. 
(Ord. No. 123, 8-12-2009) 
Secs. 15-138-15-155. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PARADES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- The minutes of Feb. 4, 2009 repealed Art. IV, §§ 15-156-15-167, which pertained to parades and derived from Code 1973, §§ 16-57-16-66; Ord. No. 30, 1-11-95. Ord. No. 121, adopted Feb. 4, 2009, added Art. IV, §§ 15-156, 15-157. 
Cross reference- Demonstrations and picketing, § 18-16. 

Sec. 15-156. - Street parades, processions, and other events. 
(a)  No parade or procession of any kind shall be held or conducted in any town rights-of-way without first obtaining a permit from the town manager. 
(b)  The town manager is authorized to require permits for the use of town rights-of-way for special events and community events (as defined within section 15-156(c) of this Code), and for other activities that may affect the safety or convenience of the general public. The town manager is authorized to promulgate regulations to govern the time, place and manner of such activities, and to establish reasonable fees, charges and rentals therefor. A violation of any of the rules and regulations established hereunder shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section the term "community event" shall refer to "Heart of Virginia Festival", "First Fridays," all "Home Coming events", Christmas Parade", the Fourth of July celebration, and other events as declared by the town council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 121, 2-4-2009) 
Sec. 15-157. - Restricted use of town streets. 
    No activity conducted by any person in or upon any town streets or rights-of-way shall be located where such activity: 
(1)  Would block access to the entrance to any adjacent building or driveway; 
(2)  Would occupy more than half of the width of any pedestrian walkway, or would obstruct the free and orderly flow of pedestrian traffic within any pedestrian walkway; 
(3)  Is within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant, public telephone, fire escape, hospital, bus stop, loading zone, or the driveway of a police or fire station; 
(4)  Is within the portion of any street intended for the use of motor vehicles, unless a temporary street closing permit has been obtained from the town manager; 
(5)  Is within any fire lane, unless a temporary street closing permit has been obtained from the town manager and approved by the town's fire code official; 
(6)  Is within an area reserved to another person by a permit for a special event or community event, unless with the permission of the person to whom the permit has been issued; or 
(7)  Is within an area reserved to another person by a permit for an outdoor cafe or vending space, unless with the permission of the person to whom the permit has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 121, 2-4-2009) 
Chapter 16 - NOISE CONTROL[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 127, adopted Dec. 9, 2009, repealed the former Ch. 16, §§ 16-1-16-3, and enacted a new Ch. 16, §§ 16-1-16-4 as set out herein. The former Ch. 16 pertained to noise control and derived from Ord. No. 116, 8-16-2007. 
Cross reference- Animals, Ch. 5; buildings, Ch. 6; cemeteries, Ch. 8; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 15; nuisances, Ch. 17; offenses-miscellaneous, Ch. 18; peddlers and solicitors, Ch. 19; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23; taxicabs, Ch. 26; unnecessary noise in the operation of motor vehicles, § 15-14. 

Sec. 16-1. - Noise-Loud, etc-Prohibited. 
    No person shall create any loud or disturbing noise in the town. Noise of such character, intensity or duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of any person or to disturb or annoy the quiet, comfort or repose of any person is hereby prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 127, 12-9-2009) 
Sec. 16-2. - Enumeration. 
    The following acts, among others and without limitation, are declared to be loud and disturbing noises in violation of section 16-1. 
(a)  Playing any radio, phonograph or musical instrument in such a manner or with such volume or duration, particularly during the hours between 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m., as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in or on the property of any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence. 
(b)  Allowing any animal or bird to cause frequent or long-continued noise that disturbs the comfort and repose of any person in the vicinity to an extent that constitutes a nuisance. 
(c)  Creating any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning or court while it is in session, or adjacent to any hospital at any time, which interferes with the workings of such school, institution or court or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in the streets indicating that the street is a school, hospital or court street. 
(d)  Shouting of vendors, or the ringing of bells, which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(e)  Using any drum, loudspeakers or other instrument or device to attract attention to any performance, show, sale or display of merchandise, by creating noise. 
(f)  Playing or permitting the playing of any radio, stereo, tape player, compact disc player, loud speaker or other electronic device or mechanical equipment used for the amplification of sound, which is located within a motor vehicle and which is audible from outside the motor vehicle at a distance of fifty (50) feet or more. This provision shall not apply to sirens, loud speakers and emergency communications radios in public safety vehicles, nor shall it apply to motor vehicle alarms or other security devices. 
(g)  Creating loud and excessive noise in residential areas before the hour of 5:00 a.m. in connection with the loading or unloading of refuse or waste collection vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 127, 12-9-2009) 
Sec. 16-3. - Same-Operation of musical devices in certain locations and times. 
    No person shall, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day, play any musical device within two hundred (200) yards of any building of another occupied as living quarters: 
(1)  While the musical device is outside of a building; 
(2)  While the musical device has the aperture of its sound box directed at and within ten (10) feet of an outside opening to the building where the musical device is located; 
(3)  While a loudspeaker attachment to the musical device is on the outside of any building; 
(4)  While the loudspeaker attachment, if inside any building and the aperture of the loudspeaker attachment is directed at and within ten (10) feet of any outside opening of the building where the loudspeaker is located; however, this section shall not be construed to affect the operation of any automobile radio when such radio is installed in an automobile and operated therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 127, 12-9-2009) 
Sec. 16-4. - Violations of chapter. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed to be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 127, 12-9-2009) 
Chapter 17 - NUISANCES[1] 
  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 78, adopted Dec. 10, 2003 rescinded Ch. 17, §§ 17-1-17-5 and enacted new provisions as set out herein. The former provisions pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1973, §§ 17-1-17-5; Ord. No. 3, adopted Aug. 8, 1991; Ord. No. 41, adopted Dec. 11, 1996; Ord. No. 71, adopted Apr. 9, 2003. 
Charter reference- Authority of council to abate nuisances, § 10. 
Cross reference- Animals, Ch. 5; buildings, Ch. 6; erosion and sediment control, Ch. 10; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 12; junkyards, car lots and automobile graveyards, Ch. 13; noise control, Ch. 16; offenses-miscellaneous, Ch. 18; peddlers and solicitors, Ch. 19; solid waste and weeds, Ch. 22; water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 28. 
State Law reference- Nuisance birds, Code of Virginia, § 3.1-1011 et seq.; local abatement of nuisances, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-14(5), 15.1-867; local health ordinances to be at least as stringent as state laws and regulations, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-34. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 17-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words whenever used in this chapter shall have the meaning respectively set forth unless a different meaning is clearly required by the context: 
    Costs. The cost to the town to abate a weed or trash nuisance, including but not limited to the cost of delivering the notice, labor, equipment, tipping fees, contractor's fees, and any other cost directly associated with the action taken to abate the nuisance. 
    Graffiti. The unauthorized application by any means of any writing, painting, drawing, etching, scratching or marking of an inscription, word, figure, or design of any type on any public or private building or other real estate or personal property owned, operated or maintained by a governmental entity or agency or instrumentality thereof or by any private person, firm, or corporation. 
    Nuisance. The doing of any act or the omission to perform any duty, or the permitting of any condition or thing to exist that endangers life or health, obstructs, or interferes with the reasonable or comfortable use of public or private property, tends to depreciate the value of the property of others, or in any way renders other persons insecure in the life or the use of property. Whenever the term nuisance is used in this chapter, it shall be deemed to mean a public nuisance. 
    Occupant. Any person age eighteen (18) or older who resides in a single-family dwelling, duplex, or townhouse, whether or not the person is the lessor. "Occupant" means any person who possesses and uses commercial or other property, with permission of or by contract with the owner. 
    Odor. Any smell from whatever source resulting from a quality of something that stimulates the olfactory and annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities. 
    Owner. The owner of record of real property. 
    Owner's agent. Any person appointed or employed by the owner for the purpose of managing the owner's real estate. 
    Person. Person shall include individuals, corporations, partnerships, and all other legal entities, which may hold title to real or personal property. 
    Premises. A tract of real property with a building or buildings thereon and shall include its grounds and other appurtenances. 
    Property. Both real property and personal. 
    Reasonable time. A time period not less than forty-eight (48) hours and not more than ten (10) calendar days, which will afford the owner a fair opportunity to abate the violation, given the time of year, type of violation, amount of weeds or trash, and other relevant factors, while achieving the goal of eradicating the public nuisance. The term "reasonable time" with respect to a property with repeat notices of violation within any twelve-month time period shall mean a time period not less than twenty-four (24) hours and not more than ten (10) calendar days, with due consideration to the factors listed above. 
    Trash. Abandoned personal property, garbage refuse, litter, or debris openly lying on any parcel, or street, which might endanger the health of residents of the town. 
    Weed or weeds. Any plant, grass or other vegetation over ten (10) inches in height growing upon private property within the town. The term excludes cultivated crops or disturbed woodland not otherwise in violation. Groundcover purposefully planted for bank stabilization is not included. The term excludes cultivated crops, hay grown, mown, and stored for animal feed, or undisturbed woodland. 
(Ord. No. 78, 12-10-2003) 
Sec. 17-2. - Illustrative enumeration. 
    The existence of any of the following activities or conditions are hereby declared to be a public nuisance provided, however, this enumeration shall not be deemed conclusive, limiting, or restrictive: 
(1)  Any violation of article II pertaining to trash, any violation of article III pertaining to household appliances and furniture, and/or any violation of article V pertaining to weeds. 
(2)  Accumulation of rubbish, trash, refuse, junk and other abandoned materials, metal, lumber, or other things that cause a blighting problem or adversely affects the public health or safety. 
(3)  Any condition which provides harborage for rats, mice, snakes, and other vermin. 
(4)  Any building or other structure which is in such a dilapidated condition that it is unfit for human habitation, or kept in such an unsanitary condition that it is a menace to the health of people residing in the vicinity thereof, or presents a more than ordinarily dangerous fire hazard in the vicinity where it is located. 
(5)  All disagreeable or obnoxious odors and stenches, as well as the conditions, substances or other causes, which give rise to the emission or generation of such odors and stenches. 
(6)  The carcasses of animals or fowl not disposed of within a reasonable time after death. 
(7)  The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or body of water by sewage, dead animals, creamery, industrial wastes or other substances. 
(8)  Any building, structure, or other place or location where any activity which is in violation of local, state or federal law is conducted, performed, or maintained. 
(9)  Any accumulation of stagnant water permitted or maintained on any lot or piece of ground. 
(10)  Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, soot, or cinders, in unreasonable quantities. 
(11)  Any action, which unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct or renders dangerous for passage any public or private street, highway, sidewalk stream, ditch, or drainage area, or that would constitute a violation pertaining to loitering and which are reasonably likely to reoccur in the future. 
(Ord. No. 78, 12-10-2003; Ord. No. 161, 3-13-2013 ) 
Sec. 17-3. - Prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to create, cause, permit, or maintain a public nuisance. It shall also be unlawful for any person to permit the continuation of a public nuisance after having been served a notice to abate such nuisance. 
(b)  If the owner of a building or premises fails to abate or cause to be abated a public nuisance occurring on his or her property after receiving reasonable notice of its existence, even though such nuisance was caused or maintained by others, he shall be deemed to have permitted the continuation of such nuisance. 
(c)  Penalty: Violation of a nuisance shall constitute a class 1 misdemeanor. In addition, each day a public nuisance exists shall constitute a separate offense after the date set by the town for its abatement. 
(Ord. No. 78, 12-10-2003) 
Sec. 17-4. - Notice to abate. 
    Whenever a nuisance is found to exist within the town, the town manager or his designee shall give written notice to the owner or occupant of the property upon which such nuisance exists and to the person causing or maintaining the nuisance, if such person is known. 
(Ord. No. 78, 12-10-2003) 
Sec. 17-5. - Contents of notice. 
    The notice to abate a nuisance issued under the provisions of this chapter shall contain: 
(1)  An order to abate the nuisance or to request a hearing within a stated time, which shall be reasonable under the circumstances. 
(2)  The location of a nuisance, if the same is stationary. 
(3)  A description of what constitutes the nuisance. 
(4)  A statement that if the nuisance is not abated as directed, and no request for hearing is made within the prescribed time, the town will abate such nuisance and assess the cost thereof against such person. 
(5)  A statement that the failure to abate a nuisance constitutes a criminal offense punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 78, 12-10-2003) 
Sec. 17-6. - Service of notice. 
(a)  The notice to abate a nuisance shall be sent to the owner, the owner's agent, or person in control of the property on which the nuisance is located via first class mail to the last known address of such person. 
(b)  The notice to abate a nuisance shall be sent to a corporation, bank, trust company or other entity who is the owner of such property or who acts as the owner's agent by mailing a copy via first class mail to its president or such other officer, manager, director or agent thereof in the town. 
(c)  If the owner of the property on which a nuisance is located is unknown or has no place of abode, office or place of business in the town, or after reasonable efforts the town cannot locate a last known address, notice shall be given by order of publication, by publishing a copy of the notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the town at least twice, ten (10) days prior to the abatement of the nuisance and a copy of the notice to abate shall also be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 78, 12-10-2003; Ord. No. 161, 3-13-2013 ) 
Sec. 17-7. - Hearing. 
    Upon request, a hearing shall be held before the town manager of the town and the designee who initially determined the existence of the nuisance. If, after hearing evidence, the town manager finds by a preponderance of the evidence that such a nuisance exists, shall order its abatement; otherwise, he shall dismiss the notice. A hearing must be requested in writing at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the date given for the abatement of the nuisance. The hearing shall be an informal administrative proceeding rather than a judicial-type trial and while each party shall have the opportunity to present pertinent information and to question adverse witnesses the rules of the evidence shall not apply. The decision of the designated officer is final and not subject to appeal. 
(Ord. No. 78, 12-10-2003) 
Sec. 17-8. - Abatement by the town. 
    Upon the failure of the person upon whom notice to abate a nuisance was served pursuant to the provisions of the chapter or who was so ordered by the town manger to abate the same, the town shall proceed to abate such nuisance and shall prepare a statement of costs incurred in the abatement thereof. In order to abate a nuisance, the town may revoke any permit or license issued by the town to the owner of the offending property and which is required by law to conduct the business or activity which gives rise to the nuisance. If the nuisance is not subject to abatement by the town, or if otherwise appropriate, the town manager or his agent shall cause criminal proceedings to be instituted against the person or persons causing or permitting the continuation of the nuisance. 
    When, in the opinion of the town manager, a nuisance results in a condition that creates an immediate, serious and imminent threat to the health or safety of the public, the official may have the necessary work done to abate the nuisance whether or not notice to require the owner or occupant of the premises to abate the nuisance has been given. 
(Ord. No. 78, 12-10-2003) 
Sec. 17-9. - Town's cost declared lien. 
    Any and all costs incurred by the town in the abatement of a nuisance under the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a lien against the property upon which nuisance existed, which lien shall be filed, proven and collected as provided for by law. Such lien shall be notice to all persons from the time of its recording, and shall bear interest at the legal rate thereafter until satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 78, 12-10-2003) 
ARTICLE II. - TRASH CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 161, adopted Mar. 13, 2013 , repealed the former Art. II, §§ 17-10-17-14, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to weed and trash control and derived from Ord. No. 78, adopted 12-10-2003. 

Sec. 17-10. - Definition. 
    The word "trash" as used in this article shall be held to include abandoned personal property, garbage, refuse, litter, or debris openly lying on any parcel. 
( Ord. No. 161, 3-13-2013 ) 
Sec. 17-11. - Accumulation of trash prohibited; duty of owner and occupant. 
(a)  Trash lying on any parcel shall constitute a public nuisance. It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of real property to permit the accumulation thereon of any trash. It shall be the joint and several duty of the owner and occupant of any parcel to immediately remove or destroy any and all trash from his or her parcel. 
(b)  Each ten-day period that such trash shall remain unremoved shall be deemed to constitute a separate misdemeanor offense under this section. 
( Ord. No. 161, 3-13-2013 ) 
Sec. 17-12. - Notice to remove trash. 
(a)  When the town manager or his designee determines that a violation of this article exists with respect to any parcel, he shall deliver written notice to the owner, via one or more of the following methods. 
(1)  Mail written notice thereof to the owner, at the owner's address as determined from public records, via first class mail; 
(2)  Mail written notice thereof to the occupant, at the address where the violation is observed, via first class mail; 
(3)  Hand-deliver written notice to the owner, the owner's agent, or occupant personally, noting the date, time, and place of personal delivery. 
(b)  The notice shall: 
(1)  Set forth the alleged violation of this article; 
(2)  Describe the parcel of real property by street address or reasonable alternative means; 
(3)  Demand the removal of the trash; 
(4)  Advise that if the trash is not removed within a specified reasonable time of the delivery of the notice, the town will proceed to remove the trash, with the costs thereof together with an administrative fee authorized by this article being specially assessed against the owner and the parcel; 
(5)  Advise that the town's costs, together with the administrative fee, will constitute a lien against the property in favor of the town, and a personal liability of the owner or occupant; 
(6)  Afford the owner or occupant an opportunity to meet with the town manager for a hearing on all alleged violations, the proposed action, and the consequences thereof. 
(c)  The owner or occupant may request a hearing with the town manager, in writing, within the reasonable time period set forth in the notice. In the event the owner or occupant requests a hearing, the town manager shall set a hearing and notify the owner of the time and location of the hearing, to be held within five (5) days from the date of the manager's receipt of the request for hearing. The town will postpone any enforcement action until after the date and time set for the hearing. 
( Ord. No. 161, 3-13-2013 ) 
Sec. 17-13. - Town action to abate the violation. 
    If the owner or occupant shall fail to complete the abatement of the trash within the reasonable time specified in the written notice, the town manager may direct that town forces abate or complete the abatement of the violation. In the alternative, the town manager may contract for this work to be done by a private contractor. 
( Ord. No. 161, 3-13-2013 ) 
Sec. 17-14. - Costs of town action constitute a lien on property; administrative fee authorized. 
    In any case where the town has delivered written notice to the owner through one of the methods prescribed in section 17-12 of this article, the costs of any town action to abate the trash violation shall constitute a lien against the parcel. In addition, an administrative fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) is hereby ordained to be assessed against the owner. The costs plus the administrative fee shall constitute a lien against the parcel, ranking on a parity with liens for unpaid local taxes, and are enforceable in the same manner. 
( Ord. No. 161, 3-13-2013 ) 
ARTICLE III. - HOUSEHOLD APPLIANCES AND HOUSEHOLD FURNITURE 

Sec. 17-15. - Definitions. 
    The following words whenever used in this article shall have the meaning respectively set forth unless a different meaning is clearly required by the context: 
    Elements. Those aspects of inclement weather conditions for which such items are not designed nor intended to function or exist for extended periods of time such as rain, wind, and temperature extremes normally associated with outdoor conditions. 
    Exposed. Circumstances under which such items will experience wear and tear due to their locations out of doors and/or the deleterious effects of the elements such that water may accumulate and/or which may shelter and/or encourage the harboring of rodents and/or mosquitoes, and/or materials which generate obnoxious odors and/or become an electrical shock or fire hazard. "Exposed" expressly does not include an operating appliance in working condition located in a partially covered area, such as a garage or porch, such that it is not susceptible to coming in contact with rain. Provided, however, "exposed" shall not include the interior of any fully enclosed porch (including, without limitation, a porch enclosed by screening material) that cannot be accessed from outside except through a closed door that can be locked, and shall not be considered "outside" for the purpose of this section. 
    Household appliances and household furniture. Those items routinely used within a household that have no weatherproofing qualities. 
(Ord. No. 78, 12-10-2003) 
Sec. 17-16. - Household appliances and household furniture prohibited outside any dwelling. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person residing in or having charge or control of any dwelling within the town to leave or permit to remain outside of any such dwelling any household appliances or household furniture in such a manner that same are exposed to the elements. 
(Ord. No. 78, 12-10-2003) 
Sec. 17-17. - Exceptions. 
    The following shall constitute specific exceptions to any alleged violation of this provision: 
(1)  That such furniture was placed in an outside location in order to allow it to be moved during a move of a resident or residents or removed as part of a trash or recycling program on a day scheduled for such moving or removal. 
(2)  That such furniture was temporarily placed in an outside location in order that it be offered for sale at a yard or garage sale if each of the following conditions exists: 
a.  The furniture is located in an outside location only during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
b.  The person attempting to sell the furniture, or that person's agent, is outside during the period of the yard or garage sale in order to monitor the sale. 
c.  A sign is placed on or near the furniture indicating that it is for sale. 
d.  This exception shall not apply if upholstered furniture is located in an outside location for more than two (2) days in any six-month period. 
(Ord. No. 78, 12-10-2003) 
Sec. 17-18. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 78, 12-10-2003) 
ARTICLE IV. - GRAFFITI CONTROL 

Sec. 17-19. - Graffiti prohibited; criminal penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deface or damage private or public property, by or through the application of graffiti. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 78, 12-10-2003) 
Sec. 17-20. - Parental responsibility for damage to property. 
    In the event graffiti is applied to any public or private property by a minor who is living with either or both parents, the town may institute an action and recover from the parents of the minor, or either of them, the costs for damages suffered by a reason of the willful destruction of, or damage to, public property by the minor. The action by the town shall be subject to any limitations on the amount of recovered set forth. Any recovery action brought by an owner for damages by reason of graffiti to private property shall be subject to the limitations set forth. 
(Ord. No. 78, 12-10-2003) 
Sec. 17-21. - Authority for town to remove or repair the defacement of buildings, walls, fences, and other structures. 
(a)  The town manager or his agent is authorized to undertake or contract for the removal or repair of the defacement, by or through the application of graffiti, on any public buildings, wall, fence or other structure or any private building, wall, fence, or other structure where such graffiti is visible from any public right-of-way. 
(b)  Prior to such removal, the town manager or his agent shall seek the written permission of the property owner or whenever possible, oral permission. If the property owner fails to provide requested permission with ten (10) days of receipt of permission request or denies the oral request, the abatement procedures set forth in sections 17-4 through 17-9 of this chapter shall be followed to effect removal or repair of the defacement. 
(c)  After receiving written permission, oral permission, or giving proper notice the town may undertake the removal or repair of the defacement. Except for those costs recovered pursuant to section 17-20 of this article, the removal or repair of graffiti shall be at the expense of the town, and shall be abated by the town with whatever means available. 
(Ord. No. 78, 12-10-2003) 
ARTICLE V. - WEED CONTROL 

Sec. 17-22. - Definition. 
    The word "weeds" as used in this chapter shall be held to include grass, weeds, bushes and any other vegetation other than trees, ornamental shrubbery, flowers and garden vegetables properly tended. 
( Ord. No. 161, 3-13-2013 ) 
Sec. 17-23. - Weeds on any property-public nuisance. 
    Weeds on any property located within the town that are in excess of ten (10) inches in height are found to be a danger to the public health and are hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance. 
( Ord. No. 161, 3-13-2013 ) 
Sec. 17-24. - Same-Duty of owner to cut. 
    The owners of property located within the town shall cut the weeds that are in excess of ten (10) inches in height on such property. The owners of property shall also cut weeds in excess of ten (10) inches along public sidewalks, curb lines, streets, alleys, and within tree wells. At no time shall weeds or grass exceed ten (10) inches. 
( Ord. No. 161, 3-13-2013 ) 
Sec. 17-25. - Same-Notice to owner to cut. 
    The town manager or his duly authorized agent may give notice in writing, via first class mail, to the owner of land in the town upon which there are weeds in excess of ten (10) inches in height that such weeds must be cut within ten (10) days from the receipt of the notice or the town will cut the weeds, bill the owner for the costs and collect the costs like taxes in the event of nonpayment by the owner. Mailing to the last known post office address shall constitute sufficient service upon owners who cannot be found after a reasonably diligent search or who are nonresidents. 
( Ord. No. 161, 3-13-2013 ) 
Sec. 17-26. - Same-Cutting by town; billing and collection of charges; unpaid bill a lien. 
    Whenever the owner of real property refuses, neglects, or fails to cut weeds after being notified in the manner prescribed by section 17-25 above, the weeds may be cut by the town. The expense thereof shall be forthwith computed, and a bill for such expense shall be prepared by the town treasurer and mailed to the owner at his last known post office address within a reasonable time after the cutting. In the event the town does not receive payment of the bill within thirty (30) days after mailing, the treasurer shall proceed to collect the expense and may do so in the same manner as town taxes are collected. In addition, an administrative fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) is hereby ordained to be assessed against the owner. Every expense with which the owner of any real property shall have been assessed and which remains unpaid shall constitute a lien against the owner's property, ranking on a parity with liens for unpaid local taxes, and are enforceable in the same manner. 
( Ord. No. 161, 3-13-2013 ) 
Sec. 17-27. - Same-Failure to cut weeds after receipt of notice. 
    An owner of real property who has received written notice in the manner prescribed by section 17-25 of this article that weeds on the owner's property, or along public sidewalks, curb lines, streets, alleys, and within tree wells, are in excess of ten (10) inches shall cut all such weeds within the time period set out in the notice, and the failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this section. Said violation shall be a civil violation which shall be enforced through the levying of a civil penalty. The penalty for the first violation occurring in any six-month period shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00), for a second violation occurring in any six-month period the penalty shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), and for each additional violation occurring in any six-month period the penalty shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
( Ord. No. 161, 3-13-2013 ) 
Sec. 17-28. - Exemptions. 
    The requirement of section 17-24 to cut all weeds shall not apply to any property which meets the following conditions: 
(1)  The parcel is vacant, greater than five (5) acres in size, and is located in a residential zoning district. 
(2)  The parcel is open space (or equivalent) designated as much as a zoning proffer on a subdivision plat, or as a conservation easement; the parcel is not used for active recreation; and the designation contemplates that the area is set aside to remain in a natural state. 
(3)  The parcel is public area set aside by the town to remain in a natural state on a temporary or permanent basis. 
(4)  The parcel is free from the accumulation of trash. 
(5)  The owner or occupant mows a buffer swath at the perimeter of the property, ten (10) feet in width where the property adjoins public or private property in residential, civic, commercial, office, or industrial use; and five (5) feet in width where the property line adjoins a public right-of-way. The vegetation in this buffer area shall not exceed ten (10) inches in height. 
( Ord. No. 161, 3-13-2013 ) 
Chapter 18 - OFFENSES-MISCELLANEOUS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Noise control, Ch. 16; nuisances, Ch. 17. 
State Law reference- Crimes and offenses generally, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-1 et seq. 

Sec. 18-1. - Abusive language. 
    If any person shall, in the presence or hearing of another, curse or abuse such other person, or use any violent abusive language to such person concerning himself or any of his relations, or otherwise use such language, under circumstances reasonably calculated to provoke a breach of the peace, he shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Code 1973, § 18-27) 
State Law reference- Using abusive language, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-416. 
Sec. 18-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 176 adopted July 13, 2016, rescinded § 18-2 entitled "Adultery and fornication", which derived from Code 1973, § 18-1. 
Sec. 18-3. - Alcoholic beverages-Drinking or tendering to another, in public place. 
(a)  If any person takes a drink of alcoholic beverages or tenders a drink thereof to another, whether accepted or not, at or in any public place (as defined in Code of Virginia, § 4-2), he shall be fined not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(b)  This section shall not prevent any person from drinking alcoholic beverages or offering a drink thereof to another in the dining room or other designated room, as defined in Code of Virginia, § 4-25, of a hotel, restaurant, club or boat, or in a dining car, club car or buffet car of any train, or wine, wine coolers or similar products that qualify as beverages as defined in Code of Virginia, § 4-99, and beer only within all seating areas, concourses, walkways, concession areas, as well as other additional locations designated by the Virginia Alcoholic Beverage Control Board, in coliseums, stadia or similar facilities, during the performance of a professional sporting exhibition or event, provided such alcoholic beverages are served in a paper, plastic or similar disposable container, or in any other establishment, provided such hotel, restaurant, club, boat, dining car, club car, buffet car, coliseum, stadium or similar facility or other establishment, or the person who operates the same, including a concessionaire, is licensed to sell at retail for consumption in such dining room, room, car, seating areas, concourses, walkways, concession areas, as well as other additional locations designated by the board, in such coliseum, stadium or similar facility or establishment, such alcoholic beverages, and the alcoholic beverages drunk or offered were purchased therein. 
(Code 1973, § 18-2) 
Sec. 18-4. - Same-Hours of sale for beer and wine. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person licensed under the provisions of the Code of Virginia, §§ 4-1 to 4-118, to sell, give away, serve or permit to be served any beer or wine at his place of business or within one hundred (100) yards thereof or to permit the consumption of wine or beer on the premises between the hours of 12:00 midnight to 6:00 a.m. each day of the week. 
(Code 1973, § 18-3) 
State Law reference- Regulation of sale of wine and beer from midnight on Saturday to 6:00 a.m. on Monday, Code of Virginia, § 4-97. 
Sec. 18-5. - Assault and battery. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or offer or threaten to fight or quarrel with another, or to use blows or violence towards another in any angry quarrelsome manner or to strike, assault or fight another. 
(Code 1973, § 18-4) 
Sec. 18-6. - Bawdyhouse; keeping; visiting. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a house of ill fame, any bawdyhouse or any place where persons may meet for the purpose of prostitution or illicit or illegal intercourse. It shall be unlawful for any person to frequent, reside in or visit for immoral purposes any house of ill fame, brothel or bawdyhouse or any place within or without any building or structure within the town which is used or is to be used for lewdness, assignation or prostitution; and in a prosecution for any of these offenses, the general character of such house or place may be proved. 
(Code 1973, § 18-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-347. 
Sec. 18-7. - Curfew-Persons under eighteen years of age. 
    It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public grounds, public places and public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day; provided, that the provisions of this section do not apply to a minor accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor; where the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor; where the minor is in attendance at or participating in sports, theatrical or other recreational activities not promoted or conducted for private gain but constantly and directly supervised by one (1) or more adults; or where the minor is in attendance at a place of amusement, if the entertainment there is censored by an authorized governmental agency or where one (1) or more police officers are in regular attendance throughout the period of entertainment or performance. Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1973, § 18-6; Ord. No. 107, 9-13-2006) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23. 
Sec. 18-8. - Same-Responsibility of parents. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor under the age of eighteen (18) years to permit such minor to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon public streets, highways, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places and public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day; provided, that the provisions of this section do not apply to a minor accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor; where the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor; where the minor is in attendance at or is participating in sports, theatrical or other recreational activities not promoted or conducted for private gain, but constantly and directly supervised by one (1) or more adults; or where the minor is in attendance at places of amusement, if the entertainment there is censored by an authorized governmental agency or where one (1) or more police officers are in regular attendance throughout the period of entertainment or performance. 
(b)  Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1973, § 18-7; Ord. No. 129, 7-14-2010) 
Sec. 18-9. - Same-Duties of officers. 
    Whenever any police officer or other officer charged with the duty of enforcing the ordinances of the town discovers or has his attention called to the fact that any such minor is in or upon the public streets, highways, alleys, parks, playgrounds, or other public grounds, public places and public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. and that such minor is not accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult having the care and custody of the minor, such officer shall make an immediate investigation, including the questioning to the minor, if feasible, for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not the presence of such minor in or upon any of such places is not prohibited by the provisions of this section. If the investigation satisfies the officer that the presence of the minor in or upon such place is prohibited by the provisions of this section, the officer shall cause a report thereof to be made to the judge of the juvenile and domestic relations court. 
(Code 1973, § 18-8; Ord. No. 129, 7-14-2010) 
Sec. 18-10. - Same-Penalties. 
    Pursuant to § 15.2-926 of the Code of Virginia, each violation of section 18-7 by any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be disposed of as provided in §§ 16.1-278.4 and 16.1-278.5 of the Code of Virginia. Any parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor violating the provisions of section 18-8, upon a conviction therefor shall be punished as provided in section 1-6. 
(Code 1973, § 18-9; Ord. No. 98, 3-8-2006; Ord. No. 135, 3-11-2011) 
Sec. 18-11. - Dances and dance halls-Permit for dances. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, conduct, sponsor or hold a dance, either public or private, within the town at any place other than at a private home, without first securing a permit therefor from the town manager or his duly authorized representative. If, in the opinion of the town manager, the health, morals or safety of any or all persons attending the dance would be adversely affected, he may refuse such permit. 
(b)  All persons intending to hold or conduct a dance as herein provided shall first make application for the permit on forms provided by the town manager, setting forth the date and time of the dance, the names of any and all sponsors, the place where the dance will be held, the charges for admission to same, together with such other information the town manager may require for the enforcement of this section and pay any and all license fees provided by town ordinances. The fee for a single dance shall be twenty dollars ($20.00). A blanket dance permit covering a one-year period will be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Fees are due and payable when application is made and/or renewed. 
(c)  Any person violating this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 18-10; Ord. No. 29, 1-11-95) 
Sec. 18-12. - Same-Definition. 
    A "public dance hall," for the purposes of sections 18-11 through 18-15, shall be construed to mean any place open to the general public where dancing is permitted to which an admission fee is charged or for which compensation is in any manner received, either directly or indirectly by cover charge or otherwise or where refreshments or food or any form of merchandise are served for compensation before, during or after dancing and the sale of any refreshments, food or any form of merchandise at any such place or the exhibition of such for sale shall be deemed direct compensation for any such dance hall as is contemplated in this section. 
(Code 1973, § 18-11) 
State Law reference- Dance halls, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-433. 
Sec. 18-13. - Same-Permit to sell beer or wine. 
    No person shall operate or conduct in or within one (1) mile of the town limits a public dance hall on the premises or in connection with any business which sells beer and wine, either or both, without a permit. The permit shall be obtained from the town council and may be revoked at any time by the town council. 
(Code 1973, § 18-12) 
Cross reference- Licensing of alcoholic beverages, § 14-51 et seq. 
Sec. 18-14. - Same-Hours of operation. 
    All public dance halls shall not in any instance continue later than 2:00 a.m. and shall not open until after 7:00 a.m.; between such hours no food, beer, wine or other merchandise may be served, dispensed or given away in such dance hall or any building connected therewith or within one hundred (100) yards thereof. No person shall be permitted to remain in the dance hall or building connected therewith, except the owner, his agents or employees. 
(Code 1973, § 18-13) 
Sec. 18-15. - Same-Penalty. 
    Any person who violates section 18-13 or 18-14 shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
Sec. 18-16. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- The minutes of Feb. 9, 2009, repealed § 18-16 which pertained to demonstrations and picketing and derived from Code 1973, § 18-14. 
Sec. 18-17. - Destroying, injuring, etc., property-Public. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to break, tear down, deface or destroy, or to assist in breaking, tearing down, defacing, injuring or destroying, any tree, sign, building, bridge, pavement or any other property belonging to or controlled by the town. 
(Code 1973, § 18-15) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-138, 18.2-139. 
Sec. 18-18. - Same-Private. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to take and carry away or destroy, deface or injure any property, real or personal, of another without permission from the owner or custodian of such property. 
(Code 1973, § 18-16) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-137. 
Sec. 18-19. - Disorderly conduct in public places. 
(a)  Any person who shall behave in a riotous or disorderly manner or cause any unnecessary disturbance in any street, highway, public building, public place or while in or on a public conveyance, and any person who shall wilfully interrupt or unnecessarily disturb any meeting of the governing body of any political subdivision of this state or a division or agency thereof, or of any school, literary society or place of religious worship, or who, being intoxicated, shall disturb such a meeting, whether wilfully or not, shall be punished as provided in section 1-6. 
(b)  The person in charge of any such building, place, conveyance or meeting may eject therefrom any person who violates any provision of this section, with the aid, if necessary, of any persons who may be called upon for such purpose. 
(Code 1973, § 18-17) 
State Law reference- Disorderly conduct in public places, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-415. 
Sec. 18-20. - Disturbing functions of school or literary society. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully interrupt, molest or disturb the exercise of any school or any literary society or, being intoxicated, disturb the same, whether wilfully or not. 
(Code 1973, § 18-18) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-415. 
Sec. 18-21. - Disturbing religious worship. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully interrupt or disturb any assembly met for the worship of God or, being intoxicated, disturb the same, whether wilfully or not. 
(Code 1973, § 18-19) 
Charter reference- Authority of council to protect places of divine worship, § 10. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-415. 
Sec. 18-22. - Fighting, etc.; unlawful to permit on premises. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to allow, suffer or permit in any house or upon any premises owned or occupied by himself any profane, obscene or vulgar language or conduct; any fighting, quarreling or affray; or any loud or unusual noises to the disturbance of the quiet and good order of the town. 
(Code 1973, § 18-21) 
Sec. 18-23. - Gambling prohibited generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Keep, exhibit, run, maintain or operate for the purpose of gambling any gaming table, bank, wheel of fortune, slot machine or any similar game, device or contrivance. 
(2)  Knowingly permit a gaming table, bank, wheel of fortune, slot machine or any similar game, device or contrivance to be kept, exhibited, run, maintained or operated for the purpose of gambling on any premises in his occupation; or to keep a place resorted to or frequented for gambling; or to reside in such a place for such purposes; or to act as doorkeeper, guard or watch thereat; or to employ any person to so act. 
(3)  Bet, wager or play at any such table, wheel of fortune or other game, device or contrivance mentioned in this section or at any public house or place, or to play at any game, except billiards, bowls, chess or a licensed game or to bet on the sides of those who play. 
(Code 1973, § 18-24) 
State Law reference- Gambling, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-325 et seq. 
Sec. 18-24. - House numbers. 
    The owner of any home, business, apartment, factory or any other building shall properly display a house number. These numbers must be at least three (3) inches in height and must be displayed so as to be clearly visible from the street in front of the building. The house number shall be assigned by the town manager's office. 
(Code 1973, § 18-53) 
Cross reference- Buildings, Ch. 6; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23. 
Sec. 18-25. - Indecent dress; nudity. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to appear on any street or in any public place in a state of nudity or in any indecent dress. 
(Code 1973, § 18-25) 
Sec. 18-26. - Indecent exposure. 
    No person shall intentionally make an obscene display or exposure of his person, or the private parts thereof, in any public place, or in any place where others are present, or shall procure another to so expose himself. 
(Code 1973, § 18-26) 
State Law reference- Taking indecent liberties with children, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-370; indecent exposure, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-387. 
Sec. 18-27. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 166, adopted June 12, 2013 , repealed § 18-27, which pertained to interfering with or assaulting officer in performance of duty. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Sec. 18-28. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 176 adopted July 13, 2016, rescinded § 18-28 entitled "Lewd and lascivious cohabitation", which derived from Code 1973, § 18-29. 
Sec. 18-29. - Loitering. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
(1)  Loiter shall mean to stand around or remain, or to park or to remain parked in a motor vehicle at a public place or place open to the public and to engage in any conduct prohibited under this section. "Loiter" also means to collect, gather, congregate, or be a member of a group or a crowd of people who are gathered together in any public place or place open to the public and to engage in any conduct prohibited under this section. 
(2)  Public place shall mean any public street, road, highway, alley, lane, sidewalk, crosswalk or other public way, place of amusement, park, playground, public building or grounds appurtenant thereto, school buildings or school grounds, or public parking lot or any other publicly owned property. 
(3)  Place open to the public shall mean any place open to the public or any place to which the public is invited or may reasonably expect to be invited, and in, on, or around any privately owned place of business, private parking lot, or private institution, including places of worship, cemetery, or any place of amusement and entertainment whether or not a charge of admission or entry thereto is made. It includes the elevator, lobby, halls, corridors and areas open to the public of any store, office, apartment building, shopping center or mall. 
(b)  Prohibited conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter at, on or in a public place or place open to the public in the following manner: 
(1)  To interfere, impede or hinder the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(2)  To attempt to interfere, impede or hinder the free passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(3)  To threaten or do physical harm to another member of the public. 
(4)  To curse and abuse (as defined in section 18-1) another member of the public. 
(5)  To damage, destroy or deface public property or the property of another member of the public. 
(6)  To litter in a public place or place open to the public. 
(7)  That by words, acts or other conduct it is clear that there is a present danger of a breach of the peace or disorderly conduct. 
(c)  Identification. It shall be unlawful for any person at a public place or place open to the public to refuse to identify himself by name and address at the request of a uniformed police officer or of a properly identified police officer not in uniform, if the surrounding circumstances are such as to indicate to a reasonable man that the public safety requires such identification. 
(d)  Lawful assembly. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit orderly picketing or other lawful assembly. 
(e)  Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and fined not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(Code 1973, § 18-28.1) 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 15; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23. 
Sec. 18-30. - Mask or disguise; trick or treat visitations; Halloween curfew. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person over twelve (12) years of age to appear in or on any of the streets, highways, alleys, public parks or other public places of the town in any mask or disguise whereby the identity of such person is concealed without the permission of the town manager or chief of police. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to appear on the streets, highways, public homes, private homes or public places in the town to make trick or treat visitations. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to children twelve (12) years of age and under on Halloween night, prior to 9:00 p.m., nor to persons: 
(1)  Wearing traditional holiday costumes. 
(2)  Engaged in professions, trades, employment or other activities and wearing protective masks which are deemed necessary for the physical safety of the wearer or other persons. 
(3)  Engaged in any bona fide theatrical production or masquerade ball. 
(4)  Wearing a mask, hood or other device for bona fide medical reasons upon the advice of a licensed physician or osteopath and carrying on his person an affidavit from the physician or osteopath specifying the medical necessity for wearing the device and the date on which the wearing of the device will no longer be necessary and providing a brief description of the device. 
(Code 1973, § 18-30; Ord. No. 27, 2-9-94) 
State Law reference- Wearing of masks, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-422. 
Sec. 18-31. - Obscenity. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to: 
(1)  Prepare any obscene item, as described in Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-372 and 18.2-373, for the purposes of sale or distribution. 
(2)  Print, copy, manufacture, produce, or reproduce any obscene item for purposes of sale or distribution. 
(3)  Publish, sell, rent, lend, transport in intrastate commerce, or distribute or exhibit any obscene item, or offer to do any of these things. 
(4)  Have in his possession with intent to sell, rent, lend, transport, or distribute any obscene item. Possession in public or in a public place of any obscene item shall be deemed prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(5)  Perform in or present any obscene play or exhibition of any kind. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, "distribute" shall mean delivery in person, by mail, messenger or by any other means by which obscene items may pass from one (1) person to another. 
(Code 1973, § 18-31) 
State Law reference- Obscene books, etc., Code of Virginia, § 18.2-374. 
Sec. 18-31.1. - Offenses without specified penalties. 
    All offenses enumerated in chapters 5, 8, 12, 16, 17, 18 and 23 for which no penalty is specified, shall be deemed to be class 2 misdemeanors as defined by the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended from time to time, and shall further be subject to all punishment provided for class 2 misdemeanors. 
(Ord. of 3-14-91, § 18-54; Ord. No. 101, 6-15-2006) 
Sec. 18-32. - Peeping or spying into structure occupied as dwelling. 
    If any person shall enter upon the property of another, in the nighttime, and secretly or furtively peep through or attempt to so peep, into, through, or spy through, a window, door or other aperture of any building, structure or other enclosure of any nature occupied or intended for occupancy as a dwelling, whether or not such building, structure or enclosure is permanently situated or transportable and whether or not such occupancy is permanent or temporary, such person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 18-32) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-130. 
Sec. 18-33. - Profane swearing and intoxication in public; penalty; transportation of public inebriates to detoxification center. 
    If any person profanely curses or swears or is intoxicated in public, whether such intoxication results from alcohol, narcotic drug or other intoxicant or drug of whatever nature, he shall be fined not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). In any area in which there is located a court-approved detoxification center a law enforcement officer may authorize the transportation, by police or otherwise, of public inebriates to such detoxification center in lieu of arrest; however, no person shall be involuntarily detained in such center. 
(Code 1973, §§ 18-20, 18-35) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-388. 
Sec. 18-34. - Profane, threatening or indecent language over public airways. 
    If any person shall use obscene, vulgar, profane, lewd, lascivious or indecent language, or make any suggestion or proposal of an obscene nature, or threaten any illegal or immoral act with the intent to coerce, intimidate, or harass any person, over any telephone or citizens band radio, in this town, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 18-36) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-427. 
Sec. 18-35. - Projectiles; throwing, shooting. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw any projectile from any sling, catapult or air gun or to shoot an arrow with any bow or crossbow upon any street, alley or other public place. 
(Code 1973, § 18-37) 
Sec. 18-36. - Public improvements-Driving over wet paint, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any automobile, motor vehicle or other vehicle of conveyance or to drive or ride any animal or to walk, run or otherwise go upon, on, over or across the newly made portion of any pavement on any highway, street, alley, sidewalk or other improvement or the freshly painted portion of any design or marking on any highway, street, alley, sidewalk or other improvement when any portion is marked with cones, "Z" bars, barrels, barricades or other markers indicating that the portion is newly made or freshly painted or when any portion is marked or posted with a sign or signs indicating that the portion is closed. 
(Code 1973, § 18-38) 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 15. 
Sec. 18-37. - Same-Tampering with signs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure, move, knock down, remove, cover or tamper with any sign, barricade, cone, "Z" bar or other marker or warning device used to indicate newly made pavement or freshly painted designs or markings on any highway, street, alley, sidewalk or other improvement or used to warn that construction is under way or that men are or may be working or that defective conditions exist. 
(Code 1973, § 18-39) 
Sec. 18-38. - Same-Hindering. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder or obstruct the making or repairing of any public improvement or work. 
(Code 1973, § 18-40) 
Sec. 18-39. - Removing sand, rock, etc., from streets and public grounds. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or cause to be removed any dirt, sand, stone, rock, tree, shrub, plank, sidewalk or fence from any street, alley, lot or ground belonging to the town without permission from the mayor or the council. 
(Code 1973, § 18-41) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23. 
State Law reference- Injuries to trees, etc., in public squares or grounds, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-139. 
Sec. 18-40. - Solicitations for contributions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, or the agents of any person, to solicit subscription in money or contribution of any kind whatsoever to any cause or object without first securing a permit from the mayor or, in the absence of the mayor, from the town manager; provided, that this section shall not apply to a subscription or contribution solicited by any person by authority of any church or purely religious body, congregation or political party. 
(Code 1973, § 18-42) 
Cross reference- Peddlers and solicitors, Ch. 19. 
Sec. 18-41. - Stones, etc.; throwing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw any stone, stick or other thing whereby any person may be or shall be hit or hurt or any window broken or other property, belonging to another, injured or destroyed. 
(Code 1973, § 18-43) 
Sec. 18-42. - Tampering with metering device; diverting service. 
(a)  Any person who shall tamper with any metering device incident to oil, telegraph, telephone, electric, gas or water facilities, or otherwise intentionally prevent such a metering device from properly registering the degree, amount or quantity of such service supplied, or who shall divert such service, excepting, however, telephonic or electronic extension service not owned or controlled by any such company without authorization from the owner of such facility who or which furnishes such service to the public, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  The presence of any metering device found to have been altered, tampered with, or bypassed in a manner that would cause such metering device to inaccurately measure and register the degree, amount or quantity of such service supplied or which would cause such service to be diverted from the recording apparatus of the meter shall be prima facie evidence of intent to violate and of the violation of this section by the person to whose benefit it is that such service be unmetered, unregistered or diverted. 
(Code 1973, § 18-34) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-163. 
Sec. 18-43. - Trespassing-Generally. 
(a)  If any person, not an officer, without the consent of the owner, proprietor or custodian or without authority of the law shall go upon the lands or premises of another where a "No Trespassing" sign has been placed thereon or if any person shall go upon the premises of another after having been forbidden to do so by the owner, proprietor or custodian or other person lawfully in charge or possession of such land or premises or if any person in the nighttime shall go upon the premises on which there is located a residence or other building without such consent or authority or unless for some lawful purpose, he shall be deemed guilty of trespass. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, not an officer, to enter the dwelling of another without the consent of the owner or other person having a legal right to give such consent or to enter a storehouse or any other building of another without such consent expressed or implied. 
(Code 1973, § 18-46) 
Cross reference- Trespassing at night on cemetery property, § 8-18. 
Sec. 18-44. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 166, adopted June 12, 2013 , repealed § 18-44, which pertained to railroad trains generally. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Sec. 18-45. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 166, adopted June 12, 2013 , repealed § 18-45, which pertained to trespassers forbidden to jump on or off railroad cars or trains. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Sec. 18-46. - Weapons-Carrying concealed. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to carry hid from common observation any pistol, dirk, bowie knife, switchblade knife, razor or any weapon of like kind, subject to the exceptions provided by Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308. 
(Code 1973, § 18-47) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308. 
Sec. 18-47. - Same-Discharge of firearms. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any cannon, gun, pistol, revolver or firearm of any description, without necessity, unless the person doing the same is an officer acting within the duties of his office. Provided, that no hunting, and discharging of firearms shall be closer than one hundred (100) yards of any dwelling, building, playgrounds or improved area. Also a permit shall be obtained from the chief of police to discharge all firearms within the corporate limits. 
(Code 1973, § 18-48; Ord. No. 166, 6-12-2013 ; Ord. No. 176 , 7-13-2016) 
Cross reference- Discharge of firearms at airport, § 4-4; discharge of firearms in cemetery, § 8-19. 
Sec. 18-48. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 152 , adopted April 2012, repealed § 18-48, which pertained to weapons-permits for purchase and sale and derived from § 18-49 of the 1973 Code. 
Sec. 18-49. - Weapons-Sale to minors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter, give, furnish or cause to be sold, bartered, given or furnished to any minor under eighteen (18) years of age a pistol, dirk or bowie knife, having good reason to believe him to be a minor under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Code 1973, § 18-50) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-309. 
Sec. 18-50. - Urination or defecation in public. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in or on any sidewalk, street, or in any place visible or open to the public where other persons are present, unless such urination or defecation be in a bathroom, restroom, or other facility specifically designed for such purpose. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 80, 12-10-2003) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 66, adopted July 10, 2002, rescinded § 18-50, which pertained to yard sales; permit required and derived from Code 1973, § 18-51. 
Chapter 19 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses and permits, Ch. 14; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 15; noise control, Ch. 16; nuisances, Ch. 17; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23; zoning, Ch. 29; licensing of peddlers, § 14-63; licenses for soliciting subscriptions and contributions, § 14-71; solicitations for contributions without permit, § 18-40. 
State Law reference- Local regulation of door-to-door vendors, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-37.3:1, 15.1-37.3:2; protection of the property and inhabitants of the town, preservation of peace and good order, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-137; solicitation of contributions, Code of Virginia, § 57-48 et seq.; local ordinances relating to charitable solicitations, Code of Virginia, § 57-63; local licensing of peddlers, itinerant merchants and direct sellers, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3717 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 19-1. - Street drumming. 
    No person shall obstruct or interfere in any way with the passage of persons along the streets or sidewalks in the town for the purpose of inducing them to purchase any article or thing, or importune passersby to make any such purchase, or enter any such establishment, or, in any disorderly manner, solicit trade, customers or patronage along the streets or sidewalks in the town. 
(Code 1973, § 19-1) 
Sec. 19-2. - Tradesmen certification standards. 
(a)  Official action. The Town of Farmville building department is hereby designated to act as the enforcing agency for the enforcement of the Virginia Tradesmen Certification Standards, duly adopted by the Virginia Board of Housing and Community Development under authority of Code of Virginia §§ 15.1-11.4 and 36-99. Enforcement shall be according, to the terms of this section. 
(b)  Enforcement. The enforcement of the tradesmen certification standards shall be instituted by the town building department in accordance with the provisions of the Virginia Tradesmen Certification Standards. 
(c)  Fees. Every person making application for examination pursuant to this section shall pay a fee of forty-five dollars ($45.00). Application fees paid pursuant to this section shall not be refunded to either successful or unsuccessful applicants. 
(d)  Appeals. The town building board of appeals is hereby designated as the appeals board to hear appeals arising from the application or interpretation of the tradesmen certification standards. 
(e)  Administrative practices. The town building department shall establish such procedures or requirements as may be necessary for administration and enforcement of this section. The procedures are to be approved by the town council. 
(f)  Violation of section. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, on or after the effective date of this section, to violate any provision. Any such violation shall be deemed a misdemeanor and any person, firm or corporation convicted of a violation shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(g)  Effective date. This section shall become effective 12:01 a.m. following the date of its adoption. 
(h)  Exemption. Upon initial adoption of the tradesmen certification standards, any person who meets the requirements of section 2.1A, is eligible to file for exemption from any further local certification requirement under this program. 
(i)  Temporary certification. Temporary certification shall be made available upon initial adoption of the tradesmen certification standards and shall be administered in accordance with section 2.2, temporary certification, of these standards. 
(Ord. No. 23, §§ 1-9, 7-14-93) 
Secs. 19-3-19-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOLICITORS 

Sec. 19-26. - Definition. 
    For the purposes of this article, the term "solicitor" means a person who goes from door to door visiting multifamily or single-family dwellings for the following purposes: 
(1)  To sell any goods, wares or merchandise or accept subscriptions or orders therefor. 
(2)  To accept or request donations for any charitable purpose. 
(Code 1973, § 19-2) 
Sec. 19-27. - Registration required. 
    Each person, before entering into or upon a residential premises within the town for the purpose of soliciting, shall register with the chief of police and furnish him with the following information: 
(1)  The name, local and permanent addresses, age, race, weight, height, color of hair and eyes and any other distinguishing physical characteristics of the applicant. 
(2)  The nature or purpose for which solicitations will be made and the nature of the goods, wares and merchandise offered for sale. 
(3)  The name and address of the employer or organization represented. 
(4)  A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor, and if so, the nature of the offense, when and where convicted and the penalty or punishment assessed therefor. 
(Code 1973, § 19-3) 
Sec. 19-28. - Issuance of permit; term; display. 
    Upon furnishing the information required under section 19-27, the applicant shall be issued a permit, unless the information furnished in compliance with this article shows that the applicant has been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude. A permit issued under this article shall be good for one (1) year from the date of issuance, unless earlier revoked as provided in this article. Every solicitor shall carry his permit with him at all times while engaged in soliciting, and shall display the same to any person who shall demand to see the same while he is so engaged. 
(Code 1973, § 19-4) 
Sec. 19-29. - Fingerprinting and photographing of registrants. 
    Before issuing a permit pursuant to this article, the chief of police shall take a photograph and a complete set of fingerprints of every individual registering pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1973, § 19-5) 
Sec. 19-30. - Fees. 
    A fee of five dollars ($5.00) to cover the costs of investigation of the applicant and processing of the application for a permit under this article shall be paid to the chief of police when the application is filed, and shall not be returnable under any circumstances. 
(Code 1973, § 19-6) 
Sec. 19-31. - Revocation of permits. 
    The chief of police or his designated agent shall revoke any permit issued under this article if he finds that the permittee has given false information or has knowingly withheld information in obtaining the same or upon violation of any provision of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 19-7) 
Sec. 19-32. - Prohibited acts. 
    No person shall: 
(1)  Enter into or upon a residential premises in the town under false pretenses to solicit for any purpose or for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares or merchandise. 
(2)  Remain in or on any residential premises after the owner or occupant has requested any such person to leave. 
(3)  Enter upon any residential premises for soliciting, when the owner or occupant has displayed a "No Soliciting" sign on such premises. 
(4)  Engage in the practice of soliciting in the town without a permit as provided for in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 19-8) 
Sec. 19-33. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any person who visits any residence or apartment at the request or invitation of the owner or occupant thereof. 
(2)  To unpaid members of any civic or charitable organization registered as such with the chief of police if the names of the solicitors have been listed as such members and the organization has provided each person listed with an approved means of identification with the organization represented. 
(3)  Persons soliciting subscriptions to any newspaper for home delivery within the town. 
(4)  Route delivery persons who make deliveries at least once a week to regular customers and whose solicitation is only incidental to their regular deliveries. 
(Code 1973, § 19-9) 
Chapter 20 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Adoption of master plan, § 24. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; buildings, Ch. 6; erosion and sediment control, Ch. 10; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23; subdivisions, Ch. 24; water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 28; zoning, Ch. 29. 
State Law reference- Notice of planning or zoning matters, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-33.1; planning, subdivision of land and zoning, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-427 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Scope of chapter. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed so as to affect property lying outside the town; except, that this provision shall not affect planning, platting or other activities now permitted by other laws to be effective outside the town. 
(Code 1973, § 20-1) 
Secs. 20-2-20-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 

Sec. 20-26. - Created. 
    A town planning commission is hereby created. 
(Code 1973, § 20-2) 
State Law reference- Creation of local planning commissions, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-427.1. 
Sec. 20-27. - Powers and duties generally. 
(a)  The planning commission shall have the power to promote public interest in and an understanding of the master plan and to that end may publish and distribute copies of the master plan or of any report and may employ such other means of publicity and education as it may determine necessary. Members of the commission, when duly authorized by the commission, may attend planning conferences or meetings of planning institutes or hearings upon pending planning legislation or visit other communities. The commission may, by resolution spread upon its minutes, pay the reasonable traveling expenses incident to such attendance or visit. 
(b)  The planning commission shall, from time to time, recommend to the council programs for public structures and improvements and for the financing thereof and shall consult and advise with public officials and agencies, public utility companies, civil, educational, professional and other organizations and with citizens with relation to the protecting or carrying out of the master plan. All public officials shall, upon request, furnish to the planning commission within a reasonable time such available information as it may require for its work. The planning commission, its members, officers and employees in the performance of their functions may enter upon any land in the town and make examinations and surveys and place and maintain necessary monuments and markers thereon. In general, the planning commission shall have such powers as may be necessary to enable it to fulfill its functions, promote planning or carry out the purposes of this section. The commission shall make an annual report to the council concerning its activities during the year. 
(Code 1973, § 20-3) 
Sec. 20-28. - Members-Appointment; term; compensation; qualifications. 
(a)  The planning commission shall be composed of not more than fifteen (15), nor less than five (5) members. Members of the planning commission shall reside within the corporate limits of the Town of Farmville and shall be appointed by council. Council shall appoint one (1) member from each town ward and two (2) at-large members. In the event that a vacancy on the planning commission cannot be filled with a qualified candidate from a specific ward, council shall fill that vacancy by appointing a qualified candidate from any of the other wards. In addition to the voting members appointed by council, council may also appoint ex-officio members comprised of staff administration, who shall have no power to vote. The role of ex-officio members shall be to assist and advise the voting members, and ex-officio members shall not be subject to the same residential or other requirements as voting members. All voting members, who shall be known as appointed members, shall be registered voters of the town residing within its corporate limits, and shall be qualified by knowledge and experience to make decisions on questions of community growth and development. At all times, a minimum of one-half of the voting members so appointed shall be owners of real property located within the corporate limits of the Town of Farmville. 
(b)  All voting members of the commission shall serve with compensation as set by council. The appointed members shall hold no other municipal office or position, except that they may serve on the board of zoning appeals. The appointed members shall serve a term of four (4) years. Ex-officio members shall be appointed by council at its first regular meeting in July. 
(Code 1973, § 20-4; Ord. No. 89, 12-8-2004; Ord. No. 125, 12-9-2009; Ord. No. 175 , 6-8-2016; Ord. No. 177 , 9-14-2016; Ord. No. 183 , 5-10-2017) 
State Law reference- Qualifications, appointment, removal, terms, compensation, etc., of members of local planning commissions, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-437. 
Sec. 20-29. - Same-Removal; notice; hearing. 
    Any member may be removed from the planning commission by the council for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office; but such removal shall not be had unless and until a complaint, in writing, is filed in the town clerk's office. Such complaint shall state with reasonable accuracy and detail the grounds or reasons for removal of the member of whom complaint is made and shall be signed by the mayor after proper order by the town council entered on the minutes of the minute book. A notice of the time and place of hearing, together with a copy of the complaint, shall be served upon the member. No such hearing shall be had until and unless such notice has been served upon the member at least thirty (30) days prior to date of hearing. The mayor shall fill all vacancies. 
(Code 1973, § 20-5) 
Sec. 20-30. - Election of chairman; meetings generally. 
    The planning commission shall elect one (1) of its members as chairman and one (1) as vice-chairman; they shall hold office as such for one (1) year with eligibility for re-election. The commission shall hold regular meetings as required by law. It shall adopt rules and regulations for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be public. 
(Code 1973, § 20-6) 
State Law reference- Meetings of planning commission, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-439. 
Sec. 20-31. - Appointment of employees; contracts for services not to exceed appropriation. 
    The planning commission may appoint such employees as it may deem necessary for its work. The commission may also contract with city planners, engineers, architects and other consultants for such services as it may require. The expenditure of the commission, exclusive of gifts to the commission, shall be within the amounts appropriated by the council for that purpose. 
(Code 1973, § 20-7) 
Secs. 20-32-20-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COMPREHENSIVE PLAN[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Adoption of master plan, § 24. 
State Law reference- Comprehensive plan to be prepared and adopted, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-446.1. 

Sec. 20-51. - Preparation, adoption; scope and purpose. 
(a)  The planning commission shall prepare and recommend a comprehensive plan for the physical development of the territory within its jurisdiction. The council shall adopt a comprehensive plan for the territory under its jurisdiction. 
(b)  In the preparation of a comprehensive plan the commission shall make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of the existing conditions and trends of growth, and of the probable future requirements of its territory and inhabitants. The comprehensive plan shall be made with the purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the territory which will, in accordance with present and probable future needs and resources, best promote the health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare of the inhabitants. 
(c)  The comprehensive plan shall be general in nature, in that it shall designate the general or approximate location, character, and extent of each feature shown on the plan and shall indicate where existing lands or facilities are proposed to be extended, widened, removed, relocated, vacated, narrowed, abandoned or changed in use as the case may be. 
(d)  Such plan, with the accompanying maps, plats, charts, and descriptive matter, shall show the commission's long-range recommendations for the general development of the territory covered by the plan, including the location of existing or proposed recycling centers. It may include, but need not be limited to: 
(1)  The designation of areas for various types of public and private development and use, such as different kinds of residential, business, industrial, agricultural, conservation, recreation, public service, floodplain and drainage, and other areas. 
(2)  The designation of a system of transportation facilities such as streets, roads, highways, parkways, railways, bridges, viaducts, waterways, airports, ports, terminals and other like facilities. 
(3)  The designation of a system of community service facilities such as parks, forests, schools, playgrounds, public buildings and institutions, hospitals, community centers, waterworks, sewage disposal or waste disposal areas and the like. 
(4)  The designation of historical areas and areas for urban renewal or other treatment. 
(5)  The designation of areas for the implementation of reasonable groundwater protection measures. 
(6)  An official map, a capital improvements program, a subdivision ordinance, and a zoning ordinance and zoning district maps. 
(7)  The designation of areas for the implementation of measures to promote construction of and maintenance of affordable housing. 
(e)  The planning commission is granted power to control, preserve and care for historical landmarks; to control the design and location of statuary and other works of art, which are or may become the property of the town; and to control the removal, relocation and alteration of any such works belonging to the town and to make suggestions concerning the designs of harbors, bridges, viaducts, street fixtures and other public structures and appurtenances. As the work of making the whole comprehensive plan progresses, the planning commission may from time to time adopt and publish a part or parts thereof, any such part to cover one (1) or more major sections or geographic or topographical divisions of the town or one (1) or more of the aforesaid or other functional matters to be included in the plan. The commission may from time to time amend, extend or add to the plan. 
(Code 1973, § 20-8) 
Sec. 20-52. - Purpose. 
    In the preparation of the comprehensive plan, the planning commission shall make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of existing conditions and future growth. The comprehensive plan shall be made with the general purposes of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the town and its environs, which will in accordance with existing and future needs, best promote public health, safety, morals, order, convenience and general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development. 
(Code 1973, § 20-9) 
Sec. 20-53. - Hearing and notice required before adoption; filing certified copies. 
    Before the adoption of the comprehensive plan or any part, amendment, extension or addition, the planning commission and the council shall hold at least one (1) public hearing thereon, not less than six (6) nor more than twenty-one (21) days' notice of the time and place of which shall be given by publication once a week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper published or having general circulation in the town. The adoption of the comprehensive plan or of any part, amendment, extension or addition shall be by resolution of the planning commission, carried by the affirmative votes of not less than a majority of the full membership of the commission. The resolution shall refer expressly to the maps and descriptive and other matter extended by the commission to form the whole or part of the plan, and the action taken shall be recorded on the map and plan, and descriptive matter by the identifying signature of the chairman or secretary of the commission. An attested copy of the plan or any adopted part thereof shall then be certified to the council and to the clerk of the court of the county. 
(Code 1973, § 20-10) 
State Law reference- Notice and hearing on plan, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-448; copy to be certified to governing body, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-449. 
Sec. 20-54. - Approval of construction in area covered by plan. 
(a)  Whenever the planning commission and the council shall have adopted a comprehensive plan for the town or any parts, sections or divisions thereof and the same shall have been filed with the county court clerk, no street, square, park or other public way, ground or open space and no public building or structure shall be constructed or authorized in the town or in the planned section or district thereof until and unless the general location, character and extent thereof shall have been submitted to and approved by the planning commission. 
(b)  No public utility, whether publicly or privately owned which is not subject to zoning control as now provided by law shall be constructed or authorized in the town or in the planned section or district thereof until and unless the reasonable and general location, but not the character and extent thereof, shall have been submitted to and approved by the planning commission. In case of disapproval, the commission shall communicate its reason to the council, which shall have the power to overrule such action by a recorded vote of not less than two-thirds of its entire membership. 
(c)  The failure of the planning commission to act on the proposed change within sixty (60) days after the date of the official submission to it shall be deemed approval of the exchange. The widening, extension, narrowing, enlargement, vacation or change in the use of streets and other public ways, grounds and places within the town, as well as the acquisition by the town or the public of any land within the town for public use or purposes or the sale of any land then held by the town shall be subject to similar approval and in case same is not approved; it may be similarly overruled. The foregoing provision of this section shall not be deemed to apply to the paving, repaving, reconstruction, improvement, drainage or other work of or in or upon any street or other public way or any public building or utility unless it involves a change in the location or extent thereof. 
(Code 1973, § 20-11) 
State Law reference- Legal status of plan, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-456. 
Chapter 21 - POLICE DEPARTMENT[1] 
  
  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Town sergeant, §§ 6, 46 et seq.; appointment of police officers, § 32. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 12; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 15; administration of noise control program, § 16-4; report on taxicab business by chief of police, § 26-34. 
State Law reference- Law enforcement officer training standards, Code of Virginia, § 9-179 et seq.; police and public order, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-131 et seq.; Line of Duty Act, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-136.1 et seq.; general municipal law enforcement powers, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-137 et seq.; auxiliary police forces, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-159.2 et seq.; malicious bodily injury to law enforcement officers, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-51.1; impersonation of police officer, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-174, 18.2-175; giving false report to police officer, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-461; criminal procedure, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-1 et seq.; conservators of the peace and special policemen, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-12 et seq.; arrest, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-71 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 21-1. - Control and supervision. 
    The supervision and control of the police department of the town shall be under the town manager. 
(Code 1973, § 22-1) 
Sec. 21-2. - Composition. 
    There shall be a chief of police and such police officers as the council may direct. 
(Code 1973, § 22-2) 
Sec. 21-3. - Duty of chief generally. 
    The chief of police shall examine all violations of this Code, other ordinances and criminal laws of the state and all nuisances within the town and report the same to the town manager and town attorney. 
(Code 1973, § 22-3; Ord. No. 176 , 7-13-2016) 
Sec. 21-4. - Bond of chief of police. 
    The bond of the chief of police shall be two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
(Code 1973, § 22-4) 
Charter reference- Bond of town sergeant, § 48. 
Sec. 21-5. - Powers and duties of police force. 
(a)  The officers and privates constituting the police force of the town are hereby invested with all the power and authority which formerly belonged to the office of constable at common law in taking cognizance of, and in enforcing the criminal laws of the commonwealth and the ordinances and regulations of the town. Each police officer shall endeavor to prevent the commission within the town of offenses against the law of the commonwealth and against the ordinances and regulations of the town; shall observe and enforce all such laws, ordinances and regulations; shall detect and arrest offenders against the same; shall preserve the good order of the town; and shall secure the inhabitants thereof from violence and the property therein from injury. 
(b)  Such police officer shall have no power or authority in civil matters, except that a police officer of the town may execute and serve an order of temporary detention pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 37.1-67.1, but a police officer of the town shall in all other cases execute such warrants or summons as may be placed in his hands by any magistrate for the town and shall make due return thereof. 
(c)  Except as otherwise specifically provided in the charter of the town, such police officer shall not receive any fee or other compensation out of the state treasury or the treasury of the town for any service rendered under the provisions of this chapter other than the salary paid him by the town and a fee as a witness in cases arising under the criminal laws of the commonwealth. Except as otherwise specifically provided in the charter of the town, such police officer shall not receive any fee as a witness in any case arising under the ordinances of his town; nor for attendance as a witness before any magistrate in his town. If, however, it shall become necessary or expedient for him to travel beyond the limits of the town in his capacity as a police officer, he shall be entitled to his actual expenses, to be allowed and paid as is now provided by law for other expenses in criminal cases. 
(d)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as prohibiting a police officer of the town from claiming and receiving any reward which may be offered for the arrest and detention of any offender against the criminal laws of this or any other state or nation. 
(Code 1973, § 22-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-138; territorial jurisdiction of town, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-250. 
Sec. 21-6. - Duty hours. 
    The members of the police department shall be on duty at such times of the day or night as the town manager may require. While on duty, they shall be under the control of the town manager. 
(Code 1973, § 22-6) 
Sec. 21-7. - Encouraging resistance to an officer. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to encourage or counsel resistance to any officer or by threats or force intimidate or impede or attempt to intimidate or impede the town sergeant or any police officer in making arrests or in the discharge of his duties. 
(Code 1973, § 22-7) 
State Law reference- Obstructing justice by threats or force, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-460. 
Sec. 21-8. - Uniform and badge to be worn. 
    Each member of the police department shall wear while on duty such wearing apparel as is necessary to perform specific functions nor incidental to routine patrol. The officers while in uniform, shall wear a badge of office, along with a medal with the name of office engraved thereon, upon his outer garment and in plain view; but in the event that a uniform is not worn, a badge of office shall at all times be carried on the officer, along with a medal with the name of the office engraved thereon. 
(Code 1973, § 22-8; Ord. No. 176 , 7-13-2016) 
Sec. 21-9. - Impersonating officer. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely assume or exercise the functions, powers, duties and privileges of or falsely assume or pretend to be the town sergeant or any other peace officer of the town. 
(Code 1973, § 22-9) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-174. 
Sec. 21-10. - Other employment. 
    No regular police officer employed by the town shall engage in any occupation, business or calling which would render him unfit or in any way hinder him in the discharge of his duties to the town. 
(Code 1973, § 22-10) 
Sec. 21-10.1. - Auxiliary police force. 
(a)  Pursuant to Code of Virginia § 15.2-1731, as amended, for the further preservation of the public peace, safety and good order of the community, the town hereby establishes an auxiliary police force, which will have all the powers and authority and all the immunities of fulltime law-enforcement officers; if such forces have met the training requirements established by the Department of Criminal Justice Services under Code of Virginia § 9.1-101, as amended. 
(b)  The police chief is hereby authorized to appoint as auxiliary police officers as many persons of good character as he deems necessary, not to exceed six (6). The chief of police is also authorized to prescribe the uniform, organization, and such rules as he deems necessary for the operation of the auxiliary police force. 
(c)  The auxiliary police officers may be called into service as provided in Code of Virginia § 15.2-1734, as amended. In addition, the members of the auxiliary police force who have been trained in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia § 15.2-1731, as amended, may be called into service by the chief of police, or his designee, to aid and assist regular police officers in the performance of their duties. 
(Ord. No. 148, 11-9-2011) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 149, adopted Nov. 9, 2011, enacted provisions intended for codification as § 21-11.1 of this chapter. To facilitate indexing, said provisions have been redesignated as § 21-10.1. 
ARTICLE II. - ALARM SYSTEMS 

Sec. 21-11. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm system means any device or system which transmits a signal visibly, audibly, electronically, mechanically or by any combination of these methods which indicates a hazard or occurrence requiring urgent attention and to which police are expected to respond. The term "alarm system" shall not include a personal, direct telephone call requesting emergency services from a person at the premises in question. 
    Alarm system user and user mean the occupant or owner of the premises which is protected by the alarm system. 
    False alarm means any alarm signal communicated to the police communications center which is not reasonably believed to be in response to actual or threatened criminal activity. False alarms include negligently activated signals; signals which are the result of faulty, malfunctioning or improperly installed or maintained equipment; and signals which are purposely activated to summons police personnel in non-emergency situations. False alarms shall not include signals activated by unusually severe weather conditions or other causes which are identified and determined by the chief of police or designee to be beyond the control of the user. 
    Negligently activated means the doing of an act where ordinary care suggests that the act should not have been done at all or that it should have been done in some other way. 
(Ord. No. 52, 8-4-99) 
Sec. 21-12. - Duties of alarm system users. 
    All alarm system users must register with the chief of police prior to hooking up an alarm system. All existing alarm systems must be registered with the chief of police within thirty (30) days of the adoption of this article. 
    It shall be the responsibility of alarm system users to instruct employees or others who may have occasion to activate an alarm that alarm systems are to be activated only in emergency situations to summons an immediate police response. Alarm system users shall also instruct appropriate employees as to the operation of the alarm system, including setting, activating and resetting the alarm. The user shall be responsible for maintaining the security system in proper working order. 
(Ord. No. 52, 8-4-99) 
Sec. 21-13. - Service fees-Established; termination of response. 
(a)  Schedule of fees. The second through tenth false alarm originating from any premises within a ninety-day period will result in the appropriate service fee being imposed upon the alarm user which must be paid within thirty (30) days after billing. The service fee shall be imposed in accordance with the following schedule: 
False Alarm Fee Second $10.00 Third 15.00 Fourth 20.00 Fifth 25.00 Sixth 35.00 Seventh 50.00 Eighth 60.00 Ninth 75.00  
(b)  Discontinuance of service. The tenth false alarm originating from any premises in a ninety-day period will result in the alarm user being notified by the chief of police or designee that all emergency response by the police department, based on alarm activation, shall cease upon receipt of the written notice. 
(c)  Reinstatement of service. Any service which has been discontinued shall not be reinstated until it has been inspected by an alarm company licensed to do business in the commonwealth, which company shall certify the system has been repaired and is found to be in a reliable status. 
    If the false alarm occurred through human negligence rather than mechanical failure, reinstatement shall not be permitted until the user, the user's employees and all others having access to the system have completed a training program satisfactory to the chief of police or designee. In addition to such written certification to the chief of police or designee, a reinstatement fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00), payable to the town, must accompany the request for reinstatement. The inspection, repair and recertification of any alarm system shall be accomplished at the alarm user's expense. 
(Ord. No. 52, 8-4-99) 
Sec. 21-14. - Same-Exceptions. 
    The service and reinstatement fees of this article shall not be applied to any alarm system used, operated or installed in any premises or place owned, leased, occupied or under the control of the United States government, the commonwealth or any of its political subdivisions, to the town or any of its political subdivisions or to the county school board or any officer, agent or employee of such governmental agencies while acting or employed in their official capacities. All other requirements, including termination of service, shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 52, 8-4-99) 
Sec. 21-15. - Payment of fees. 
    The chief of police or designee shall certify to the treasurer the name of the user, the address from which alarms subject to penalty emanated and the amount due the town on the last day of each month. The treasurer shall cause billing to be sent and shall in turn notify the chief of police or designee whether any account is more than thirty (30) days in arrears. Any account more than thirty (30) days in arrears shall be subjected to a termination of response and the reinstatement fee specified in this article before service is restored. 
(Ord. No. 52, 8-4-99) 
ARTICLE III. - REIMBURSEMENT OF EXPENSES 

Sec. 21-16. - Reimbursement of expenses incurred in responding to DUI incident and other accidents or traffic incidents. 
(a)  A person convicted of violating any of the following provisions shall be liable for restitution at the time of sentencing or in a separate civil action for reasonable expenses incurred by the town, including by the police department, or by any volunteer fire or rescue squad, or by any combination of the foregoing, when providing an appropriate emergency response to any accident or incident related to such violation: 
(1)  Pursuant to the Code of Virginia, 1950, (as amended), provisions § 18.2-51.4, 18.2-266, 18.2-266.1, 29.1-738, 29.1-738.02, or a similar ordinance, when such operation of a motor vehicle, engine, train or watercraft while so impaired is the proximate cause of the accident or incident. 
(2)  Pursuant to the Code of Virginia, 1950, (as amended), provisions of Article 7 (§ 46.2-852 et seq.) of Charter 8 of Title 46.2 relating to reckless driving, when such reckless driving is the proximate cause of the accident or incident; 
(3)  Pursuant to the Code of Virginia, 1950, (as amended), provisions of Article 1 (§ 46.2-300 et seq.) of Chapter 3 of Title 46.2 relating to driving without a license or driving with a suspended or revoked license; and 
(4)  Pursuant to the Code of Virginia, 1950, (as amended), provisions of § 46.2-894 relating to improperly leaving the scene of an accident. 
(b)  Personal liability under this section for reasonable expenses of an appropriate emergency response shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in the aggregate for a particular accident or incident occurring in the town. In determining the "reasonable expenses" the town may bill a flat fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or a minute by minute accounting of the actual costs incurred. As used in this section, "appropriate emergency response" includes all costs of providing law-enforcement, fire-fighting, rescue and emergency medical services. The court may order as restitution the reasonable expenses incurred by the town for fire-fighting, rescue and emergency medical services. The provisions of this section shall not preempt or limit any remedy available to the commonwealth, to the town or to any volunteer rescue squad to recover the reasonable expenses of an emergency response to an accident or incident not involving impaired driving, operation of a vehicle or other conduct as set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 97, 2-8-2006; Ord. No. 112, 2-14-2007) 
Chapter 22 - SOLID WASTE AND WEEDS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 12; junkyards, car lots and automobile graveyards, Ch. 13; nuisances, Ch. 17; water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 28; debris, trash and rubbish in cemetery, § 8-15; rubbish and waste matter in junkyard, car lot or automobile graveyard, § 13-9; throwing or depositing certain substances upon highway, § 15-16. 
State Law reference- Virginia Waste Management Act, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1400 et seq.; removal of trash, garbage, weeds, etc., from property, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-11; contracts for garbage and refuse pickup and disposal services, waste recovery facilities, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-28.02; ordinances requiring delivery of garbage, trash and refuse to certain facilities, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-28.03; regulation of garbage and refuse pickup and disposal services, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-28.1; municipal collection and disposal of refuse, regulation of disposal facilities, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-857; mailing of summons for violation of trash ordinance, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-76.2; dumping trash, etc., on highway, right-of-way or private property, Code of Virginia, §§ 33.1-346, 33.1-346.1; dump creating fire hazard to public bridge, Code of Virginia, § 33.1-347. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    Ashes and clinkers means the residue from fires used for cooking and heating. 
    Combustible rubbish means paper, cartons, boxes, barrels, wood and excelsior, yard trimmings, wood furniture, bedding and other materials of a similar nature. 
    Garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
    Industrial refuse means the solid wastes resulting from industrial processes and manufacturing and construction operations, such as food processing wastes, boiler house cinders, lumber scraps and shavings and similar materials. 
    Market refuse means the waste from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    Noncombustible rubbish means metals, tin cans, metal furniture, dirt, glass, crockery and other materials of a similar nature. 
    Street refuse means street sweepings, dirt and leaves in the streets. 
(Code 1973, § 13-1) 
Sec. 22-2. - Depositing garbage, etc., on streets or premises. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw into the streets or sidewalks or on private premises any dead carcasses, rubbish, newspapers, handbills, dirt, filth, shavings, manure, offal, ashes, vegetables, fruit, fruit skins, broken glass, tacks, tin cans or any other articles or substances or things calculated to render the streets or premises unclean, unsightly or unsafe to any person or vehicle using the streets or liable to injuriously affect the health of the community. 
(Code 1973, § 13-2) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23. 
Sec. 22-3. - Dumping garbage, etc., at unauthorized locations. 
    Nothing shall be removed from a private premises and deposited within the town limits at any place except such as may be designated by the town manager; nor shall anything be dumped into a town provided container or private dumpster without first having consent from the owner, renter or provider of such dumpster or container. 
(Code 1973, § 13-3; Ord. No. 50, 3-10-99) 
Sec. 22-4. - Bringing garbage or trash into town. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person outside the corporate limits of the town to transport garbage or trash into the corporate limits of the town for collection by the town crews. 
(Code 1973, § 13-4; Ord. No. 156, 6-25-2012 ) 
Sec. 22-5. - Tampering with garbage containers, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, examine into, or remove from garbage containers, boxes, etc., the contents therein set out by the owner, or employee of the owner, for collection by the town or by private contractor. 
(Code 1973, § 13-5; Ord. No. 50, 3-10-99) 
Secs. 22-6-22-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION REGULATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 47, adopted July 8, 1998, amended Art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. The former Art. II, §§ 22-21-22-34, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1973, §§ 13-6-13-12, 13-12.1, 13-13, 13-14; Ord. No. 4, adopted Aug. 8, 1991; and Ord. No. 12, adopted May 13, 1992. 

Sec. 22-21. - Compliance with chapter prerequisite to collection. 
    Any refuse put out for collection which does not comply with this chapter shall not be collected by the town collection crew but shall be removed by the owner or tenant. 
(Ord. No. 47, 7-8-98) 
Sec. 22-22. - Preparation of refuse. 
(a)  In business area. In any business area in the town all paper cartons shall be folded flat. Where there are large quantities of loose paper, sufficient cartons may be left intact to hold such paper. 
(b)  In residential area. In any residential area, garbage shall be bagged and tied before being placed in the refuse container provided by the town. 
(Ord. No. 47, 7-8-98) 
Sec. 22-23. - Industrial refuse. 
    No industrial or bio-hazardous refuse shall be collected by the town collection crew. 
(Ord. No. 47, 7-8-98; Ord. No. 156, 6-25-12 ; Ord. No. 157, 6-25-2012 ) 
Sec. 22-24. - Containers required. 
    All garbage and rubbish out for collection by town trucks shall be placed in containers provided by the town. 
(Ord. No. 47, 7-8-98) 
Sec. 22-25. - Placement of containers at collection site and removal of same therefrom. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the owner and user of a town refuse container, the contents of which are to be collected by the town forces, to: 
(1)  Place the container at the curbside in the public right-of-way, alley or designated pick up area, so that there is no danger of the container being overturned and so that there is sufficient clearance to accommodate town collection equipment and pedestrians. 
(2)  For residents receiving regular once weekly refuse collection, place collection containers at the collection site no later than 7:00 a.m. on the day of collection and not earlier than 5:00 p.m. on the night prior to the day of collection. Placement of containers at the collection site prior to 5:00 p.m. on the night prior to the day of collection or failure to remove containers by 12:00 midnight of the collection day shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(3)  Remove all emptied containers from the alley, curbside, street or sidewalk as soon as practicable after they have been emptied, but in no case later than 12:00 midnight of the collection day. 
(4)  Collections containers shall be located five (5) feet behind the building line, or screened so as to not be visible from the street except during the times prescribed for placement for collection. This provision applies to all residential and commercial locations. Where placement as described herein is not possible, an alternate location may be designated by the director of public works, or his designee. 
(5)  For those designated shopping centers and businesses receiving collection services on a regular three-day-per-week schedule, place collection containers at the collection site no earlier than 5:00 p.m. on the day preceding collection, nor later than 6:00 a.m. on the day of collection. 
(6)  Recyclables may be placed out for collection no earlier than 5:00 p.m. of the day preceding collection, nor later than 7:00 a.m. of the day of collection. 
(Ord. No. 47, 7-8-98) 
Sec. 22-26. - Bulk containers for residential areas. 
(a)  The regulations set forth in this section shall be administered by the town manager. The director of public works and the fire chief shall assist the town manager as provided herein. 
(b)  All bulk containers in residential areas shall require current permits as issued by the town manager. When property owners or managers propose new constructions or changes in use requiring the installation of bulk containers, they shall submit a proposed site plan to the office of the building official. The permit application and site plan, along with such fees as specified by the town council, shall be submitted before the installation is begun. 
(c)  The town manager shall recommend approval of the installation, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  The bulk containers will not be located on any town property, right-of-way or easement. 
(2)  The bulk containers will be accessible for removal, transportation or emptying from a public right-of-way. 
(3)  The proposed location will not violate any fire or building code, or zoning ordinance. 
(4)  The base on which the bulk container is located will be firm (concrete or equal) and cleanable. 
(5)  The bulk container will be located not less than ten (10) feet from any building, fire escape or doorway. 
(6)  The bulk container will be located behind the building line. 
(7)  The bulk container will not displace a required parking space. 
(8)  Bulk containers may require screening if adjacent to a residence. 
(d)  The town manager may seek independent verification of data set forth in the site plan and may disapprove a plan if he cannot verify compliance with the requirements of subsection (c) above. 
(e)  When bulk containers have been installed at existing structures prior to April 1, 1988, the owner or manager of such structure will obtain a bulk container permit in accordance with the provision in subsection (c) above. 
(Ord. No. 47, 7-8-98) 
Sec. 22-27. - Preparation and removal of yard trimmings. 
    Yard and tree trimmings shall be collected by town collection crews; provided, that the yard trimmings, such as grass clippings, hedge or shrub clippings and other small items of a similar nature, are placed in suitable containers or plastic bags not exceeding fifty (50) pounds in weight, and tree trimmings not exceeding two (2) inches in diameter and five (5) feet long are placed in a neat pile. Yard and tree trimmings shall be placed on the grass plots or front portions of lawns where there is no grass plot or a service alley being used by the town. Collection by town crews will be made once a week and additional days as required will be designated by the town manager. Complete trees or tree trimmings resulting from pruning or tree surgery must be removed by the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 47, 7-8-98) 
Sec. 22-28. - Fall leaves. 
    During the months of September through December, leaves placed in neat and orderly piles shall be removed by the town trucks from grass plots or front portions of lawns where there are no grass plots. No leaves shall be placed on the sidewalks or in the streets or gutters. 
(Ord. No. 47, 7-8-98) 
Sec. 22-29. - Cardboard-Collection generally. 
(a)  The mandatory separation and collection of cardboard from other solid waste applies to business/commercial establishments within the corporate limits of the town. 
(b)  The cardboard collected by the town will become the property of the town who will be responsible for its recycling. Private haulers will be permitted to collect cardboard from commercial establishments providing (i) the cardboard is being recycled at a local recycler and (ii) the private hauler provides the commercial establishment with a suitable cardboard collection bin as outlined in subsection (c). Private haulers will be responsible for providing accurate weight records of the cardboard collected to the town at its request. 
(c)  All cardboard shall be broken down and stacked in bundles and placed inside a closed, non-porous collection bin of not over four (4) cubic yards in capacity. Containers shall be made of metal, plastic, or other suitable material and shall have a tight fitting cover. 
(Ord. No. 47, 7-8-98; Ord. No. 99, 6-15-2006) 
Sec. 22-30. - Same-Collection site. 
    The bundles of cardboard are to be placed at a site where the other refuse is picked up or a location that is readily accessible for town employees to pick up. 
(Ord. No. 47, 7-8-98) 
Sec. 22-31. - Same-Collection frequency. 
    The town manager is authorized to provide a regular collection schedule for the pick up of the bundles of cardboard from commercial establishments. Where sufficient volume is generated at certain establishments more frequent collections will be authorized and scheduled. 
(Ord. No. 47, 7-8-98) 
Sec. 22-31.1. - Monthly service charge-Sanitation fee. 
    For garbage and recycling refuse collection and removal service, the occupant of each dwelling unit and business unit in the town shall pay a rate of ten dollars ($10.00) per month, and this service charge shall be billed to each user monthly with the water and sewer service or other method, if any, and payable therewith. The occupant of each dwelling unit shall be entitled to one pick up of garbage and refuse each week and business pick up will be determined by the director of public works. Trash other than household garbage may be removed by town employees if requested and approved for removal by the town manager when placed at curbside. 
( Ord. No. 156, 6-25-2012 ) 
State Law reference- Local recycling and waste disposal; powers; penalties, Code of Virginia § 15.2-928. 
Sec. 22-32. - Cardboard-Penalty for noncompliance. 
(a)  Before issuing a criminal citation for an infraction hereunder, warning notices shall be given to the responsible lessee or owner as follows: 
(1)  First violation: The town manager and/or representative shall issue a warning to the responsible party. 
(2)  Second violation: This warning notice shall be sent to the person responsible by certified mail to the address where the violation occurred. 
(3)  Third violation: A criminal citation will be issued and this violation shall be punished as a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(b)  The following shall apply with respect to infraction: 
(1)  Failure to abate the cited violation at the time of a subsequent infraction shall cause the violation to be treated as a repeat violation. 
(2)  Any individual or corporate owner who receives a citation and who wishes to stand trial shall not receive additional citations until the court rules on the citation for which the defendant is standing trial. 
(3)  In cases where the town manager has determined that extreme danger exists to persons or property regarding storage of the cardboard bundles the warning notice shall be dispensed with and the town manager shall obtain a court order to take corrective action. However nothing shall be construed to prohibit the town manager from taking what action he deems appropriate to protect the public health and safety both under the laws of the town and the commonwealth. 
(4)  The town manager or the manager's representative shall have authority to enforce all the provisions of sections 22-21 through 22-32. 
(Ord. No. 47, 7-8-98; Ord. No. 156, 6-25-2012 ) 
Secs. 22-33-22-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONDITION OF PREMISES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Removal of trash, garbage, weeds, etc., from property, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-11; abatement or removal of nuisances, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-867. 

Sec. 22-46. - Weeds, brush, etc., on property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to have, keep, maintain, cause or permit upon any land or premises any grass, weeds, brush or other vegetable matter detrimental to the health, comfort or general welfare of the inhabitants of the town. 
(Code 1973, § 13-15) 
Sec. 22-47. - Weeds, etc., encroaching on sidewalks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any weeds, thistles, brushes or plants to overhang or encroach upon any sidewalk adjoining his property. 
(Code 1973, § 13-16) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23. 
Sec. 22-48. - Cutting grass, weeds. 
    The owners of vacant developed or undeveloped property therein shall cut the grass, weeds and other foreign growth on such property or any part thereof at such time or times as the council shall prescribe; or may, whenever the council deems it necessary, after reasonable notice, have such grass, weeds or other foreign growth cut by its agents or employees, in which event, the cost and expenses thereof shall be chargeable to and paid by the owner of such property and may be collected by the town as taxes and levies are collected. 
Sec. 22-49. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 156 , adopted June 25, 2012, repealed § 22-49, which pertained to disposal of trash, garbage, etc. 
Secs. 22-50-22-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Waste management, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1400 et seq. 

Secs. 22-66-22-68. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 156 , adopted June 25, 2012, repealed §§ 22-66-22-68, which pertained to hours of operation of landfill, sanitary landfill within corporate limits, disposal of inorganic waste and derived from §§ 13-17-13-19 of the 1973 Code. 
Sec. 22-69. - Authorized use of landfills. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of garbage, trash or refuse of any kind on the town's landfills, except employees of the town in the execution of their duties, an agent of the town in the execution of a contract or an agreement with the town or a citizen of the town or his employee using a vehicle displaying a valid town tag and delivering a town citizen's refuse, for disposal on the town's landfills. This section shall not allow any collection contractor to use this landfill, except with permission of the town council and such fees as council may require. 
(Code 1973, § 13-20) 
Secs. 22-70-22-75. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 156 , adopted June 25, 2012, repealed §§ 22-70-22-75, which pertained to rubber tires, trees and tree stumps, metal appliances, payment of charges, charges for commercial use of sanitary landfill, charges for collection of brush and derived from §§ 13-21-13-25 of the 1973 Code; Ord. No. 31, 1-11-95. 
Chapter 23 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of council as to streets, alleys, sidewalks, etc., § 10 et seq. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; advertising, Ch. 3; buildings, Ch. 6; cable television, Ch. 7; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 15; noise control, Ch. 16; peddlers and solicitors, Ch. 19; planning, Ch. 20; subdivisions, Ch. 24; taxicabs, Ch. 26; trees and shrubs, Ch. 27; water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 28; conditions on street occupancy by cable television company, § 7-17; streets and sidewalks near junkyards, car lots and automobile graveyards, § 13-12; curfew for minors, § 18-7 et seq.; house numbers, § 18-24; loitering, § 18-29; removing sand, rock, etc., from streets, § 18-39; depositing solid waste on streets, § 22-2; weeds, etc., encroaching on sidewalks, § 22-47; streets in subdivisions, § 24-76 et seq.; location of sewer, § 28-133; widening of highways and streets, § 29-52. 
State Law reference- Authority of town to lay off streets, walks or alleys and to permit the temporary use of streets for other than public purposes, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-14(1), (9); limited access streets, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-16; assessments for local improvements, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-239 et seq.; municipal streets and alleys generally, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-363 et seq., 15.1-888 et seq.; franchises, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-894; state highway plat book, Code of Virginia, § 17-69.1; state highway system, Code of Virginia, § 33.1-25 et seq.; pipelines and other works in streets and alleys, Code of Virginia, § 56-257. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 23-1. - Obstructing streets, sidewalks, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or interfere with the passage of persons on any sidewalk, street, railroad platform or crossing or to obstruct the entrance to any public building, business or church. Gates shall not be constructed so that they open outward over any street, alley or sidewalk. No assembly shall be held on any street, alley or public ground without a written permit from the mayor. This section shall not apply to railroads blocking streets or sidewalks. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to obstruct or interfere in any way with the passage of persons along the public driveways and sidewalks of the town for the purpose of inducing them to purchase any article or thing or to enter into any shop, store or stall, any hotel, boardinghouse, restaurant or like establishment, or to importune passersby to make any such purchase or to enter such establishment, or in any disorderly or undue manner to solicit trade, custom or patronage in or along the public highways of the town. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place or allow to be placed or to continue the accumulation of leaves, grass clippings, sticks, dirt or refuse, etc., from their house, business, yard, or other property onto a public street, a sidewalk, the grass strip between a paved sidewalk and a street, or into a storm sewer inlet or on an area that pedestrians would be expected to use as a public right-of-way. Such refuse shall be gathered into containers and collected with other refuse; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to the accumulation of leaves placed along the edge of the roadway in the public right-of-way during special collection periods designated by the town for collection of leaves. 
(d)  Each day the condition exists constitutes a separate offense. Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 23-1; Ord. No. 133, 12-8-2010) 
State Law reference- Obstructions on streets and alleys, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-893. 
Sec. 23-2. - Parking of buses, trailers and certain trucks restricted. 
(a)  No person shall park or cause, or permit to be parked, any motor passenger bus, camping, boating or utility trailer, or other trailer or any truck with a carrying capacity of one (1) ton or greater, on any street or alley or other public place in the town on Sundays, holidays or on weekdays between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except for the purpose of loading and unloading. 
(b)  A conditional permit shall be acquired at the town treasurer's office to park any trailer, tractor-trailer or similar vehicle, in a business or manufacturing area, on town streets. 
(c)  The cost for the permit shall be assessed at one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month, per vehicle. The person acquiring the permit is responsible to insure that the street is kept clean and free of debris. Recreational vehicles and camping trailers, in residential areas, are exempt, providing they are not kept on the street for longer than a seven-day period, during any calendar year. 
(d)  Violation of this section shall result in a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each offense. Each day shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 6-14-90) 
Sec. 23-3. - Coasting on sidewalks, etc., in business district. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to coast or slide on any sidewalk or on any street in the business section of the town by means of any sled, coaster, wagon or other contrivance. 
(Code 1973, § 23-2) 
Sec. 23-4. - Playing ball or golf on streets, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to play ball or golf on any street or public property without the consent of the mayor or the council. 
(Code 1973, § 23-3) 
Sec. 23-5. - Playing on streets or sidewalks. 
    No person shall play on any street within the town that is designated for vehicular travel. No person shall use on a street where play is prohibited roller skates, toys or other devices on wheels or runners except bicycles and motorcycles. No person shall use roller skates, toys, or other devices on wheels or runners including bicycles and motorcycles on any sidewalks within the business district of the town, Longwood College, or any other area so designated by the council. Skating or skateboarding on other sidewalks in the town will be prohibited after 10:00 p.m. 
(Code 1973, § 23-4) 
Sec. 23-6. - Removal of snow from sidewalks on certain streets. 
(a)  The tenant, owner or occupant or any person having the care of any building or lot bordering on any of the following streets shall be required to remove all snow from the sidewalks abutting such property within six (6) hours after the snow shall have ceased falling, unless the snow shall have fallen during the night or on Sunday in which case it shall be removed by 12:00 noon the day following: 
(1)  High Street, between North Street and Main Street. 
(2)  Main Street, between Robeson Street and Depot Street (Norfolk and Western right-of-way). 
(3)  Third Street, between North Street and Bridge Street. 
(b)  Any person failing to remove the snow shall, in addition to the fine imposed, be liable for the cost of the removal by the town. 
(Code 1973, § 23-5) 
Sec. 23-7. - Placing merchandise, etc., on sidewalks, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place on or suffer to be placed on or to suspend over any sidewalk, street or alley any merchandise, goods, wares, ice cream cans or containers, pop or beer cases, chicken crates, packing cases or boxes, coal, wood or other fuel or anything of a similar character so as to interfere with the free passage of persons using the street, sidewalk or alley. No wood or other fuel shall be cut, split or sawed on any street, sidewalk or alley without a permit from the town manager. 
(Code 1973, § 23-6) 
Sec. 23-8. - Unguarded opening on or near street or sidewalk. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep open any cellar door, grating or cover to any vault or fail to properly protect or guard all openings on or within six (6) feet of any street, alley, sidewalk or highway. 
(Code 1973, § 23-7) 
Sec. 23-9. - Awnings over sidewalks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain awnings unless all parts of the awning shall be elevated at least seven (7) feet above the surface of the sidewalk and at least eighteen (18) inches back from the edge of the curb, and the roof or covering shall be made of duck, canvas or other suitable material supported by iron frames or brackets firmly and securely fastened to the building, without any posts or other device that will obstruct the sidewalk or hinder or interfere with the free passage of pedestrians thereon and then only upon obtaining a permit from the town manager's office. 
(Code 1973, § 23-8) 
Sec. 23-10. - Permit for sale of fruit, vegetables, etc., from stand or vehicle. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or keep any stand for the sale of fruits, vegetables or other substances or commodities on any sidewalk, street or alley or to use or occupy any part of a street or alley with any vehicle for the sale therefrom of any article without written permission from the mayor. 
(Code 1973, § 23-9) 
Cross reference- Licenses and permits, Ch. 14. 
Sec. 23-11. - Discharging water on sidewalks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any waterspout, trough, gutter or balcony extending from any building owned or leased by him to discharge or conduct water on the surface of any sidewalk. All such water shall be conducted under the sidewalk in accordance with plans and specifications of the town manager and under his direction. 
(Code 1973, § 23-10) 
Cross reference- Water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 28. 
Sec. 23-12. - Writing, scattering handbills, etc., on sidewalks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to scatter waste, or to place paste, paint or writing on any sidewalk, street or alley without the consent of the mayor or to leave any paper removed or coming from billboards on any street or sidewalk or to scatter showbills, handbills or other advertising on the sidewalks, streets or alleys. 
(Code 1973, § 23-11) 
Cross reference- Advertising, Ch. 3. 
Sec. 23-13. - Bicycle helmets. 
(a)  Every person fourteen (14) years of age or younger shall wear a protective helmet that meets the standards promulgated by the American National Standards Institute or the Snell Memorial Foundation whenever riding or being carried on a bicycle on any highway as defined in Code of Virginia § 46.2-100, as amended, sidewalk or public bicycle path. 
(b)  Violation of such ordinance shall be punishable by a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). However, such fine shall be suspended (i) for first-time offenders, and (ii) for violators who, subsequent to the violation but prior to imposition of the fine, purchase helmets of the type required by this section. 
(Ord. No. 34, 12-13-95) 
Secs. 23-14-23-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION AND EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 23-31. - Constructing curbs and gutters. 
    The policy of the town concerning the construction of curbs and gutters within its corporate limits shall be to construct the same at no expense to the adjacent property owners; but wherever curbs and gutters are constructed, construction shall be insofar as practicable, an orderly program to tie in future constructions and already existing curbs and gutters so that the same shall be for an entire block or one (1) side of a block within a block when it is practical to do so. Where adjacent property owners are willing to voluntarily share in the cost of construction of curbs and gutters by making voluntary payments on some portion of the cost thereof to the town, the town will consider accepting contributions from adjacent property owners. The council reserves the right to pass on all such projects on the basis of their necessity, and such curbs and gutters so built under this program shall adhere to the policy heretofore set out. No curbs and gutters shall be built with aid from adjacent property owners unless funds are available for that purpose to meet the town's agreed portion thereof. 
(Code 1973, § 23-12) 
Sec. 23-32. - Sidewalk and terrace grade. 
    All sidewalks and terraces, where practicable, shall have a uniform grade of two and one-half (21/2) percent from the inside of the walk to the outside of the curb unless otherwise provided by resolution of the council. 
(Code 1973, § 23-13) 
Sec. 23-33. - Curb lines. 
    The curb lines shall be parallel with the lot lines and at such distances therefrom as established by the town engineer. 
(Code 1973, § 23-14) 
Sec. 23-34. - Permit required to erect steps to sidewalk, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect any stairs or steps to the first or second floor of any building on any part of any sidewalk, street or alley or to construct or build a stairway or passageway to any cellar or basement by occupying any part of the sidewalk, street or alley or to enclose any portion of the same with a railing without having first obtained permission, by resolution, of the council. 
(Code 1973, § 23-15) 
Sec. 23-35. - Excavations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make any excavation in any street, alley or public place or within ten (10) feet of any sidewalk, street, alley or public place except in accordance with the provisions of the following paragraphs. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person other than a duly authorized officer or employee of the town to make any excavation in any street, alley, highway or public property or to dig up or uncover so as to expose to frost any of the mains or water pipes of the town, except after securing the consent of the council or the town manager thereto. In making such excavations, the planks, paving stones, earth and other materials shall be deposited and placed in such manner as to occasion the least inconvenience to the public and to permit the passage of water along the gutter. All such excavations and any excavations near any street, alley, highway or public property shall be so guarded at all times as to prevent injury to persons and animals using the streets, alleys and highways or public property. Red lights shall be so placed at night as to give warning of all excavations and ditches. The contractor and the person for whom the excavation has been made shall relieve the town of any responsibility for any accident or damage that may be caused by the work in question. 
(c)  In refilling excavations, the earth shall be laid in layers and each layer packed to prevent settlement and the street, alley or highway placed in as good condition as before to the satisfaction of the town manager. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall apply to the making of any and all excavations made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter in any street, alley or highway by any person other than a duly authorized officer or employee of the town. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dig into or in any manner break any sidewalk, curb, pavement, street, alley or public ground without replacing the same in as good condition as found. 
(Code 1973, § 23-16) 
Chapter 24 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses and permits, Ch. 14; planning, Ch. 20; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23; water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 28; zoning, Ch. 29. 
State Law reference- Codification of subdivision ordinance, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-37.3; land subdivision and development, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-465 et seq.; Virginia Public Records Act, Code of Virginia, § 42.1-76 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    Administrator means the representative of the governing body who has been appointed to serve as the agent of the governing body in approving subdivision plats. 
    Alley means a permanent service way providing a secondary means of access to abutting properties. 
    Approve means the word "approve" shall be considered to be followed by the words "or disapproval." 
    Block means an area enclosed by adjacent and usually by intersecting streets. 
    Building lane means the distance which a building is from the front lot line or front boundary line. 
    Commission means the planning commission of Farmville, Virginia. 
    Cul-de-sac means a street with only one (1) outlet and having an appropriate turnaround for a safe and convenient reverse traffic movement. 
    Developer means an owner of property being subdivided, whether or not represented by an agent. 
    Distance, area means measurements in a horizontal plane. 
    Easement means a grant by a property owner of the use of land for a specific purpose. 
    Engineer means an engineer licensed by the commonwealth. 
    G.I.S . means geographic information system. 
    Governing body means the town council. 
    Health official means the health director or sanitarian serving the town. 
    Highway engineer means the resident engineer employed by the state department of transportation. 
    Jurisdiction means the area or territory subject to the legislative control of the governing body. 
    Lot means a numbered and recorded portion of a subdivision intended for transfer of ownership or for building development for a single building and its accessory building. The word "lot" includes the word "parcel." 
    Lot, corner, means a lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection; the shortest side fronting on a street shall be considered the front of the lot and the longest side fronting on a street shall be considered the side of the lot. 
    Lot, depth of, means the mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
    Lot, double frontage, means an interior lot having frontage on two (2) streets. 
    Lot, interior, means a lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot of record means a lot which has been recorded in the office of the clerk of the appropriate court. 
    Lot, width of, means the mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines. 
    Plat includes the terms "map," "plan," "plot," "replat" or "replot"; a map or plan of a tract or parcel of land which is to be or which has been subdivided. When used as a verb, plat is synonymous with subdivide. 
    Property means any tract, lot, parcel or several of the same collected together for the purpose of subdividing. 
    Street means the principal means of access to abutting properties. 
    Street, major, means any existing or future street designated as a major street on the adopted plan of land use and major thoroughfares or heavily traveled thoroughfare or highway that carries a large volume of through traffic or anticipated traffic exceeding five hundred (500) vehicles per day. 
    Street, minor, means a street that is used primarily as a means of public access to the abutting properties with anticipated traffic of less than five hundred (500) vehicles per day. 
    Street or alley, public use of, means the unrestricted use of a specified area or right-of-way for ingress and egress to two (2) or more abutting properties. 
    Street, service drive, means a public right-of-way generally parallel and contiguous to a major highway, primarily designated to promote safety by eliminating promiscuous ingress and egress to the right-of-way by providing safe and orderly points of access to the highway. 
    Street width means the total width of the strip of land dedicated or reserved for public travel, including roadway, curbs, gutters, sidewalks and planting strips. 
    Subdivide means to divide any tract, parcel or lot of land into two (2) or more parts; except, that the administrator may permit the separation of one (1) parcel from a tract of land without complying with all requirements of this chapter if it is: 
(1)  Not in conflict with the general meaning and purpose of this chapter. 
(2)  No new streets are required to serve the parcel. 
(3)  Meets or exceeds all zoning requirements. 
(4)  Not less than one-hundred-fifty-foot frontage. 
(5)  Signed by the administrator as required in section 24-37, (paragraph (1)a). 
    Subdivider means an individual, corporation or registered partnership, owning any tract, lot or parcel of land to be subdivided or a group of two (2) or more persons owning any tract, lot or parcel of land to be subdivided who has given its power of attorney to one (1) of the group or to another individual to act on its behalf in planning, negotiating for, in representing or executing the legal requirements of the subdivision. 
    Surveyor means a land surveyor licensed by the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
(Code 1973, § 24-1; Ord. No. 96, 9-14-2005; Ord. No. 103, 7-18-2006) 
Sec. 24-2. - Purpose of chapter. 
(a)  The purpose of this chapter is to establish certain subdivision standards and procedures for the town under the jurisdiction of the governing body as provided for by the Code of Virginia, as amended. 
(b)  These are part of a long-range plan to guide and facilitate the orderly beneficial growth of the community and to promote the public health, safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity and general welfare. Most specifically, the purposes of these standards and procedures are to provide a guide for the change that occurs when lands and acreage become urban in character as a result of development for residential, business or industrial purposes to provide assurance that the purchasers of lots are buying a commodity that is suitable for development and use and to make possible the provision of public services in a safe, adequate and efficient manner. Subdivided land sooner or later becomes a public responsibility in that roads and streets must be maintained and numerous public services customary to urban areas must be provided, this chapter assists the community in meeting these responsibilities. 
(Code 1973, § 24-2; Ord. No. 96, 9-14-2005) 
State Law reference- Extraterritorial jurisdiction of town, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-250. 
Sec. 24-3. - Administrator. 
(a)  The administrator appointed by the governing body is hereby delegated to administer this chapter. In so doing, the administrator shall be considered the administrator of the governing body and approval or disapproval shall be considered as though it were given by the governing body. 
(b)  The administrator shall consult with the planning commission on matters contained herein; and in the performance of his duties the administrator may call for opinions or decisions, either verbal or written, from other departments in considering details of any submitted plat. This authority by the administrator shall have particular reference to the resident highway engineer and the health officer. 
(c)  The administrator shall perform his duties regarding subdivisions and subdividing in accordance with this chapter and the Land Subdivision and Development Act. 
(d)  In addition to the regulations herein contained for the platting of subdivisions, the administrator may, from time to time, establish any reasonable additional administrative procedures deemed necessary for the proper administration of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 24-3) 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 
Sec. 24-4. - Conformity with chapter required. 
    No person shall subdivide any tract of land that is located within the town except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 24-4; Ord. No. 96, 9-14-2005) 
Editor's note- The extraterritorial jurisdiction provided in Code of Virginia, § 19.2-250 is one mile. 
Sec. 24-5. - Granting of variance. 
    Where the subdivider can show that a provision of these standards would cause unnecessary hardship if strictly adhered to and where, because of topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site, in the opinion of the administrator a departure may be made without destroying the intent of such provisions, the administrator may authorize an exception. Any exception thus authorized is to be stated in writing in the report of the administrator with the reasoning on which the departure was justified set forth. No such variance may be granted by this chapter which is opposed in writing by the highway engineer or health official. 
(Code 1973, § 24-5) 
Sec. 24-6. - Private contracts. 
    This chapter bears no relation to any private easement, covenant, agreement or restriction nor is the responsibility of enforcing such private easement, covenant, agreement or restriction implied herein to any public official. When this chapter calls for more restrictive standards than are required by private contracts, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(Code 1973, § 24-6) 
Sec. 24-7. - Amendments. 
    This chapter may be amended in whole or in part by the governing body; provided, that any such amendment shall either originate with or be submitted to the planning commission for recommendation; further provided, that no such amendment shall be adopted without a public hearing having been held by the governing body. Notice of time and place of the hearing shall have been given at least once a week for two (2) weeks and the last notice at least five (5) days prior to the hearing. 
(Code 1973, § 24-7; Ord. No. 96, 9-14-2005) 
State Law reference- Preparation and adoption of amendments to subdivision ordinance, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2253. 
Sec. 24-8. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each lot or parcel of land subdivided, transferred or sold in violation of this chapter and the description of such lot or parcel by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties or from the remedies herein provided. 
(Code 1973, § 24-8) 
Secs. 24-9-24-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLATTING 

Sec. 24-26. - Recordation of plats; sale of lots in unrecorded subdivision. 
    Any owner or developer of any tract of land situated within the town who subdivides the same shall cause a plat of subdivision with reference to known or permanent monuments to be made and recorded in the office of the clerk of the appropriate court. No such plat of subdivision shall be recorded unless and until it shall have been submitted, approved and certified by the administrator in accordance with the regulations set forth in this chapter. No lot shall be sold in any such subdivision before the plat shall have been recorded. 
(Code 1973, § 24-9; Ord. No. 96, 9-14-2005) 
State Law reference- Plat of proposed subdivision and site plans to be submitted for approval, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2258. 
Sec. 24-27. - Requisites of plat. 
    Every subdivision plat which is intended for recording shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer or land surveyor, who shall endorse upon each plat a certificate signed by him setting forth the source of title of the owner of the land subdivided and the place of record of the last instrument in the chain of title; when the plat is of land acquired from more than one (1) source of title, the outlines of the several tracts shall be indicated upon such plat within an inset or by means of a dashed boundary line on the plat. 
(Code 1973, § 24-10; Ord. No. 96, 9-14-2005) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2262. 
Sec. 24-28. - Statement of consent to subdivision; execution; acknowledgment and recordation. 
    Every plat, or deed of dedication to which the plat is attached, shall contain in addition to the professional engineer's or land surveyor's certificate a statement as follows: 
"The platting or dedication of the following described land (here insert a correct description of the land subdivided) is with the free consent and in accordance with the desire of the undersigned owners, proprietors, and trustees, if any." 
    The statement shall be signed by such persons and duly acknowledged before some officer authorized to take acknowledgment of deeds. When thus executed and acknowledged, the plat, subject to the provisions herein, shall be filed and recorded in the office of the clerk of court where deeds are admitted to record for the lands contained in the plat, and indexed in the general index to deeds under the names of the owners of lands signing such statement, and under the name of the subdivision. 
(Code 1973, § 24-11; Ord. No. 96, 9-14-2005) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2264. 
Sec. 24-29. - Changes on approved plats. 
    No change, erasure or revision shall be made on any preliminary or final plat nor on accompanying data sheets after approval of the administrator has been endorsed in writing on the plat or sheets unless authorization for such changes has been granted in writing by the administrator. 
(Code 1973, § 24-12) 
Sec. 24-30. - Fees for examination. 
    There shall be a charge for the examination and approval or disapproval of every plat reviewed by the administrator. At the time of filing the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall deposit with the town checks payable to the town treasurer in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) per plat and five dollars ($5.00) for each lot in the subdivision. 
(Code 1973, § 24-13; Ord. No. 96, 9-14-2005) 
Sec. 24-31. - Approval required before sale. 
    Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed, and before any permit for the erection of a structure shall be granted, the subdivider or his representative shall apply in writing to the administrator for the approval of the subdivision plat. No lot shall be sold until a final plat for the subdivision shall have been approved and recorded in the manner provided in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 24-14) 
Sec. 24-32. - Preliminary sketch. 
(a)  The subdivider may, if he so chooses, submit to the administrator two (2) copies of a preliminary sketch of the proposed subdivision prior to his preparation of professional preliminary and final plats. The purpose of the preliminary sketch is to permit the administrator to advise the subdivider whether his plans in general are in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. The planning commission, on submission of any preliminary sketch by the administrator, shall study it and advise the subdivider wherein it appears that changes would be necessary. The administrator may mark the preliminary sketch indicating necessary changes and any such sketch shall be returned to the subdivider. 
(b)  The preliminary sketch shall be drawn on white paper or on a print of a topographic map of the property. It shall be drawn to a scale of one hundred (100) feet to the inch. It shall show the name, location and dimensions of all streets entering the property, adjacent to the property or terminating at the boundary of the property to be subdivided. It shall show the location of all proposed streets, lots, parks, playgrounds and other proposed uses of the land to be subdivided and shall include the approximate dimensions. 
(c)  Whenever part of a tract is proposed for platting and it is intended to subdivide additional parts in the future, a sketch plan for the entire tract shall be submitted with the preliminary plat. This sketch is merely for informational purposes and is not binding on the subdivider or the governing body. 
(Code 1973, § 24-15; Ord. No. 96, 9-14-2005) 
Sec. 24-33. - Preliminary plat-Submission; contents; forms. 
    The subdivider shall present to the administrator three (3) prints of a preliminary layout at a scale of one hundred (100) feet to the inch as a preliminary plat. The preliminary plat shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name of subdivision, owner, subdivider, surveyor or engineer, date of drawing, number of sheets, north point and scale. If true north is used, method of determination shall be shown. 
(2)  Location of proposed subdivision by an inset map at a scale of not less than two (2) inches equal to one (1) mile showing adjoining roads, their names and numbers, towns, subdivisions and other landmarks. 
(3)  The boundary surveyor existing survey of record provided such survey shows a closure with an accuracy of not less than that prescribed in VA. Stat. Title 54.1 § 5.10 13-3; total acreage, acreage of subdivided area, number and approximate area and frontage of all building sites, existing buildings within the boundaries of the tract, names of owners and their property lines within the boundaries of the tract and adjoining such boundaries. 
(4)  All existing, platted and proposed streets, their names, numbers and widths; existing utility or other easements, public areas and parking spaces; culverts, drains and watercourses, their names and other pertinent data. 
(5)  The complete storm drainage layout, including all pipe sizes, types, drainage easements and means of transporting the drainage to a well-defined open stream, which is considered natural drainage. 
(6)  Proposed connections with existing sanitary sewers and existing water supply or alternate means of sewage disposal and water supply. The location, type, profile, percentage of slope, pipe size, and location of manholes for all sewers shall be shown. The distance between manholes shall not exceed three hundred (300) feet. The location, type and sizes of all water lines shall be shown, as well as the location of valves and fire hydrants. 
(7)  A cross section showing the proposed street construction, depth and type of base, type of surface, etc. 
(8)  A profile or contour map showing the proposed grades for the streets and drainage facilities, including elevations of existing and proposed ground surface at all street intersections and all points of major grade change along the centerline of streets, together with proposed grade lines connecting therewith. 
(9)  All parcels of land to be dedicated for public use and the condition of such dedication. 
(Code 1973, § 24-16; Ord. No. 96, 9-14-2005) 
Sec. 24-34. - Same-Review; recommendations; estimated cost of improvements. 
    The administrator or his appointed representative shall discuss the preliminary plat with the subdivider in order to determine whether or not his preliminary plat generally conforms to the requirements of the subdivision chapter and of the zoning chapter. The subdivider shall then be advised in writing within forty-five (45) days, which may be by formal letter or by legible markings on his copy of the preliminary plat, concerning any additional data that may be required, the character and extent of public improvements that shall have to be made and an estimate of the cost of construction or improvements and the amount of the performance bond that shall be required as a prerequisite to approval of the final subdivision plat. In determining the cost of required improvements and the amount of the performance bond, the administrator may consult with a duly licensed engineer who shall prepare this data for the administrator or preferably may require a bona fide estimate of the cost of improvements to be furnished by the subdivider. 
(Code 1973, § 24-17) 
Sec. 24-35. - Same-Effect of approval. 
    Approval by the administrator of the preliminary plat does not constitute a guarantee of approval of the final plat. 
(Code 1973, § 24-18) 
Sec. 24-36. - Limitation on time between preliminary and final plats. 
    The subdivider shall have not more than six (6) months after receiving official notification concerning the preliminary plat to file with the administrator a final subdivision plat in accordance with this chapter. Failure so to do shall make preliminary approval null and void. The administrator may, on written request by the subdivider, grant an extension of this time limit. 
(Code 1973, § 24-19) 
Sec. 24-37. - Final plat-Submission; contents; form. 
    The subdivision plats submitted for final approval by the governing body and subsequent recording shall be clearly and legibly drawn in ink at a scale of one hundred (100) feet to the inch on sheets having a size of not more than eighteen (18) by twenty-four (24) inches. In addition to the requirements of the preliminary plat, the final plat shall include the following: 
(1)  Two (2) signature lines shall be drawn and labeled "Subdivision Administrator" and "President of Council". 
a.  For single divisions as defined in section 24-1 "Subdivision" only one (1) line shall be required and shall be labeled "Subdivision Administrator". 
(2)  Certificates signed by surveyor or other professional recognized under VA. Stat. Title 54-1-400 setting forth the source of title of the owners of the land subdivided and the place of record of the last instrument in the chain of title. 
(3)  A statement to the effect that the subdivision as it appears on this plat is with the free consent and in accordance with the desires of the owners, proprietors and trustees, if any, which shall be signed by the owners, proprietors and trustees, if any, and shall be duly acknowledged before some officer authorized to take acknowledgements of deeds. 
(4)  When the subdivision consists of land acquired from more than one (1) source of title, the outlines of the various tracts shall be indicated by dash [-] lines and identification of the respective tracts shall be placed on the plat. 
(5)  The accurate location and dimensions by bearings and distances with all curve data on all lots and street lines and centerlines of streets, boundaries of all proposed or existing easements, parks, school sites, all existing public and private streets, their names, numbers and widths, existing utilities, and those to be provided such as sanitary sewers, storm drains, water mains, manholes and underground conduits, including their size and type, watercourses and their names, names of owners and their property lines, both within the boundary of the subdivision and adjoining the boundaries. 
(6)  Distances and bearings must balance and close with an accuracy of not less than that set forth in the VA. Stat. Title 54.1 § 5.10, B-3. 
(7)  The data of all curves along the street frontage shall be shown in detail to include the following: delta, radius, arc, chord and chord bearings. 
(Code 1973, § 24-20; Ord. No. 96, 9-14-2005; Ord. No. 104, 7-18-2006) 
Sec. 24-38. - Same-Approval procedure. 
(a)  The plat shall not be approved until the subdivider has complied with the general requirements and minimum standards of design in accordance with this chapter and has made satisfactory arrangements for performance bond, cash or cash bond to cover the cost of necessary improvements, in lieu of construction, to the satisfaction of the administrator. Approval of final plat shall be written on the face of the plat by the administrator. 
(b)  The completed plat shall be submitted to the town council for approval. On the approval by the council, the plat shall be signed by the president of the council, marked approved, and returned to the property owner, who will cause the plat to be recorded in the clerk's office, Prince Edward County, Virginia, or clerk's office, Cumberland County, Cumberland, Virginia, wherein the land lies. If not approved, the council will return the plat to the owner with corrections to be made indicated thereon. No plat shall be recorded until council approval has been made. Any plat not recorded within six (6) months after final approval shall be considered void and approval withdrawn and the plat shall be returned to the approving officer. 
(Code 1973, § 24-21; Ord. No. 96, 9-14-2005) 
Sec. 24-39. - Appeals from disapproval. 
    If a plan for subdivision is disapproved by the administrator, the subdivider may appeal to the governing body, which may then override the recommendation of the administrator and approve the plat. 
(Code 1973, § 24-22) 
Secs. 24-40-24-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REQUIREMENTS AND DESIGN STANDARDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 24-56. - Mutual responsibility. 
    There is a mutual responsibility between the subdivider and the town to divide the land so as to improve the general use pattern of the land being subdivided. 
(Code 1973, § 24-23) 
Sec. 24-57. - Suitability of land. 
    The administrator shall not approve the subdivision of land if, from adequate investigations conducted by all public agencies concerned, it has been determined that in the best interest of the public the site is not suitable for platting and development purposes of the kind proposed. 
(Code 1973, § 24-24) 
Sec. 24-58. - Land subject to flooding. 
    Land subject to flooding and land deemed to be topographically unsuitable shall not be platted for residential occupancy nor for such other uses as may increase danger of health, life or property or may aggravate erosion or flood hazard. Such land within the subdivision shall be set aside on the plat for such uses as shall not be endangered by periodic or occasional inundation or shall not produce conditions contrary to public welfare. 
(Code 1973, § 24-25) 
Sec. 24-59. - Improvements. 
    All required improvements shall be installed by the subdivider at his cost. In cases where specifications have been established either by the Virginia Department of Highways for streets, curbs, etc., or by local ordinances and codes, such specifications shall be followed. The subdivider's bond shall not be released until construction has been inspected and approved by the appropriate official. All improvements shall be in accordance with the requirements and design standards set forth in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 24-26; Ord. No. 96, 9-14-2005) 
Secs. 24-60-24-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STREETS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23. 

Sec. 24-76. - Responsibility of subdivider. 
    All streets in the proposed subdivision shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the following minimum requirements by the subdivider at no cost to the locality. 
(Code 1973, § 24-27) 
Sec. 24-77. - Alignment and layout. 
(a)  The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provision for the continuation of existing streets in adjoining areas and proposed streets as shown on the adopted plan of land use and major thoroughfares. 
(b)  The street arrangement shall be such as to cause no unnecessary hardship to owners of adjoining property when they plat their own land and seek to provide for convenient access to it. Where, in the opinion of the administrator, it is desirable to provide for street access to adjoining property, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication to the boundary line of such property. Half streets along the boundary of land proposed for subdivision shall not be permitted. Wherever possible streets should intersect at right angles. In all hillside areas streets running with contours shall be required to intersect at angles of not less than sixty (60) degrees, unless approved by the administrator on recommendation of the highway engineer. 
(Code 1973, § 24-28) 
Sec. 24-78. - Service drives. 
    Whenever a proposed subdivision contains or is adjacent to a limited access highway or expressway, provision shall be made for a service drive or marginal street approximately parallel to the right-of-way at a distance suitable for an appropriate use of the land between the highway and the proposed subdivision. Such distances shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for ingress and egress to the main thoroughfare. The right-of-way of any major highway or street projected across any railroad, limited access highway or expressway, shall be of adequate width to provide for the cuts or fills required for any future separation of grades. 
(Code 1973, § 24-29) 
Sec. 24-79. - Approach angle. 
    Major streets shall approach major or minor streets at an angle of not less than eighty (80) degrees unless the administrator, on recommendation of the highway engineer, shall approve a lesser angle of approach for reasons of contour, terrain or matching of existing patterns. 
(Code 1973, § 24-30) 
Sec. 24-80. - Minimum widths. 
    The minimum width of proposed streets, measured from lot line to lot line, shall be as shown on the major street plan; or, if not shown on such plan, the widths shall be: 
(1)  Major streets, not less than eighty (80) feet. 
(2)  Minor streets, not less than sixty (60) feet. 
(3)  Local service drives or other minor streets which cannot be extended in the future, no less than fifty (50) feet. 
(4)  In the case of townhouses/condominiums the minimum right-of-way shall be as follows: 
a.  Main Street fifty (50) feet. 
b.  Local Street forty (40) feet. 
c.  Private Street thirty (30) feet. 
(5)  Minimum pavement width shall be twenty-two (22) feet, exclusive of parking. 
(Code 1973, § 24-31; Ord. No. 96, 9-14-2005; Ord. No. 154, 1-9-2013 ) 
Sec. 24-81. - Construction requirements. 
(a)  In cases where state department of highways specifications are lacking or are less restrictive than the requirements of this section, this section shall prevail. 
(b)  The following specifications shall apply within corporate limits of the town: 
(1)  The roadway shall be graded to pavement with plus eight (8) feet exclusive of side ditches. 
(2)  Base for pavement shall be at least thirty (30) feet in width and six (6) inches in depth and be of stone, gravel or other satisfactory material approved by the department of highways. 
(3)  Pavement width shall be a minimum of twenty-four (24) feet where there is no on-street parking, or a minimum of thirty (30) feet when on-street parking is required, constructed of a material passing state department of highways specification. The pavement will consist of a bituminous oil primer treatment and double sealed treatment with rates of application to be in accordance with the state department of highways specifications. 
(Code 1973, § 24-32; Ord. No. 33, 11-8-95; Ord. No. 96, 9-14-2005) 
Sec. 24-82. - Cul-de-sacs. 
    Generally, minor terminal streets (cul-de-sacs) designed to have one (1) end permanently closed shall serve no more than twenty-five (25) lots. Each cul-de-sac must be terminated by a turnaround of not less one hundred (100) feet diameter. Cul-de-sacs or approved turnarounds shall be required as prescribed in the most current version of the International Fire Code. Hammerhead and/or other types of turnarounds shall be designed to the satisfaction of the town manager or representative. 
(Code 1973, § 24-33; Ord. No. 96, 9-14-2005; Ord. No. 154, 1-9-2013 ) 
Sec. 24-83. - Alleys. 
    There will be no alleys provided unless required by the administrator. All utilities and access requirements will be handled by the use of easements and will be part of the property deeds in adjacent lots. 
(Code 1973, § 24-34; Ord. No. 96, 9-14-2005) 
Sec. 24-84. - Private streets and reserve strips. 
    There shall be no private streets platted in any subdivision. Every subdivided property shall be served from a publicly dedicated street. There shall be no reserve strip controlling access to streets. 
(Code 1973, § 24-35) 
Sec. 24-85. - Names. 
    Proposed streets which are obviously in alignment with other already existing and named streets shall bear the names of the existing streets. In no case shall the names of proposed streets duplicate existing street names irrespective of the use of the suffix street, avenue, boulevard, drive, way, place, lane or court. Street names shall be indicated on the preliminary and final plats and shall be approved by the administrator. Names of existing streets shall not be changed except by approval of the governing body. 
(Code 1973, § 24-36) 
Sec. 24-86. - Identification signs. 
    Street identification signs of a design approved by the administrator shall be installed at all intersections, readable from either side. 
(Code 1973, § 24-37) 
Secs. 24-87-24-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BLOCKS 

Sec. 24-106. - Compliance with requirements. 
    Where created by the subdivision of land, all new blocks shall be of modern design and shall comply with the general requirements set out in this division. 
(Code 1973, § 24-38) 
Sec. 24-107. - Length. 
    Generally, the maximum length of blocks shall be twelve hundred (1200) feet and the minimum length of blocks on which lots have frontage shall be five hundred (500) feet. 
(Code 1973, § 24-39) 
Sec. 24-108. - Width. 
    Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two (2) tiers of lots of minimum depth, consistent with the town zoning ordinance and this chapter, unless prevented by topographical conditions or size of the property, in which case the administrator may approve a single tier of lots of minimum depth. 
(Code 1973, § 24-40) 
Sec. 24-109. - Orientation. 
    Where a proposed subdivision will adjoin a major road, the administrator may require that the greater dimension of the block shall front or back on such major thoroughfare to avoid unnecessary ingress or egress. 
(Code 1973, § 24-41) 
Secs. 24-110-24-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - LOTS 

Sec. 24-126. - Minimum size. 
    The minimum lot size in any area shall be in accordance with the zoning ordinance for those subdivisions within the corporate limits. 
(Code 1973, § 24-42) 
Sec. 24-127. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 96, adopted Sept. 14, 2005, rescinded § 24-127, which pertained to water and sewer requirements as determinant of size and derived from Code 1973, § 24-43. 
Sec. 24-128. - Shape. 
    The lot arrangement, design and shape shall be such that lots shall provide satisfactory and desirable sites for buildings, be properly related to topography and conform to requirements of this chapter. Lots shall not contain peculiarly shaped elongations solely to provide necessary square footage of area but which would be unusable for normal purposes. 
(Code 1973, § 24-44) 
Sec. 24-129. - Location. 
    Each lot shall abut on a street dedicated by the subdivision plat or on an existing publicly dedicated street or on a street which has become public by right of use. If the existing streets are not sixty (60) feet in width, the subdivider shall make provisions in the subdivision plat for the dedication of additional road right-of-way to equal one half (1/2) the width set out in section 24-80 from the existing Code. This dedication will be deeded to the town prior to the final approval of the subdivision. 
(Code 1973, § 24-45; Ord. No. 96, 9-14-2005) 
Sec. 24-130. - Corner lots. 
    Corner lots shall have extra width sufficient for maintenance of any required building lines on both streets as determined by the administrator. 
(Code 1973, § 24-46) 
Sec. 24-131. - Side lines. 
    Side lines of lots shall be approximately at right angles, or radial to the street line. 
(Code 1973, § 24-47) 
Sec. 24-132. - Remnants. 
    All remnants of lots below minimum size left over after subdividing a tract shall be added to adjacent lots or otherwise disposed of rather than allowed to remain as unusable parcels. 
(Code 1973, § 24-49) 
Sec. 24-133. - Separate ownership. 
    Where the land covered by a subdivision includes two (2) or more parcels in separate ownership and lot arrangement is such that a property ownership line divides one (1) or more lots, the land in each lot so divided shall be transferred by deed to single ownership simultaneously with the recording of the final plat. Such deed is to be deposited with the clerk of the court and held with the final plat until the subdivider is ready to record same and they both shall then be recorded together. 
(Code 1973, § 24-50) 
Sec. 24-134. - Incorporation of two contiguous parcels of land. 
(a)  With the approval of the administrator, two (2) contiguous parcels of land may be incorporated into one (1) lot and there shall be no future subdivision of the new enlarged lot. Such conveyance shall carry a covenant with it prohibiting such subdivision and such covenant shall be recorded in the clerk's office at the owner's expense. 
(b)  The town council may make an exception to this section, if they feel the compliance with this section would cause an undue hardship on the property owner or cause a waste of land. Any exception made shall not violate any provisions of the zoning ordinance or other regulation in the town. 
(Code 1973, § 24-50.1; Ord. No. 96, 9-14-2005) 
Secs. 24-135-24-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - WATER AND SEWERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 28. 

Sec. 24-151. - Public water. 
    Where public water is available, the service, including fire hydrants, shall be extended to all lots within a subdivision by the subdivider in accordance with the design standards and specifications for water, construction and improvements in the town and meeting the approval of the administrator. 
(Code 1973, § 24-51; Ord. No. 96, 9-14-2005) 
Sec. 24-152. - Sewerage facilities. 
    Where public sewerage facilities are available, the service shall be extended to all lots within a subdivision and septic tanks shall not be permitted. Every subdivision shall be provided by the subdivider with a satisfactory and sanitary means of sewage collection and disposal in accordance with the design standards and specifications for sewerage construction and improvements in the town and meeting the approval of the administrator. 
(Code 1973, § 24-52; Ord. No. 96, 9-14-2005) 
Secs. 24-153-24-170. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 96, adopted Sept. 14, 2005, deleted § 24-153, which pertained to private water and/or sewers and derived from Code 1973, § 24-53. 
DIVISION 6. - IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 24-171. - Storm drainage facilities. 
    The subdivider shall provide all necessary information needed to determine what improvements are necessary to properly develop the subject property, including contour intervals, drainage plans and flood control devices. The subdivider shall also provide plans for all such improvements together with a properly qualified licensed engineer's or surveyor's statement that such improvements, when properly installed, will be adequate for proper development. The subdivider shall install the approved storm drainage facilities. 
(Code 1973, § 24-54; Ord. No. 96, 9-14-2005) 
Sec. 24-172. - Fire protection. 
    Adequate fire hydrants in a subdivision at locations approved by the administrator shall be installed by the subdivider; provided, that necessary public water is available. The location of the fire hydrants shall meet the American Insurance Association specifications. 
(Code 1973, § 24-55) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 12. 
Sec. 24-173. - Easements. 
    The administrator may require that easements for drainage through adjoining property be provided by the subdivider. Easements of not less than twenty (20) feet in width shall be provided for drainage, water, sewer, power lines and other utilities in the subdivision when required by the administrator. 
(Code 1973, § 24-56) 
Sec. 24-174. - Bond. 
    Before any subdivision plat will be finally approved the subdivider shall, in lieu of construction, furnish bond in an amount calculated by the administrator to secure the required improvements in accordance with specifications and construction schedules established, which bond shall be payable to and held by the governing body. 
(Code 1973, § 24-57) 
Sec. 24-175. - Plans and specifications. 
    Two (2) blue or black line prints of the plans and specifications for all required physical improvements to be installed shall be prepared by an engineer and shall be submitted to the administrator for approval or disapproval within sixty (60) days. If approved, one (1) copy bearing certification of such approval shall be returned to the subdivider. If disapproved, all papers shall be returned to the subdivider with the reason for disapproval in writing. 
(Code 1973, § 24-58) 
Secs. 24-176-24-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - MONUMENTS 

Sec. 24-191. - Responsibility of subdivider. 
    As required by this chapter all monuments shall be installed by the subdivider and shall meet the minimum specifications. On completion of subdivision streets, sewers and other improvements, the subdivider shall make certain that all monuments required by the administrator are clearly visible for inspection and use. Such monuments shall be inspected and approved by the administrator before any improvements are accepted by the governing body. 
(Code 1973, § 24-59) 
Sec. 24-192. - Location-Concrete. 
    Concrete monuments four (4) inches in diameter or square, three (3) feet long, with a flat top shall be set at all street corners at all points where the street line intersects the exterior boundaries of the subdivision and at right angle points and points of curve in each street. The top of the monument shall have an appropriate mark to identify properly the location and shall be set six (6) inches above the finished grade. An alternate to this requirement will be annotate coordinates to at least one outer point based on the town datum, (Virginia HARN-NAD 1983-1993) and provide the town G.I.S. department with an electronic file of the boundary, division lines and easement lines in a format usable by that office. 
(Code 1973, § 24-60; Ord. No. 96, 9-14-2005) 
Sec. 24-193. - Same-Iron pipe. 
    All other lot corners shall be marked with iron rod not less than one-half (1/2) inch in diameter and twenty-four (24) inches long, or iron rod not less than one-half (1/2) inch in diameter and twenty-four (24) inches long. When rock is encountered, a hole shall be drilled one (1) inches deep in the rock, into which shall be cemented a steel rod one-half (1/2) inch in diameter, the top of which shall be flush with the finished grade line or reference irons shall be driven on line and shown on plat. 
(Code 1973, § 24-61; Ord. No. 96, 9-14-2005) 
Chapter 25 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Taxation generally, § 13; annual levy, § 15 et seq.; assessment of property, § 36 et seq.; exemption from county levies, § 58. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; buildings, Ch. 6; finance, Ch. 11; licenses and permits, Ch. 14. 
State Law reference- Vote to levy tax in towns, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-826; municipal taxes and assessments, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-841; local taxes, Code of Virginia, Title 58.1, Ch. 30 et seq.; enforcement, collection, refunds, remedies and review of local taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3901 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 25-1-25-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BANK FRANCHISE TAX 

Sec. 25-26. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section: 
    Bank means as defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1201. 
    Net capital means a bank's net capital computed pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1205. 
(Code 1973, § 25-1) 
Sec. 25-27. - Imposition of tax. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of Code of Virginia, Tit. 58.1, Ch. 12 (§ 58.1-1200 et seq.), there is hereby imposed upon each bank located within the boundaries of this town a tax on net capital equalling eighty (80) percent of the state rate of franchise tax set forth in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1204. 
(b)  In the event that any bank located within the boundaries of this town also has offices that are located outside the corporate limits hereof, the tax shall be apportioned as provided in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1211. 
(Code 1973, § 25-1.1) 
Sec. 25-28. - Filing of return and payment of tax. 
(a)  On or after the first day of January of each year, but not later than March first of any such year, all banks whose principal offices are located within this town shall prepare and file with the commissioner of the revenue (or comparable local assessing officer) a return as provided by Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1207 in duplicate which shall set forth the tax on net capital computed pursuant to Code of Virginia, Tit. 58.1, Ch. 12 (§ 58.1-1200 et seq.). The commissioner of the revenue (or comparable assessing officer) shall certify a copy of the bank's return and schedules and shall forthwith transmit such certified copy to the state department of taxation. 
(b)  In the event that the principal office of a bank is located outside the corporate boundaries of this town and such bank has branch offices located within this town, in addition to the filing requirements set forth in subsection (a) above, any bank conducting such branch business shall file with the commissioner of the revenue or appropriate assessing officer of this county a copy of the real estate deduction schedule, apportionment and other items which are required by Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-1207, 58.1-1211 and 58.1-1212. 
(c)  Each bank, on or before the first day of June of each year, shall pay into the treasurer's office (or other appropriate official of this town) all taxes imposed pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1973, § 25-1.2) 
Sec. 25-29. - Penalty upon bank for failure to comply with article. 
    Any bank which fails to file a return or pay the tax required by this article or fails to comply with any other provision of this article shall be subject to a penalty of five (5) percent of the tax due. If the commissioner of the revenue is satisfied that such failure is due to providential or other good cause, such return and payment of tax shall be accepted exclusive of such penalty, but with interest determined in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-15. 
(Code 1973, § 25-1.4) 
Secs. 25-30-25-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TAX ON REAL PROPERTY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Persons and property subject to annual levy, § 16. 
State Law reference- Municipal taxes and assessments, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-841; real estate subject to local taxation, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3200. 

Sec. 25-46. - Annual assessment; valuation of property. 
    The town council shall, annually, at its first meeting in July or as soon as practicable, fix the tax rates on all real property properly subject to taxation within and by the town and shall assess such taxes as may be required to provide for the needs and purposes of the town. In determining the valuation of property in the town, reference shall be had to the records of the commissioner of the revenue of the county in which the land is located. 
(Code 1973, § 25-2) 
Sec. 25-47. - Tax tickets; bills for taxes. 
    As soon as practicable after taxes are assessed the town treasurer shall make or cause to be made for each taxpayer a tax ticket substantially in the form prescribed by the state department of taxation and shall send by mail to each taxpayer a bill for such taxes. 
(Code 1973, § 25-3) 
Sec. 25-47.1 - Exemption adopted. 
    Pursuant to Code of Virginia, tit. 58.1, ch. 32, art. 2, as amended, the Town Council for Farmville, Virginia, hereby adopts this article which provides for the exemption from real estate taxation of certain elderly and/or permanently and totally disabled person who own their own home in Farmville, Prince Edward County or Farmville, Cumberland County, and further provides a schedule of exemption to persons qualifying and the procedure to be followed for claiming such exemptions. 
( Ord. No. 160, 12-12-2012 ) 
Sec. 25-47.2 - Qualification-Qualifying property owners in Farmville, Prince Edward County. 
    For persons who own their own home in Farmville, Prince Edward County, who qualify for this exemption pursuant to Prince Edward County, Virginia, Code of Ordinances, Chapter 70 - Taxation Article VII. - Exemptions, Division I Real Estate Exemption for Elderly and Permanently Disable Persons as amended shall be granted the same exemptions as to the town real estate taxes. 
( Ord. No. 160, 12-12-2012 ) 
Sec. 25-47.3 - Qualification-Qualifying property owners in Farmville, Cumberland County. 
    For persons who own their own home in Farmville, Cumberland County who qualify for this exemption pursuant to Cumberland County, Virginia Code of Ordinances, Chapter 58 - Taxation, Article VII, Real Property Tax, Division 3, Property of Elderly and Disabled Persons, as amended shall be granted the same tax exemptions as to the town real estate taxes. 
( Ord. No. 160, 12-12-2012 ) 
Sec. 25-48. - When taxes due and payable; penalty. 
    Except as otherwise provided, all taxes shall be due and payable as soon as the tax bills are sent. Any person failing to satisfy such tax bill on or before the fifteenth day of December following the mailing thereof shall incur a penalty of ten (10) percent of the total taxes due. 
(Code 1973, § 25-4) 
Sec. 25-49. - Interest. 
    Interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum shall be collected upon the principal from January 1 of the year next after taxes were assessed. 
(Code 1973, § 25-5; Ord. No. 7, 10-10-91) 
Sec. 25-50. - Lien of taxes on real estate; delinquent tax record. 
(a)  There shall be a lien upon real estate for the taxes assessed thereon by the town council from the commencement of the year for which they are assessed. After six (6) months when any of such taxes are returned delinquent by the town treasurer, a list of the same shall be returned to the clerk of the circuit court of the county wherein such land is located and be by him entered in a book furnished by the town and kept in his office, the form and manner of entering the same to be similar to that provided by law for the record of delinquent taxes on real estate due to the county. In such book there shall also be columns in which shall be entered the names of the purchasers and the amount and date of sales of real estate sold for delinquent taxes, as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  Until the taxes so returned delinquent are entered in the record as herein provided, the real estate shall not be liable for town taxes as against purchasers for value and without notice. The real estate may be sold for town taxes, as hereinafter provided, whether owned by the person in whose name it was assessed or not. 
(Code 1973, § 25-6) 
Sec. 25-51. - Sale for taxes. 
(a)  When taxes have been returned delinquent and entered of record, the circuit court or the judge thereof in vacation on the application of the town council may order any real estate delinquent for the nonpayment of town taxes to be sold by the treasurer of the town at public auction for such taxes, with interest at ten (10) percent and costs exclusive of costs attending the redemption thereof, at such times as the court or judge may direct, the sale and advertisement thereof to be made in conformity as nearly as may be to the state law with reference to the sale of delinquent lands. 
(b)  When such sale has been made, the sale with the date thereof, the name of the purchaser and the amount at which the real estate sold shall be entered by the clerk of the circuit court in the record of the delinquent real estate. 
(Code 1973, § 25-7) 
Sec. 25-52. - Purchase by town. 
    If at any sale no bid shall be made by any person for the parcel of land or the bid is not equal to the taxes with interest and costs, the same may be bid in and purchased by the treasurer for the town. On such sale the treasurer shall execute to the town a certificate of sale, in which the property purchased shall be described and the aggregate amount of taxes, interest and costs specified. He shall deposit the certificate with the clerk of the council of the town. 
(Code 1973, § 25-8) 
Sec. 25-53. - Redemption of real estate sold for taxes. 
    After real estate has been sold for taxes, it may be redeemed within such time and by such person and upon such terms as is provided by law for the redemption of land sold for county taxes; except, that the money paid for the redemption shall be paid to the town treasurer. On the redemption of such real estate, the treasurer shall issue to the person so redeeming it, a certificate to that effect, which shall be presented to the clerk of the circuit court, who shall thereupon mark in the record the redemption of the real estate, the name of the person redeeming it and the date thereof. 
(Code 1973, § 25-9) 
Sec. 25-54. - Clerk's fee. 
    The clerk shall receive for his service a fee of ten cents ($0.10) for each lot of land so entered in the record, a fee of ten cents ($0.10) for the entry of such sale of real estate and a fee of twenty-five cents ($0.25) for each redemption so entered. The fee shall be paid by the town and shall be charged against and be a lien on the land, along with the taxes assessed against the land. 
(Code 1973, § 25-10) 
Sec. 25-55. - Deed to purchaser. 
    If, at the expiration of the time within which the real estate may be redeemed, it has not been redeemed, the town clerk shall execute to the purchaser thereof a deed conveying the same in like manner as is prescribed by law for the conveyance of real estate by the clerk of the circuit court which has been sold for delinquent taxes due the county. Such deed shall convey such title as would be conveyed had the same been sold for delinquent county taxes. 
(Code 1973, § 25-11) 
Sec. 25-56. - Vesting title in town; waiving purchase and enforcing lien in equity. 
(a)  If any real estate purchased by the treasurer for the town shall not be redeemed within the time specified, the town treasurer shall, within sixty (60) days after the expiration of the time for redemption, cause to be recorded in the clerk's office of the circuit court the certificate of sale with his oath that the real estate has not been redeemed and thereupon the town or its assigns shall acquire an absolute title to the same. The certificate or record thereof or a certified copy thereof shall in all courts and other places, be evidence of the facts therein stated. 
(b)  The failure to obtain or record such certificate shall not invalidate the lien of the town for taxes assessed against such real estate, but the town may at any time elect to enforce its lien for taxes in a court of equity and release its right as purchaser or to become purchaser of such real estate. 
(Code 1973, § 25-12) 
Sec. 25-57. - Article does not affect other remedies. 
    The provisions of this article shall not affect any remedy given by other provisions of the Code of Virginia, as amended, or by the town charter for the collection of town taxes; in any other proceeding for the collection of town taxes or under which they may be collected, the provisions of this article shall not be applicable. 
(Code 1973, § 25-13) 
Secs. 25-58-25-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TAX ON PURCHASERS OF ELECTRIC SERVICES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 59, adopted Oct. 10, 2000 repealed the former Art. IV, §§ 25-76-25-85, and enacted a new Art. IV. as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to tax purchasers of utility services and derived from Code 1973, §§ 25-14-25-21, 25-23; Ord. No. 28, adopted June 8, 1994. 
Charter reference- Taxation of purchasers of any public utility service, § 13. 
State Law reference- Consumer utility taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3812 et seq. 

Sec. 25-76. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    Consumer means every person who, individually or through agents, employees, officers, representatives or permittees, makes a taxable purchase of electricity in the town. 
    Kilowatt hours (kwh) delivered means one thousand (1,000) watts of electricity delivered in a one-hour period by an electric provider to an actual consumer, except that in the case of eligible customer generators (sometimes called cogenerators) as defined in Code of Virginia, §56-594, it means kwh supplied from the electric grid to such customer-generators, minus the kwh generated and fed back to the electric grid by such customer-generators. 
    Person means any individual, corporation, company or other entity. 
    Residential consumer means the owner or tenant of property used primarily for residential purposes, including but not limited to, apartment houses and other multiple-family dwellings. 
    Service provider means the person who delivers electricity to a consumer. 
    Used primarily relates to the larger portion of the use for which electric utility service is furnished. 
(Ord. No. 59, 10-11-2000) 
Sec. 25-77. - Electric utility consumer tax. 
(a)  In accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814, effective January 1, 2001, there is hereby imposed and levied a monthly tax on each purchase of electricity delivered to consumers by a service provider, classified as determined by such provider, as follows: 
(1)  Residential consumers: such tax shall be one dollar and forty cents ($1.40) plus the rate of $0.01524 on each kwh delivered monthly to residential consumers by a service provider, not to exceed three dollars ($3.00) monthly. 
(2)  Nonresidential consumers: such tax on nonresidential consumers shall be at the rates per month for the classes of nonresidential consumers as set forth below: 
a.  Commercial consumers-Such tax shall be two dollars and twenty-nine cents ($2.29) plus the rate of $0.013717 on each kwh delivered monthly to commercial consumers not to exceed sixty dollars ($60.00) monthly. 
b.  Industrial consumers-Such tax shall be two dollars and twenty-nine cents ($2.29) plus the rate of $0.013717 on each kwh delivered monthly to industrial consumers, not to exceed sixty dollars ($60.00) monthly. 
(3)  The conversion of tax pursuant to this article to monthly kwh delivered shall not be effective before the first meter reading after December 31, 2000, prior to which time the tax previously imposed by the town shall be in effect. 
(b)  Exemptions: The following consumers of electricity are exempt from the tax imposed by this article: 
(1)  Any public safety agency as defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3813. 
(2)  Any church or religious body entitled to exemption pursuant to Article 4 of Chapter 36 of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia (§ 58.1-3650 et seq.) 
(3)  The United States of America, the commonwealth and the political subdivisions thereof, including this jurisdiction. 
(c)  Billing, collection and remittance of tax. The service provider shall bill the electricity consumer tax to all users who are subject to the tax and to whom it delivers electricity and shall remit the same to the town on a monthly basis. Such taxes shall be paid by the service provider to the town in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814, paragraphs F. and G., and Code of Virginia, §58.1-2901. If any consumer receives and pays for electricity but refuses to pay the tax imposed by this section, the service provider shall notify the town of the name and address of such consumer. If any consumer fails to pay a bill issued by a service provider, including the tax imposed by this section, the service provider must follow its normal collection procedures and upon collection of the bill or any part thereof must apportion the net amount collected between the charge for electric service and the tax and remit the tax portion to the town. 
Any tax paid by the consumer to the service provider shall be deemed to be held in trust by such provider until remitted to the town. 
(d)  Computation of bills not on monthly basis. Bills shall be considered as monthly bills for the purposes of this article if submitted twelve (12) times per year of approximately one (1) month each. Accordingly, the tax for a bi-monthly bill (approximately sixty (60) days) shall be determined as follows: (i) the kwh will be divided by two (2); (ii) a monthly tax will be calculated using the rates set forth above; (iii) the tax determined by (ii) shall be multiplied by two (2); (iv) the tax in (iii) may not exceed twice the monthly "maximum tax". 
(Ord. No. 59, 10-11-2000) 
Sec. 25-78. - Penalties. 
    Any consumer of electricity failing, refusing or neglecting to pay the tax imposed and levied under this article, and any officer, agent or employee of any service provider violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment in jail for not more than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such failure, refusal, neglect or violation shall constitute a separate offense. Such conviction shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection and remittance of the tax as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 59, 10-11-2000) 
Sec. 25-79. - Town treasurer to collect taxes. 
    The town treasurer shall be charged with the power and duty of collecting the taxes imposed and levied under this article. 
(Ord. No. 59, 10-11-2000) 
Sec. 25-80. - Application for refund on utility tax for electric service. 
    Any business, firm or corporation that has more than two (2) meters for electric service at one (1) location in the corporate limits of the town and pays utility tax on electric service in excess of one thousand four hundred forty dollars ($1,440.00) per calendar year may apply to the town treasurer during the month of January of each year for a refund in excess of this amount. Application for refund shall include receipts of all utility taxes on electric service paid during the preceding calendar year. 
Secs. 25-81-25-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TAX ON THE SALE OF PREPARED FOOD[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 57, adopted June 14, 2000, repealed the former Art. V., §§ 25-101-25-113, and enacted a new Art. V. as set out herein. The former Art. V. pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1973, §§ 25-24, 25-25, 25-27-25-35; Ord. of June 26, 1990(1); Ord. No. 13, adopted June 11, 1992; Ord. No. 20, adopted Feb. 10, 1993. 
State Law reference- Meals tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3840. 

Sec. 25-101. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have, for the purposes of this article, the following respective meanings except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cater means the furnishing of food, beverages, or both on the premises of another, for compensation. 
    Collector means the treasurer or designee. 
    Food means all food, beverages or both, including alcoholic beverages purchased in or from a food establishment, whether prepared in such food establishment or not, and whether consumed on the premises or not, and without regard to the manner, time or place of service. 
    Food establishment means any place in or from which food or food products are prepared, packaged, sold or distributed in the town, including but not limited to, any restaurant, dining room, grill, coffee shop, cafeteria, cafe, snack bar, lunch counter, convenience store, movie theater, delicatessen, confectionery, baker, eating house, eatery, drugstore, ice cream/yogurt shops, lunch wagon or truck pushcart or other mobile facility from which food is sold, public or private club, resort, bar, lounge, or other similar establishment, public or private, and shall include private property outside of and contiguous to a building or structure operated as a food establishment at which food or food products are sold for immediate consumption. 
    Meal means that any prepared food or drink offered or held out for sale by a food establishment for the purpose of being consumed by any person to satisfy the appetite and is ready for immediate consumption. All such food and beverage, unless otherwise specifically exempted or excluded herein shall be included, whether intended to be consumed on the seller's premises or elsewhere, whether designated as breakfast, lunch, snack, dinner, supper or by some other name, and without regard to the manner, time or place of service. 
(Ord. No. 57, 6-14-2000) 
Sec. 25-102. - Levy. 
    There is hereby imposed and levied by the town on each person a tax rate of seven (7) percent on the amount paid for meals purchased from any food establishment or not, and whether consumed on the premises or not. 
(Ord. No. 57, 6-14-2000; Ord. No. 76, 10-8-2003; Ord. No. 139, 6-16-2011) 
Sec. 25-103. - Collection of tax by seller. 
    Every person receiving any payment for food with respect to which a tax is levied hereunder shall collect and remit the amount of the tax imposed by this article from the person on whom the same is levied or from the person paying for such food at the time payment for such food is made; provided, however, no blind person operating a vending stand or other business enterprise under the jurisdiction of the Department for the Visually Handicapped and located on property acquired and used by the United States for any military or naval purpose shall be required to collect or remit such taxes. 
    All tax collections shall be deemed to be held in trust for the town. 
(Ord. No. 57, 6-14-2000) 
Sec. 25-104. - Exemptions; limits on application. 
(a)  The tax imposed under this article shall not be levied on factory-prepackaged candy, gum, nuts or other items of essentially the same nature served for on or off-premises consumption. 
(b)  The tax imposed under this article shall not be levied on the following items when served exclusively for off-premises consumption: 
(1)  Donuts, ice cream, crackers, nabs, chips, cookies and factory-prepackaged items of essentially the same nature. 
(2)  Food sold in bulk. For the purposes of this provision, a bulk sale shall mean the sale of any item that would exceed the normal, customary and usual portion sold for on premises consumption (e.g. whole cake, a gallon of ice cream); a bulk sale shall not include any food or beverage that is catered or delivered by a food establishment for off-premises consumption. 
(3)  Alcoholic and nonalcoholic beverages sold in factory sealed containers. 
(4)  Any food or food product purchased with food coupons issued by the United States Department of Agriculture under the Food Stamp Program or drafts issued through the Virginia Special Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infants, and Children. 
(5)  Any food or food product purchase for home consumption as defined in the federal Food Stamp Act of 1977, 7 U.S.C. § 2012, as amended except hot food or hot food products ready for immediate consumption. For the purposes of administering the tax levied hereunder, the following items whether or not purchased for immediate consumption are excluded from the said definition of food in the federal Food Stamp Act: sandwiches, salad bar items sold from a salad bar, prepackaged single-serving salads consisting primarily of an assortment of vegetables, and nonfactory sealed beverages. This subsection shall not affect provisions set forth in subparagraphs (d) (3), (4) and (5) hereinbelow. 
(c)  A grocery store, supermarket or convenience store shall not be subject to the tax except for any portion or section therein designated as a delicatessen or designated for the sale of prepared food and beverages. 
(d)  The tax imposed hereunder shall not be levied on the following purchases of food and beverages: 
(1)  Food and beverages furnished by food establishments to employees as part of their compensation when no charge is made to the employee. 
(2)  Food and beverages sold by day care centers, public or private elementary or secondary schools or food sold by any college or university to its students or employees. 
(3)  Food and beverages for use or consumption and which are paid for directly by the commonwealth, any political subdivision of the commonwealth or the United States. 
(4)  Food and beverages furnished by a hospital, medical clinic, convalescent home, nursing home, home for the aged, infirm, handicapped, battered women, narcotic addicts or alcoholics, or other extended care facility to patients or residents thereof and the spouses and children of such persons. 
(5)  Food and beverages furnished by a public or private nonprofit charitable organization or establishment or a private establishment that contracts with the appropriate agency of the commonwealth to offer meals at concession prices to elderly, infirm, blind, handicapped or needy persons in their homes or at central locations. 
(6)  Food and beverages sold on an occasional basis, (not exceeding three (3) times per calendar year), by a nonprofit educational, charitable or benevolent organization, church, or religious body as a fundraising activity, the gross proceeds of which are to be used by such organization exclusively for nonprofit educational, charitable, benevolent or religious purposes. 
(7)  Food and beverages sold through vending machines. 
(Ord. No. 57, 6-14-2000) 
Sec. 25-105. - Gratuities and service charges. 
    Where a purchaser provides a gratuity for an employee of a seller, and the amount of the gratuity is wholly in the discretion of the purchaser, the gratuity is not subject to the tax imposed by this article, whether paid in cash to the employee or added to the bill and charged to the purchaser's account, provided in the latter case, the full amount of the gratuity is turned over to the employee by the seller. 
(Ord. No. 57, 6-14-2000) 
Sec. 25-106. - Report of taxes collected; remittance; preservation of records. 
    It shall be the duty of every person required by this article to pay to the town the taxes imposed by this article to make a report thereof setting forth such information as the treasurer may prescribe and require, including all purchases taxable under this article, the amount charged the purchaser for each such purchase, the date thereof, the taxes collected thereon and the amount of tax required to be collected by this article, and shall sign and deliver such report to the treasurer with the remittance of such tax. Such report and remittance shall be made as require by the treasurer, which shall be at least once in every thirty-day period, and each shall be filed no later than the twentieth (20 th ) day of each month. Failure to remit the tax due by the twentieth (20 th ) day of each month shall create a presumption that the responsible person has unlawfully converted the tax due to his own use and has committed larceny thereof. 
    Any such tax records shall be kept and preserved for a period of five (5) years. The treasurer or his duly authorized agents shall have the power to examine such records at reasonable times and without unreasonable interference with the business of such person, for the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this article, and to make transcripts of all or any parts thereof. 
(Ord. No. 57, 6-14-2000) 
Sec. 25-107. - Compensation. 
    For the purpose of compensating a responsible person for accounting for and remitting the tax levied by the provisions of this article, such person shall be allowed three (3) percent of the amount of tax due and accounted for in the form of a deduction in submitting his return and paying the amount due by him; provided the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. No. 57, 6-14-2000) 
Sec. 25-108. - Penalties, interest on delinquent taxes. 
    If any responsible person shall fail or refuse to remit to the treasurer the tax required to be collected and paid him under the provisions of this article within the time and in the amount required, there shall be added to such tax by the treasurer a penalty in the amount of ten (10) percent thereof, and interest thereof at the rate of eight (8) percent per annum which shall be computed upon the taxes and penalty from the date such taxes are due and payable. 
(Ord. No. 57, 6-14-2000) 
Sec. 25-109. - Penalty for violation of article. 
(a)  Any person willfully failing or refusing to file a return as required under this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a class I misdemeanor except that any person failing to file such a return shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor if the amount of tax lawfully assessed in connection with the return is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or less. Any person violating or failing to comply with any other provision of this article shall be guilty of a class I misdemeanor. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (a) above, any corporate or partnership officer, as defined in Code of Virginia § 58.1-3906, or any other person required to collect, account for, or pay over the meals tax imposed under this article, who willfully fails to collect or truthfully account for or pay over such tax, or who willfully evades or attempts to evade such tax or payment thereof, shall, in addition to any other penalties imposed by law, be guilty of a class I misdemeanor. 
(c)  Each violation of or failure to comply with this article shall constitute a separate offense. Conviction of any such violation shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection or remittance of the tax as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 57, 6-14-2000) 
Sec. 25-110. - Enforcement. 
    If any responsible person shall fail or refuse to collect the tax imposed by the provisions of this article and to make payment within the time required according to the reports and remittances required by this article, the treasurer shall proceed in such manner as be may deem best to obtain the facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the treasurer procures such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax payment by any person who shall fail or refuse to collect such tax and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such responsible person such tax and penalty and interest provided by this article and shall notify such responsible person by registered mail sent to his last known place of address of the amount of such tax and penalty and interest, and the total amount thereof shall be payable within ten (10) days from the date of such notice. The treasurer shall have the power to examine such records for the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this section. If any responsible person fails to comply with this article or any provision of it, the treasurer may terminate the business license issued pursuant to section 14-11 or in the alternative, may require the responsible person to place a deposit with the treasurer equal to the greater of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or the equivalent of one (1) month's tax imposed under this article. Said deposit is to serve as security for the payment of future taxes due hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 57, 6-14-2000) 
Secs. 25-111-25-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TAX ON TRANSIENT LODGING[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Tax on transient room rentals, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3840. 

Sec. 25-131. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this article, have the following respective meanings except when the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Hotel means any public or private hotel, inn, hostelry, tourist home or house, motel, roominghouse, or other lodging place within the city offering lodging for compensation to any transient. 
    Lodging means space or room furnished any transient. 
    Transient means any person who, for a period of not more than thirty (30) consecutive days, either at his own expense, or at the expense of another, obtains lodging at any hotel. 
    Treasurer means the town treasurer and any of his duly authorized agents. 
(Code 1973, § 25-36) 
Sec. 25-132. - Violations. 
    Every person convicted of a violation of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor and be subject to the penalty prescribed. Each violation and each day's continuance thereof shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1973, § 25-37; Ord. No. 18, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 25-133. - Levied. 
    There is hereby imposed and levied by the town on each transient a tax equivalent to seven (7) percent of the total amount paid for lodging including any other taxes levied thereon by or for any transient to any hotel or motel. 
(Ord. of 6-26-90(2); Ord. No. 77, 10-8-2003; Ord. No. 141, 6-16-2011) 
Sec. 25-134. - Exemptions. 
    No tax shall be payable under this article in any of the following instances: 
(1)  On charges for lodging paid to any hospital, medical clinic, convalescent home or home for the aged. 
(2)  On charges made for providing space for a mobile home in a duly authorized mobile home park. 
(Code 1973, § 25-39) 
Sec. 25-135. - Collection generally. 
    The tax imposed and levied by this article shall be collected from the transient by the person providing such lodging at the time and in the manner provided in this article. 
(Code 1973, § 25-40) 
Sec. 25-136. - Collection procedure. 
(a)  The person designated as the responsible person shall receive any payment for lodging with respect to which a tax is levied under this article shall collect the amount of such tax so imposed from the transient on whom such tax is levied or from the person paying for such lodging at the time payment for such lodging is made. The taxes required to be collected under this section shall be deemed to be held in trust by the responsible person required to collect such taxes until remitted as required in this article. 
(b)  For the purpose of compensating a person for accounting for and remitting the tax levied by this article, such person shall be allowed three (3) percent of the amount of tax due and accounted for in the form of a deduction in submitting his return and paying the amount due by him; provided the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Code 1973, § 25-41; Ord. No. 18, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 25-137. - Reports, remittance of tax collected. 
    The responsible person collecting any tax as provided in this article shall make out a record thereof upon such forms and setting forth such information as the treasurer may prescribe and require, showing the amount of lodging charges collected and the tax required to be collected, and shall sign and deliver such reports to the treasurer with a remittance of such tax. Such report and remittance shall be made on or before the twentieth day of each month for taxes collected the preceding month. All payments of monies shall be to the town treasurer. 
(Code 1973, § 25-42; Ord. No. 18, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 25-138. - Interest, penalties. 
    If any responsible person shall fail or refuse to remit to the town treasurer the tax required to be collected and paid under this article within the time and in the amount specified in this article there shall be added to such tax by the treasurer a penalty in the amount of ten (10) percent thereof and interest thereon at the rate of eight (8) percent per annum which shall be computed upon the taxes and penalty from the date such taxes are due and payable. 
(Code 1973, § 25-43; Ord. No. 18, 2-10-93) 
State Law reference- Maximum interest rate, etc., Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916. 
Sec. 25-139. - Failure or refusal to collect and report tax. 
    If any responsible person shall fail or refuse to collect the tax imposed by the provisions of this article and to make payment within the time required according to the reports and remittances required by this article, the treasurer shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain the facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the treasurer procures such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax payable by any person who shall fail or refuse to collect such tax and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such responsible person such tax and penalty and interest provided by this article and shall notify such responsible person by registered mail sent to his last known place of address of the amount of such tax and penalty and interest, and the total amount thereof shall be payable within ten (10) days from the date of such notice. The treasurer shall have the power to examine such records for the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this section. If any responsible person fails to comply with this article or any provision of it, the treasurer may terminate the business license issued pursuant to section 14-11 or in the alternative, may require the responsible person to place a deposit with the treasurer equal to the greater of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or the equivalent of one (1) month's tax imposed under this article. Said deposit is to serve as security for the payment of future taxes due hereunder. 
(Code 1973, § 25-35; Ord. No. 13, 6-11-92; Ord. No. 18, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 25-140. - Records. 
    It shall be the duty of every person liable for the collection and payment to the town of any tax imposed by this article to keep and to preserve for a period of two (2) years such suitable records as may be necessary to determine and show accurately the amount of such tax as he may have been responsible for collecting and paying to the town. The treasurer may inspect such records at all reasonable times. 
(Code 1973, § 25-45) 
Sec. 25-141. - Procedure upon cessation of business. 
    Whenever any person required to collect and pay to the town a tax under this article shall cease to operate or dispose of his business, he shall notify the treasurer of such fact and any tax payable on the date such person shall cease to operate or dispose of his business and such person having made a report through such date for the collection of such taxes thereafter. Otherwise such person shall be liable for such taxes through the succeeding collection date. 
(Code 1973, § 25-46) 
Secs. 25-142-25-144. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PERSONAL PROPERTY TAX 

Sec. 25-145. - Tax on motor vehicles, trailers and boats. 
    There shall be a personal property tax at a rate established each year by the town council on motor vehicles, trailers, semi-trailers and boats, hereafter referred to in this section as "taxable property," which shall have a situs within the town on January 1 of each year and which acquire a situs within the town on or after January 2 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 46, 12-22-97) 
Sec. 25-146. - Tax on business personal property. 
    There shall be a personal property tax at a rate established each year by the town council on the personal property of businesses, to include, but not be limited to, vehicles, trailers, semi-trailers, furniture and fixtures, hereafter referred to in this section as "taxable property," which shall have a situs within the town on January 1 of each year and which acquire a situs within the town on or after January 2 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 46, 12-22-97) 
Sec. 25-147. - Penalty for failure to pay. 
    Any person who fails to pay personal property taxes on or before the date due shall incur a penalty of ten (10) percent of the tax due. Interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum from the first day following the day such taxes are due shall be paid upon the principal of such taxes remaining unpaid. Both penalty and interest shall become part of the taxes due. 
(Ord. No. 46, 12-22-97) 
Sec. 25-148. - Exemptions. 
    An exemption from this tax and any penalties arising therefrom shall be granted for any tax share or portion thereof during which the property was legally assessed by another jurisdiction and proof is presented to the treasurer of the town indicating that such tax on the assessed property was paid. 
(Ord. No. 46, 12-22-97) 
Sec. 25-149. - Taxes to be extended on basis of assessment. 
    Taxes for each year on all property subject to assessment shall be extended by the town treasurer on the basis of the last assessment prior to such year, subject to such changes and reassessments as may have been lawfully made. In the event of a lawful reassessment, including a general reassessment, made by the county after January 1, and prior to the date of adoption and levy of the tax rate, the taxes for such year shall be extended on the basis of reassessment. 
(Ord. No. 46, 12-22-97) 
Sec. 25-150. - Rate. 
    There shall be levied, assessed and collected a general levy or tax, in an amount determined annually by the town council, upon each one hundred dollars ($100.00) worth of property subject to local levy or taxation at its assessed value. 
(Ord. No. 46, 12-22-97) 
Sec. 25-151. - Deduction of taxes due town by persons in whose favor town warrants are drawn. 
    In the payment of any warrants lawfully drawn on account of allowance made against the town, the treasurer of the town paying the warrants shall first deduct all taxes due by the party in whose favor the warrant is drawn. If such warrant is insufficient to pay the entire amount due, then such treasurer shall credit the tax bill by the amount of the warrant. 
(Ord. No. 46, 12-22-97) 
Sec. 25-152. - Tax tickets-Form. 
    The town council shall prescribe the forms of tax tickets to be used by the town, and the treasurer shall follow the forms so prescribed, in which shall be stated the name and address of the taxpayer, the year for which the taxes and levies are due, the subjects of taxation, the value of the property taxed, the tax rate, the rate and amount of penalty, when the penalty attaches, the rate and amount of interest, when the interest attaches, the total amount of taxes, levies, penalty and interest, and the date of payment, when delinquent. The treasurer shall deliver to each taxpayer from whom he has collected taxes or levies such tax tickets as are so prescribed, showing the date of payment. 
(Ord. No. 46, 12-22-97) 
Sec. 25-153. - Same-Mailing to taxpayers. 
    The treasurer shall, as soon as possible in each year, but not later than December 1, mail to each taxpayer assessed with taxes and levies for that year a bill in the form prescribed in section 25-152. 
(Ord. No. 46, 12-22-97) 
Sec. 25-154. - When due and payable. 
    All taxes shall be due and payable on December 15 of the year for which such taxes are assessed. The treasurer shall commence to receive taxes and levies as soon as the assessments provided for in this article are completed and continue to receive the same up to and including December 15, without penalty. 
(Ord. No. 46, 12-22-97) 
Sec. 25-155. - When taxes and levies are delinquent; reporting and recording of delinquent list. 
    All taxes and levies assessed in the town that are not paid on or before December 15 of the assessment year shall be, for the purposes of this article, deemed to be delinquent; and the treasurer shall make and furnish to the town council a list of all property that is delinquent for the nonpayment of taxes and levies thereon, with the amount of such taxes and levies charged thereon, not later than its March regular meeting immediately after December 15 of the assessment year. 
(Ord. No. 46, 12-22-97) 
Sec. 25-156. - How tax payments are to be credited. 
    Any payment of taxes received shall be credited first against the most delinquent tax account, the collection of which is not subject to a defense of an applicable statute of limitations. 
(Ord. No. 46, 12-22-97) 
Secs. 25-157-25-159. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY USE FEE 

Sec. 25-160. - Manner in which public rights-of-way use fee is to be calculated. 
    Section 56-468.1 of the Code of Virginia sets forth in detail the manner in which the public rights-of-way use fee is to be calculated for the benefit of the town, the extent of its application, the method and means of billing and collecting said fee and transmission of the appropriate amount thereof to the town. 
(Ord. No. 51, 4-14-99) 
Sec. 25-161. - Adoption of the public rights-of-way use fee. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of law including the Town of Farmville's charter, or Code section of, or any franchise granted by the town, or of any other ordinance, resolution, or provision of law heretofore adopted or applicable to the town in any way relating thereto, and in lieu of any other fee or charge therefor, the town hereby adopts the public rights-of-way use 
fee as hereinabove described, effective as of April 14, 1999, in order that collection of the said fee shall commence as provided in subparagraph I of said Section 56-468.1 of the Code of Virginia. Terms herein shall have the same meaning as outlined in Section 56-468.1. 
(Ord. No. 51, 4-14-99) 
Secs. 25-162-25-169. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - TAX ON TELEPHONE SERVICE 

Sec. 25-170. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    Commercial or industrial user means the owner or tenant of property used for commercial or industrial purposes, including the owner of a master-metered apartment building who pays for telephone service for the property. 
    Purchaser includes every person who purchases telephone service. 
    Residential user means the owner or tenant of private property or tenant of an apartment who pays for telephone service in or for the property. 
    Seller includes every person whether a public service corporation or private corporation or not who sells or furnishes telephone service. 
(Ord. No. 59, 10-11-2000) 
Sec. 25-171. - Tax levied; collected by seller; rate. 
    There is hereby imposed and levied by the town on each purchaser of telephone service a tax in the amount of twenty (20) percent of the charge (exclusive of any federal tax thereon) made by the seller against the purchaser of that telephone service, which tax in every case shall be collected by the seller for the use of the town at the time the purchase price or such charge shall become due and payable under the agreement between the purchaser and seller; provided, that in the case where any monthly bill submitted by a seller for residential telephone service shall exceed fifteen dollars ($15.00) for a residential user, there shall be no tax computed on that portion of the bill exceeding fifteen dollars ($15.00). If any monthly bill submitted by a seller for a telephone utility service shall exceed thirty-seven dollars and fifty cents ($37.50) for a commercial or industrial user, there shall be no tax computed on that portion of the bill exceeding thirty-seven dollars and fifty cents ($37.50). In case a bill is submitted by the seller for purchases made by the user during period of greater than one (1) month, the amount in which a bill for the subject telephone service would be taxed in a single month shall be multiplied by the number of months for which the bill is submitted. 
(Ord. No. 59, 10-11-2000) 
Sec. 25-172. - Duties of seller in collecting tax. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every seller in acting as the tax collection medium or agency for the town to collect from the purchaser for use of the town the tax hereby imposed and levied at the time of collecting the purchase price charged therefore and paid by each seller to the town treasurer by the last day of the second calendar month thereafter, together with the name and address of any purchaser who has refused to pay his tax. 
(b)  In all cases where the seller collected the price for telephone service in state periods, the tax hereby imposed and levied shall be computed on the amount of purchase during the month or period according to each bill rendered; provided, that the amount of tax to be collected shall be the nearest whole cent to the amount computed. 
(c)  Each and every seller shall keep complete records showing all purchasers in the town. These records shall show the price charged against each purchaser with respect to each purchase, the date thereof and the amount of tax imposed hereunder and such records shall be kept open for inspection by the duly authorized agents of the town during regular business hours on business days. The duly authorized agents of the town shall have the right, power and authority to make such transcripts thereof during such time as they may desire. 
(Ord. No. 59, 10-11-2000) 
Sec. 25-173. - Powers of treasurer to enforce article. 
(a)  The town treasurer is hereby authorized to prescribe forms for the filing of any report or the payment of any funds set forth in this article. 
(b)  The town treasurer is hereby authorized to make and establish rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article to help enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 59, 10-11-2000) 
Sec. 25-174. - Exemptions. 
    The United States of America, diplomatic personnel exempted by the laws of the United States, the state and the political subdivisions, boards, commissions and the authorities and agencies thereof are hereby exempt from the payment of the tax imposed and levied by this section on the purchase of telephone service. 
(Ord. No. 59, 10-11-2000) 
Sec. 25-175. - Tax imposed. 
    The tax hereby imposed and levied on purchasers of telephone service shall apply to all charges made for local telephone service except as follows: 
(1)  Coin box telephones. The total amount of the guaranteed charge on each bill rendered for semipublic coin box telephone service shall be included in the basis for the tax imposed on the purchaser of such service, but no other tax shall be imposed on telephone service paid for by inserting coins in coin-operated telephones. 
(2)  Flat-rate service. With respect to flat-rate message service, the tax shall apply only to the amount payable for local area service and shall not apply to any specific charge for calls to points outside the town or local area or to any general charge or rate differential payable for the privilege of calling points outside the town and local area. 
(3)  Message-rate service. Where purchasers of telephone service are charged on a message-rate basis, the tax shall apply only to the basic charge for such service and shall not apply to any charge for additional message units. 
(Ord. No. 59, 10-11-2000) 
Sec. 25-176. - Tax computed on aggregate amount of purchases. 
    In all cases where the seller collects the price for telephone service periodically, the tax hereby imposed and levied may be computed on the aggregate amount of purchases during such period; provided that the amount of tax to be collected shall be the nearest whole cent to the amount computed. 
(Ord. No. 59, 10-11-2000) 
Sec. 25-177. - Town treasurer to collect taxes. 
    The town treasurer shall be charged with the power and duty of collecting the taxes imposed and levied under this article. 
(Ord. No. 59, 10-11-2000) 
Sec. 25-178. - Tax levied; cellular phone service. 
    There is hereby imposed and levied by the town on each purchaser of mobile local telecommunication services (cellular phone service) a tax in the amount of ten (10) percent of the charge (exclusive of any federal tax thereon) on the first thirty dollars ($30.00) of each cellular phone bill each month (or a maximum of three dollars ($3.00) per month). 
(Ord. No. 59, 10-11-2000) 
Secs. 25-179-25-184. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - CIGARETTE TAX 

Sec. 25-185. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Agent means every local dealer and other person who shall be authorized by the town treasurer to purchase and affix stamps to packages of cigarettes under the provisions of this article. 
    Dealer means every manufacturer, jobber, wholesale dealer or other person who supplies a seller with cigarettes. 
    Package means every package, box, can or other container of any cigarettes to which the Internal Revenue Stamp of the United States Government is required to be affixed by and under federal statutes and regulations and in which retail sales of such cigarettes are normally made or intended to be made. 
    Sale means every act or transaction, irrespective of the method or means employed, including the use of vending machines and other mechanical devices, whereby title to any cigarettes shall be transferred from the seller, as defined in this section, to any other person within the town. 
    Seller means every person engaged in the business of selling cigarettes who transfers title or in whose place of business title to any such cigarettes is transferred within the town for any purpose other than resale. 
    Stamp means the small gummed piece of paper or decalcomania to be sold by the town treasurer and to be affixed by the agent to every package of cigarettes; it shall also denote any insignia or symbol printed by a meter machine upon any such package under authorization of the town treasurer. 
    Treasurer means the town treasurer and every person duly authorized by him to serve as his representative. 
( Ord. No. 165, 6-12-2013, enacted 10-1-2013 ) 
Sec. 25-186. - Levied; amount. 
    There is hereby levied and imposed by the town, in addition to any other taxes which may be or have been imposed, a tax to be paid and collected as provided in this article on each and every sale of cigarettes made in the town. The tax is to be paid by the seller, local dealer or other agent by affixing a stamp, or causing a stamp to be affixed to every package of cigarettes, in the kind and manner required in this article and at the applicable rates as follows: The rate or amount of tax levied or imposed on cigarettes shall be at the rate of twenty-seven cents ($0.27) for each twenty (20) cigarettes or fractional part thereof. 
( Ord. No. 165, 6-12-2013, enacted 10-1-2013 ) 
Sec. 25-187. - Preparation, sale, etc., of stamps; duties of treasurer generally. 
(a)  The town treasurer shall acquire, keep and sell necessary stamps to local dealers and other agents, the stamps to be of such denominations and quantities as may be necessary for the payment of the tax imposed in this article. 
(b)  In the sale of such stamps to a local dealer or other agent, the treasurer shall allow a discount of two cents ($0.02) per stamp of the face value thereof to cover the cost which will be incurred by such dealer or agent in affixing the stamps to packages of cigarettes. 
(c)  The town treasurer may, from time to time and as often as he deems advisable, provide for the issuance and exclusive use of stamps of a new design and forbid the use of stamps of any other design. The treasurer is empowered to make and carry into effect such reasonable rules and regulations relating to the preparation, furnishing, sale and redemption of stamps as he may deem necessary. In redeeming stamps or making refunds for destroyed stamps, he shall not in any case refund more than ninety (90) percent of the face value of such redeemed or destroyed stamps. He is further authorized and empowered to prescribe the method to be employed, the conditions to be observed, and any other necessary requirements not contrary to this article in the use of meter machines for printing upon packages of cigarettes an insignia to represent the payment of the tax and in lieu of stamps. 
(d)  In addition to powers granted in subsections (a) through (c) of this section, the town treasurer is further authorized and empowered to: 
(1)  Prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to the method and means to be used in the cancellation of stamps; 
(2)  Delegate his powers to agents or others, including the police officers of the town; 
(3)  Act in any other matters pertaining to the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
( Ord. No. 165, 6-12-2013, enacted 10-1-2013 ) 
Sec. 25-188. - Inspection of records, premises, etc. 
    The town treasurer, or his duly authorized agent, is empowered to examine books, records, invoices and papers related to purchases, sales, etc., of cigarettes, and to examine all cigarettes in and upon any premises where cigarettes are placed, sold, stored, offered for sale or displayed for sale by a seller. 
( Ord. No. 165, 6-12-2013, enacted 10-1-2013 ) 
Sec. 25-189. - Seizure and disposition of untaxed cigarettes, etc. 
(a)  If the town treasurer or his agent discovers any cigarettes subject to the tax imposed under this article, but upon which such tax has not been paid and upon which stamps have not been affixed or evidence of payment is not shown thereon by printed markings of a meter machine in compliance with the provisions of this article, then the treasurer or duly authorized agents or officers, any of them, may seize and take possession forthwith of such cigarettes, which shall thereupon be deemed to be forfeited to the town. Such cigarettes may, within a reasonable time thereafter, and after written notice is posted at the front door of the municipal building at least five (5) days before the date given therein for sale, shall sell such cigarettes in the place designated in such notice. 
(b)  Any property, other than motor vehicles, used in the furtherance of any illegal evasion of the tax may be seized, confiscated and disposed of as provided in subsection (a) of this section. No credit from any sale or other disposition shall be allowed toward any tax or penalties owed. 
(c)  The seizure and sale of any property shall not be deemed to relieve any of the persons of any other penalties provided in this article. 
( Ord. No. 165, 6-12-2013, enacted 10-1-2013 ) 
Sec. 25-190. - Obligation of dealers and agents regarding stamps. 
(a)  Every local dealer in cigarettes and every agent appointed under this section shall purchase necessary stamps from the town treasurer to pay the tax imposed under this article and shall affix or cause to be affixed a stamp of the monetary value provided by this article to each package of cigarettes prior to delivering or furnishing such cigarettes to any seller who is not also an agent. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to preclude any dealer from authorizing and employing any agent to purchase and affix such stamps in his behalf or to have a stamp meter machine used in lieu of stamps to effectuate the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Stamps or printed markings of a meter machine shall be placed upon each package of cigarettes in such a manner as to be readily visible to the purchaser. 
(d)  It shall be the responsibility of every seller to determine that each package of cigarettes offered for sale shall have a proper stamp affixed thereto in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(e)  If inspection by the agents of the town discloses unstamped or improperly stamped packages of cigarettes, the seller, when such cigarettes were obtained from a local dealer, shall immediately notify such dealer and upon such notification such dealer shall forthwith either affix to the unstamped or improperly stamped package, container or item the proper amount of stamps or he shall replace such package, container or item with others to which stamps have been properly affixed. If a seller, who is not also an agent, acquires or has in his possession unstamped or improperly stamped cigarettes, the seller shall forthwith notify the treasurer of such fact. The treasurer shall thereupon affix or cause to be affixed the proper stamps to such cigarettes. The cost of such stamps at face value shall be advanced by such seller. 
(f)  The treasurer, by proper rules and regulations, may require every local dealer, agent or seller to cancel stamps upon all packages of cigarettes in his possession. 
(g)  Every local dealer and seller shall maintain and keep for a period of at least two (2) years such records of cigarettes received and sold by him as may be required by the treasurer; such records shall be made available for examination in the town by the treasurer upon demand, and the means, facilities and opportunities for making any such examination shall be made available at all reasonable times. 
( Ord. No. 165, 6-12-2013, enacted 10-1-2013 ) 
Sec. 25-191. - Presumptions based on quantity. 
    Cigarettes found in quantities of more than six (6) cartons within the town shall be conclusively presumed for sale therein and may be seized and confiscated if: 
(1)  They are in transit, and are not accompanied by a bill of lading or other document indicating the true name and address of the consignor or seller and of the consignee or purchaser, and the brands and quantity of cigarettes so transported, or they are in transit and accompanied by a bill of lading or other document which is false or fraudulent, in whole or in part; 
(2)  They are in transit and are accompanied by a bill of lading or other document indicating: 
a.  A consignee or purchaser in another state or the District of Columbia who is not authorized by the law of such other jurisdiction to receive or possess such cigarettes on which the taxes imposed by such other jurisdiction have not been paid, unless the tax of the state or district of destination has been paid and the products bear the tax stamps of that state or district; or 
b.  A consignee or purchaser in the commonwealth but outside the town who does not possess a state sales and use tax certificate, a state retail cigarettes license and, where applicable, both a business license and retail cigarettes license issued by the local jurisdiction of destination; or 
(3)  They are not in transit and the tax has not been paid, nor have approved arrangements for payment been made, provided that this subsection shall not apply to cigarettes in the possession of distributors or public warehouses which have filed notice and appropriate proof with the town that those cigarettes are temporarily within the town and will be sent to consignees or purchasers outside the jurisdiction in the normal course of business. 
( Ord. No. 165, 6-12-2013, enacted 10-1-2013 ) 
Sec. 25-192. - Presumption based upon stamps or markings. 
    If any package of cigarettes is found in the possession of a seller without proper stamps or authorized printed markings thereon, and the seller is unable to submit evidence establishing that he received such packages, containers or items within the immediately preceding forty-eight (48) hours, and that he has not offered the same for sale, then it shall be presumed that such packages, containers, or items are being kept in violation of the provisions of this article, and the seller shall be subject to the tax and a penalty in the amount of fifty (50) percent thereof, even though such seller is also an agent. 
( Ord. No. 165, 6-12-2013, enacted 10-1-2013 ) 
Sec. 25-193. - Disposition of revenue. 
    Revenue derived from the tax imposed in this article shall be deposited by the town treasurer to the credit of the general fund of the town for utilization for such legal purposes as the council of the town may from time to time determine. 
( Ord. No. 165, 10-1-2013 ) 
Sec. 25-194. - Illegal acts. 
    It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any dealer or other person liable for the tax to: 
(1)  Perform any act or fail to perform any act for the purpose of evading the payment of any tax imposed by this article or of any part thereof, or to fail or refuse to perform any of the duties imposed under him under the provisions of this article or to fail or refuse to obey any lawful order which may be issued under this article; 
(2)  Falsely or fraudulently make, or cause to be made, any invoices or reports, or to falsely or fraudulently forge, alter or counterfeit any stamp, or to procure or cause to be made, forged, altered or counterfeited any such stamp or knowingly and willfully to alter, publish, pass or tender as true any false, altered, forged or counterfeited stamp or stamps; 
(3)  Sell, offer for sale or authorize or approve the sale of any cigarettes upon which the town stamp has not been affixed; 
(4)  Possess, store, use, authorize or approve the possession, storage or use of any cigarettes in quantities of more than sixty (60) cigarettes upon which the town stamp has not been affixed; 
(5)  Transport, authorize or approve the transportation of any cigarettes in quantities of more than sixty (60) packages into or within the town upon which the town stamp has not been affixed, if they are: 
a.  Not accompanied by a bill of lading or other document indicating the true name and address of the consignor or seller and the consignee or purchaser and the brands and quantity of cigarettes transported; 
b.  Accompanied by a bill of lading or other document which is false or fraudulent in whole or part; or 
c.  Accompanied by a bill of lading or other document indicating: 
1.  A consignee or purchaser in another state or the District of Columbia who is not authorized by the law of such other jurisdiction to receive or possess such tobacco products on which the taxes imposed by such other jurisdiction have not been paid unless the tax on the jurisdiction of destination has been paid and such cigarettes bear the tax stamps of the jurisdiction; or 
2.  A consignee or purchaser in the state but outside the taxing jurisdiction who does not possess a state sales and use tax certification, a state retail tobacco license and, where applicable, a business license and a retail tobacco license issued by the local jurisdiction of destination; 
(6)  Reuse or refill with cigarettes any package from which cigarettes have been removed, for which the tax imposed has been theretofore paid; or 
(7)  Remove from any package any stamp with intent to use or cause the package to be used after such package has already been used or to buy, sell or offer for sale or give away any used, removed, altered or restored stamps to any person, or to reuse any stamp which had therefore been used for evidence of the payment of any tax prescribed by this article or to sell, or offer to sell, any stamp provided for in this article. 
( Ord. No. 165, 6-12-2013, enacted 10-1-2013 ) 
Sec. 25-195. - Penalty. 
    Any persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. Any fine and/or imprisonment pursuant to conviction of a Class 1 misdemeanor shall not relieve any such person from the payment of any tax, penalty or interest imposed by this article. 
( Ord. No. 165, 6-12-2013, enacted 10-1-2013 ) 
Sec. 25-196. - Each violation a separate offense. 
    The sale of any quantity or the use, possession, storage or transportation of more than sixty (60) packages of cigarettes upon which the town stamp has not been affixed shall be and constitutes a separate violation. Each continuing day of violation shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. 165, 6-12-2013, enacted 10-1-2013 ) 
Secs. 25-197-25-204. - Reserved. 
Chapter 26 - TAXICABS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Power of council to license vehicles for hire, § 17. 
Cross reference- Advertising, Ch. 3; airport, Ch. 4; licenses and permits, Ch. 14; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 15; noise control, Ch. 16; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23; taxicab license, § 14-72; taxicab stands in parking meter zones, § 15-132. 
State Law reference- License plates for vehicles for hire, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-711; local regulation of vehicles for hire, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-310, 56-291.3:1 et seq.; taxicabs generally, Code of Virginia, § 56-291.1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    Driver means any person operating a taxicab. 
    Owner means any person having the control of the operation or maintenance of a taxicab or of the collection of revenue derived from its operation. 
    Taxicab means any motor vehicle made available to the public for hire and engaged in the business of transporting passengers on the streets and public ways of the town and charging a fare for such transportation; provided, that this definition should not be construed to include buses on scheduled routes. 
(Code 1973, § 26-1) 
Sec. 26-2. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates this chapter shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each subsequent offense. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 56-291.3:5. 
Sec. 26-3. - Scope of chapter. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated within the town any taxicab except under the conditions, regulations and restrictions set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 26-2) 
Sec. 26-4. - License-Required. 
    No taxicab shall be operated in the town without a license issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 26-3) 
Sec. 26-5. - Same-Issuance. 
    On receipt of the report from the chief of police, the town council shall authorize the town clerk to issue or refuse to issue a license therefor, according to the findings. 
(Code 1973, § 26-4) 
Sec. 26-6. - Same-Appeal from denial. 
    Any person denied a license may appeal his case to the town council at the next regular meeting of that body. A denial by the town council may be appealed to the circuit court. 
(Code 1973, § 26-5) 
Sec. 26-7. - Insurance or bonds required. 
(a)  No license shall be issued until the applicant shall submit satisfactory evidence to the town council that he has filed with the state corporation commission an insurance policy, bond, certificate of insurance or letter of credit covering liability or property damage as may be required by state law. 
(b)  In lieu of the requirements of subsection (a), applicant for a certificate of public convenience and necessity, whose home office is in the town, may become a self-insurer by entering into a bond in the amount required by the state corporation commission but not less than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00), with such security as may be approved by the town council. This security may be either real estate or intangibles, which, in the opinion of the town council, have a value of at least fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00). 
(c)  Any such intangibles shall be deposited with the town treasurer, together with an agreement in a form approved by the town attorney, setting forth the conditions on which such intangibles are to be held. 
(d)  The bond shall be payable to the town and shall be conditioned upon the payment by the applicant of any and all damages to persons or property inflicted in the maintenance or operation of the taxicab for which the applicant or operator may be legally liable, and action may be brought on such bond in the name of the town, but for the benefit and at the cost of those entitled to compensation for such injuries. 
(Code 1973, § 26-6) 
Sec. 26-8. - Condition of equipment. 
    All vehicles and equipment used in connection therewith shall be kept in proper operating condition so as to render safe, adequate, sanitary and proper service at all times. 
(Code 1973, § 26-7) 
Sec. 26-9. - Vehicle inspectors. 
    The mayor is hereby empowered to designate from the personnel of the police department such officers as may be necessary to act as inspectors of the vehicles used under this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 26-8) 
Sec. 26-10. - Number of passengers. 
    No driver shall permit more than five (5) persons, other than the driver, to be carried in a taxicab. A child in arms shall not be counted as an additional person. 
(Code 1973, § 26-9) 
Sec. 26-11. - Parking on streets. 
    It shall be unlawful to park any taxicab on the streets of the town, except while such taxicab is actually engaged in the act of loading or unloading passengers. 
(Code 1973, § 26-10) 
Sec. 26-12. - Drivers bearing evidence of intoxicating beverages. 
    No owner of a taxicab shall permit any driver to work, if he reports for duty with any evidence of intoxicating beverages upon his person or upon his breath. 
(Code 1973, § 26-11) 
Secs. 26-13-26-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CERTIFICATE OF PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses and permits, Ch. 14. 

Sec. 26-31. - Prerequisite for license. 
    No license for the operation of a taxicab or a fleet of taxicabs shall be issued to any person unless and until the town council issues a certificate of public convenience and necessity. No such certificate shall be issued unless the applicant is the owner or proposed owner of the vehicles. 
(Code 1973, § 26-12) 
Sec. 26-32. - Application-Information required. 
    The application for the certificate of public convenience and necessity shall contain the following information: applicant's name and address; name under which applicant proposes to do business; the number of vehicles the applicant proposes to operate; the capacity of each vehicle; the color scheme of each vehicle; and the lettering or marks to be used thereon. 
(Code 1973, § 26-13) 
Sec. 26-33. - Same-Number of copies; filing. 
    The applications for the certificates shall be filed in duplicate by the owner or proposed owner with the town clerk between the first and fifteenth of October, inclusive. The town council will hear the request for application at the regular December meeting of the council. Any application submitted after the December council meeting shall be in the hands of the town clerk not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the next regular meeting date of the town council. 
(Code 1973, § 26-14) 
Sec. 26-34. - Report of chief of police. 
    On receipt of an application for the certificate of public convenience and necessity the name of the applicant, together with such other information deemed pertinent, shall be turned over to the chief of police for a report as to whether or not the applicant is qualified to operate such service and to comply with this chapter. This report shall be in writing and shall include the applicant's knowledge of traffic laws and the provisions of this chapter, his character and his court records, if any. This report shall be rendered to the clerk prior to the regular meeting of the town council. 
(Code 1973, § 26-15) 
Cross reference- Police department, Ch. 21. 
Sec. 26-35. - Evidence of off-street parking facilities required. 
    Any person making application to operate taxicabs within the town shall furnish to the treasurer or clerk of the council written evidence that he can provide off-street parking facilities at his place of business from which to operate such taxicabs. 
(Code 1973, § 26-16) 
Cross reference- Off-street parking, § 29-53. 
Sec. 26-36. - Transfer; substitution of vehicles. 
    Certificates of public convenience and necessity, when issued, shall not be transferable, except by approval of the town council. The holder of such certificate, after notifying the chief of police, may substitute new or other vehicles in place of vehicles that have become worn out or obsolete; provided, that the number of vehicles does not exceed the number of certificates originally issued and outstanding. 
(Code 1973, § 26-17) 
Sec. 26-37. - Revocation; notice and hearing. 
    An adequate and sufficient public service shall at all times be maintained by the holders of certificates of public convenience and necessity. Should any holder of a certificate fail to operate in accordance with this chapter, such certificate may be revoked by the town council after reasonable notice and hearing for failure to properly and adequately render reasonable service to the public. 
(Code 1973, § 26-18) 
Sec. 26-38. - Display in vehicle. 
    The certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be prominently displayed in the vehicle at all times. On request, any police officer may inspect the certificate. 
(Code 1973, § 26-19) 
Secs. 26-39-26-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DRIVER'S PERMIT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses and permits, Ch. 14. 

Sec. 26-56. - Required. 
    No person shall operate a taxicab on the streets of the town under the provisions of this chapter until he shall have obtained a special permit from the chief of police for that purpose. 
(Code 1973, § 26-20) 
Sec. 26-57. - Application. 
    On application to the chief of police for the special permit required by this article, the driver shall present a state chauffeur's license. 
(Code 1973, § 26-21) 
Sec. 26-58. - Police chief to issue. 
    After a complete investigation of the applicant as to his knowledge of the traffic regulations of the town, his knowledge of this chapter, his character and his physical fitness to operate a public vehicle, the chief of police may issue or deny the issuance of the special permit. 
(Code 1973, § 26-22) 
Sec. 26-59. - Transfer. 
    Drivers' permits are not transferable. 
(Code 1973, § 26-23) 
Sec. 26-60. - Duration. 
    Drivers' permits shall be issued for a period of twelve (12) months and shall expire on December thirty-first. 
(Code 1973, § 26-24) 
Sec. 26-61. - Revocation. 
    On recommendation of the chief of police, a special driver's permit once issued may be revoked for cause by the mayor after a hearing. Any conviction of violation of any criminal law involving moral turpitude automatically makes such permit void, effective upon conviction. 
(Code 1973, § 26-25) 
Chapter 27 - TREES AND SHRUBS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 102, adopted June 15, 2006, amended and re-enacted the former Ch. 27, §§ 27-1-27-8, and enacted a new Ch. 27 as set out herein. The former Ch. 27 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1973, §§ 27-1-27-8. 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23; tree trimming by cable television company, § 7-17; permit for planting or removal of plants, shrubbery or trees in cemetery, § 8-20. 

Sec. 27-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following words are hereby defined for use in the administration and enforcement of this chapter: 
    Canopy means the crown branch area of a single tree or several combined trees. 
    Drip line means a vertical line extending from the outermost edge of the tree canopy or shrub branch to the ground. 
    Land-disturbing activity means defoliation or alteration of a site, or the commencement of any construction activities. 
    Landmark trees means trees that are designated depending on species rarity, old age, association with an historical event or person, abnormality, scenic enhancement, etc. 
    Public area means a privately owned area where the general public has access. 
    Public places/property means all streets, public rights-of-way, parks, and other real property owned by the Town of Farmville or its Industrial Development Authority (IDA). 
    Shrub means a woody plant that usually remains low in height and produces roots or stems from the base and is usually not tree-like or single stemmed. 
    Street tree means a tree planted within the developed street right-of-way between the curb line of the street and the property line of the site. 
    Topping means the severe cutting back of limbs within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. 
    Tree means any self-supporting woody plant growing upon the earth that usually provides one (1) main trunk and produces more or less a distinct and elevated head with many branches. The following are specific descriptions of three (3) sizes of trees: 
(1)  Small tree: Attaining a height of less than thirty (30) feet. 
(2)  Medium tree: Attaining a height of thirty (30) to forty-five (45) feet. 
(3)  Large tree: Attaining a height of forty-five (45) feet or more. 
(Ord. No. 102, 6-15-2006) 
Sec. 27-2. - Purpose of the chapter. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to: 
(1)  Conserve and protect public land, water, air, vegetation and other natural resources of the town; 
(2)  Promote and protect the public and private aesthetic benefits gained from trees in the town; 
(3)  Promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare by providing for the regulation of planting, maintenance and removal of trees shrubs and other plants on public property within the town; 
(4)  Preserve and protect trees and other vegetation during all phases of any land-disturbing activity within the town; 
(5)  Encourage private landowners to enhance their property along street frontage and in public use areas. 
(Ord. No. 102, 6-15-2006) 
Sec. 27-3. - Authority and duties. 
(a)  There is hereby created and established a tree board for the town, which shall consist of five (5) members and shall be appointed by the town council. Members shall serve without compensation. The town manager and horticulturist will serve on the tree board as ex-officio members. 
(b)  The tree board shall choose its own officers, develop its own operating guidelines, and keep minutes of its meetings. Tree board meetings will not be pre-set but rather meetings will be scheduled on an as needed basis at the request of a board member or by the town manager or town horticulturist. A majority of its members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The tree board shall have no executive authority, its powers being strictly advisory. 
(c)  The tree board, in collaboration with the town manager and the town horticulturist, shall study, investigate and develop recommendations for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting and removal of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other publicly owned places. The tree board, through various public outreach and educational programs, will encourage private landowners to enhance their property along street frontage and in public use area such as parking lots. 
(Ord. No. 102, 6-15-2006) 
Sec. 27-4. - Term of office of tree board. 
    Tree board members shall serve a three-year term with the following exception. The first appointed board shall serve terms as follows: two (2) shall serve two (2) years, two (2) shall serve three (3) years, and one (1) shall serve four (4) years. 
(Ord. No. 102, 6-15-2006) 
Sec. 27-5. - Applicability. 
    This chapter shall apply to trees, shrubs, and other plants within street rights-of-way, parks and other public places within the town. This chapter shall also apply to trees, shrubs and plants located on private property that constitute a public hazard or health threat as determined by the town manager through input from the director of public works and the town horticulturist. 
(Ord. No. 102, 6-15-2006) 
Sec. 27-6. - Licensing and permits. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of planting, cutting, trimming, pruning, spraying, or to otherwise treat trees, shrubs or vines on public property, within the town without first producing evidence of a business license. 
(Ord. No. 102, 6-15-2006) 
Sec. 27-7. - Insurance. 
    All contractors in the business of planting, cutting, trimming, pruning, removing, spraying, and otherwise treating tree, shrubs or vines on public property within the town shall show proof of liability insurance. This certificate of insurance shall be in the amount as required by the town. This coverage shall be for bodily injury or death and property damage, indemnifying the town or any person injured or damages resulting from the pursuit of such endeavors, as herein described. 
(Ord. No. 102, 6-15-2006) 
Sec. 27-8. - New landscaping. 
    In the development of commercial property and subdivisions, the town manager, horticulturist, and building inspector shall review landscaping plans and may require changes as recommended for street trees to be planted in any of the streets, parking lots and other public places. 
(Ord. No. 102, 6-15-2006) 
Sec. 27-9. - Tree planting, maintenance, and removal. 
(a)  The town shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees shrubs and other plants within the lines of streets, alleys, avenues, lanes and public property as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty or public property. It shall be unlawful for any person to tie any animal or bicycle to any tree or shrub or to any structure erected for the protection of the same on public property. The town may remove or cause or order to be removed any tree, shrub, or part thereof which constitutes a threat to public health or safety or which is injurious to public property, public buildings, sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is affected with an injurious fungus, insect, or other pest. This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners provided that the selection and location of said trees is in accordance with this chapter. 
(b)  The tree board may develop a list of desirable tree species for planting along streets in three (3) sizes: small, medium and large. A list of undesirable tree species may be developed as well. Such lists are not all inclusive and other species or cultivars may be taken into consideration by the town horticulturist as seems reasonable. This list would be available for the general public in assisting with landscaping of private property. 
(c)  No street trees other than those listed as small trees may be planted under or within ten (10) lateral feet of an overhead utility wire, or over or within five (5) lateral feet of an underground utility line (water, sewer, gas, transmission, etc.) 
(d)  It shall be discouraged as a normal practice for any person, firm or town department to top a tree on public property. Exceptions to this would be for instance; trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, certain trees under utility wires, or other obstructions where normal pruning practices are impractical and shall be exempted from this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 102, 6-15-2006) 
Sec. 27-10. - Construction of sidewalks to allow for growth. 
    Insofar as possible, when any granolithic, concrete, brick or other permanent sidewalk is laid in any street along which trees or shrubs have been planted, care shall be taken that an opening around the same shall be left in such sidewalk large enough for the expected growth of the trees or shrubs. 
(Ord. No. 102, 6-15-2006) 
Sec. 27-11. - Town maintenance of trees and vegetation in public rights-of-way. 
(a)  The town is not required to cut and/or remove weeds, brush, plants, grass or other vegetation growing in the public alleys, unimproved streets and other unimproved rights-of-way except as provided in section 17-23 of the town's weed [control article]. The town shall not cut and/or remove weeds, brush, plants, grass or other vegetation growing in the unimproved portion of the public rights-of-way lying between any public street and private property lines except when the weeds, brush, plants, grass or other vegetation grow in such a manner as to obstruct the view of traffic signs, obstruct the view of an intersection or otherwise create a traffic hazard. 
(b)  If any tree growing in a public alley, unimproved street or other unimproved rights-of-way is dead or is growing in such a manner that the branches, limbs or other parts of the tree extend or pertrude onto private property in a manner that constitutes a danger to citizens or property, the town will cut and remove or prune such tree once it has been notified of the condition of the tree. It shall be the responsibility of the adjoining property owner or tenant to notify the town when a tree is growing in such a manner that it needs to be cut and removed or pruned. 
(c)  Any adjacent property owner, tenant or citizen, at their own expense, may cut and/or remove any weeds, brush, plants, grass or other vegetation growing in the public alleys, unimproved streets and other unimproved rights-of-way and in the unimproved portion of the public right-of-way lying between any public property and private property lines. No person shall cut and remove or prune any tree growing in the public right-of-way without first obtaining a permit from the office of the town manager as required in section 27-17. 
(Ord. No. 102, 6-15-2006; Ord. No. 190 , 10-10-2018) 
Sec. 27-12. - Tree protection. 
    Trees that are to be saved or kept in construction projects shall be protected as follows: 
(1)  No grading shall be done within the tree's drip line. 
(2)  A temporary fence shall be constructed around the tree's drip line. 
(3)  No equipment or machinery shall work within the fenced area. 
(4)  No tools, equipment or supplies shall be stored inside the fenced area. 
(5)  Landmark trees shall be protected. 
(Ord. No. 102, 6-15-2006) 
Sec. 27-13. - Private trees. 
    The town manager in collaboration with the town horticulturist and the director of public works, is allowed to enter private land whereon there is located a tree, shrub, plant, or any part thereof is suspected to be a public health threat or nuisance to public property and to order its removal if necessary. 
(Ord. No. 102, 6-15-2006) 
Sec. 27-14. - Enforcement. 
    The town manager and his designee shall have the power to enforce rules, regulations, and specifications concerning the trimming, spraying, removal, planting, pruning and protection of trees, shrubs, and other plants as set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 102, 6-15-2006) 
Sec. 27-15. - Penalties, claims and appeals. 
(a)  Any person who knowingly and willfully violates any provision of this chapter or who fails to comply with any notice issued pursuant to provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each separate offense. 
(b)  Any financial and/or material cost of damage to trees, shrubs, or other landscaping that results from violation of any provision of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the party in violation. The value of trees and shrubs shall be determined in accordance with the latest revision of "A Guide to the Professional Evaluation of Landscape Trees, Specimen, and Evergreens," published by the International Society of Arboriculture. Any decision made by the town may be appealed to the town council in the same manner as set forth in the Town of Farmville Code. 
(Ord. No. 102, 6-15-2006) 
Sec. 27-16. - Review. 
    The town council shall review recommendations made by the town's tree board and endorse them as is or amend them as they deem necessary. 
(Ord. No. 102, 6-15-2006) 
Sec. 27-17. - Required. 
    No person shall plant, spray, fertilize, preserve, prune, remove, cut above ground, or otherwise disturb any tree on any unimproved street or unimproved town-owned property without first filing an application and procuring a permit from the office of the town manager. The person receiving the permit shall abide by the arboricultural specifications and standards of practice adopted by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 190 , 10-10-2018) 
Sec. 27-18. - Application-When due. 
    Applications for permits required by the provisions of this article shall be made at the office of the town manager not less than forty-eight (48) hours in advance of the time the work is to be done. 
(Ord. No. 190 , 10-10-2018) 
Chapter 28 - WATER, SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of council to erect, control, regulate and prohibit waterworks and sewerage facilities, § 10. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; buildings, Ch. 6; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 12; nuisances, Ch. 17; planning, Ch. 20; solid waste and weeds, Ch. 22; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23; subdivisions, Ch. 24; plumbing, § 6-21 et seq.; discharging water on sidewalks, § 23-11; water and sewers in subdivisions, § 24-151 et seq. 
State Law reference- Acquisition of land, construction of dams, etc., for water supply, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-37 et seq.; water-saving ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-37.2:1; water supply emergency ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-37.3:4; public utilities, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-292 et seq.; municipal water supplies and facilities, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-332.1 et seq., 15.1-875; health regulations, permits, etc., for public water supplies, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-167 et seq.; Virginia Water and Sewer Authorities Act, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-1239 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 28-1-28-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 28-26. - Rules and regulations generally. 
    The rules and regulations set out in this article shall be considered a part of the contract with every person supplied with water through the town waterworks system and every person by taking water shall be considered to express his assent to be bound thereby. When any of the rules and regulations are violated or such others as the council may adopt, water shall be cut off from the building or place of such violations and shall not be turned on except by order of the town manager or town council and then only after the payment of the sum of twenty dollars ($20.00) to cover the cost of shutting off the water and turning it on again; and in case of such violations, the council shall have the right to declare forfeited any payment made for water by persons committing or permitting such violations. 
(Code 1973, § 28-1; Ord. No. 155, 6-25-2012 ) 
Sec. 28-27. - Taking water without authority. 
    It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to take any water from the waterworks system of the town, except in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 28-2) 
Sec. 28-28. - General restrictions on use of water. 
    No consumer shall supply water to other families nor suffer them to take water off his premises. Nothing in this section shall prevent the occupant of any house or premises supplied with town water from having, when his hydrant or connection is out of order, the use of water from another house or premises with the permission of the occupant thereof nor prevent any person from taking town water to extinguish a fire in the case of an emergency. 
(Code 1973, § 28-3) 
Sec. 28-29. - Management vested in town manager. 
    The town manager shall have the general management and control of the town waterworks and the properties appertaining thereto. He shall have authority to appoint such assistants and employees as he may deem necessary for the operation and maintenance of the waterworks, to fix their compensation and to remove such assistants and employees at any time; provided, that in such general management and control, the town manager shall be subject to the control of the council. 
(Code 1973, § 28-4) 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 
Sec. 28-30. - Waterworks fund. 
    There shall be an account kept by the treasurer known as the "waterworks fund." All money received from the sale of waterworks bonds, from the collection of water rents, from any taxation for waterworks purposes, from the sale of any property or material connected with the waterworks, from any appropriation made by the council for the purpose of construction or extension of the waterworks or from any source whatsoever connected with the management and operation of the waterworks system shall be placed in the waterworks fund; and all salaries and disbursements connected with the management and operation of the waterworks system shall be paid out of this fund, insofar as possible. 
(Code 1973, § 28-5) 
Cross reference- Finance, Ch. 11. 
Sec. 28-31. - Fire hydrants. 
(a)  All hydrants erected for the purpose of extinguishing fires are hereby declared to be public hydrants. No persons, except the members of the fire department, or persons especially authorized by the town manager or the council, and then only in the exercise of the authority delegated, shall open any of such hydrants or uncover or remove any protection from or in any manner interfere with such hydrants. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person authorized to open hydrants to delegate his authority to another or to let or suffer another person to take wrenches or tools furnished him or to suffer the same to be taken from any fire station except for the purpose strictly connected with the fire department or as they accompany fire apparatus on occasion of fire. 
(Code 1973, § 28-6) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 12. 
Sec. 28-32. - Tampering, etc., with waterworks property. 
    It shall be unlawful to break, injure, mark, deface, interfere with or disturb any building, machinery, apparatus, mains, pipes, meters, fixtures, attachments or appurtenances of the waterworks system or any part thereof or to commit any act tending to obstruct or impair the intended use of the above-mentioned property without permission of the town manager or the council or excepting cases provided by ordinance or this Code. The waterworks system referred to in this section shall not include the pipes, fixtures, etc., owned and maintained by the consumer. 
(Code 1973, § 28-7) 
Sec. 28-33. - Failure of system; right to cut off water generally. 
    The town does not guarantee a regular and uninterrupted supply of water to any consumer and shall not be liable for any failure to supply the same nor shall it be liable for any claim or damages by reason of the breaking of any main, service pipe, stopcock or other equipment or if for any reason the supply of water shall be shut off to make repairs, connections or extensions or for any other reason whatsoever. The right is reserved to cut off the supply of water at any time. When possible to do so, reasonable notice of such discontinuation shall be given to the consumers affected. 
(Code 1973, § 28-8) 
Sec. 28-34. - Right of entry. 
    Every consumer shall permit the town manager and the duly authorized employees of the waterworks system of the town, at all reasonable hours of the day, to enter his premises or building to examine the pipes and fixtures and the manner in which the water is used. Such consumer shall frankly and without concealment answer questions put to him relative to the use of water on such premises or in such building. The town shall have the right, on giving reasonable notice to the consumer, to discontinue the service when such access at any time is refused or not permitted. 
(Code 1973, § 28-9) 
Sec. 28-35. - Discharge from sinks, bathrooms, etc. 
    No sewage or wastewater from any lot or discharge from any sink, bathroom or hydrant or other water fixture shall be permitted to flow into the street, upon the sidewalk or footway, or upon the premises of any adjacent owner. 
(Code 1973, § 28-10) 
Sec. 28-36. - Drought management. 
(1)  Title. This section shall be known and may be cited as the Drought Management Ordinance. 
(2)  Authority to declare a potential water shortage and to impose water conservation measures. The town manager, with the authorization from the town council, is authorized to declare drought or emergency conditions and impose voluntary and mandatory water conservation measures for the town's water system and service area. The town manager will authorize and initiate prudent drought management actions as outlined in [this section] and the regional Town of Farmville/Prince Edward County Drought Response and Contingency Plan. 
The town manager, under advisement from the town council, will notify the county of impending and actual drought watch, warning and/or emergency statuses. 
(3)  Conditions for drought declaration and potential water shortage. The Town of Farmville is committed through various methods on a continuing basis to educate the general public through flyers, the town's instant alert system, media (radio, newspapers), Channel 2, etc. on ways to conserve water at all times not just in times of impending drought. 
Upon a determination by the town manager regarding conditions for drought declaration and potential water shortage, the town manager shall consider the following indicators and parameters for each of the three (3) drought stages and take the following actions: 
a.  Stage I-Drought watch. 
Those indicators/parameters that trigger a drought watch are as follows: 
1.  Lack of or below average precipitation for an extended period of time, which would be intensified during the summer months when water usage is higher. 
2.  Flow decreasing in Appomattox River as measured by flow meters at WTP and the USGS gauging station located at the Route 45 Bridge. At this stage, the gauging station is monitored at least daily. Also at this stage town staff will be physically observing and monitoring the water level at the intake. 
3.  Monitoring and comparing water intake and treatment with water usage. 
4.  Compare raw and finished water production data from previous five (5) years. 
5.  Research weather predictor patterns. 
6.  Virginia Department of Health, Office of Drinking Water, monitors the flow in the Appomattox River and provides reports and data to the town. 
7.  Periodically check NOAA's website for the National Weather Service, Climate Prediction Center. 
8.  Under normal operations the plant operates on average eleven (11) hours per day. 
Specify any voluntary and mandatory conservation measures: 
1.  Keeping public informed of conditions through newspaper, instant alert system, radio, Channel 2 and flyers. 
2.  Piedmont Soil and Water Conservation assists with educating the public on conservation measures on an ongoing basis. 
3.  A list of water conservation techniques shall be tabulated and distributed by the town manager. 
b.  Stage II-Drought warning. 
Those indicators/parameters that trigger a drought warning are as follows: 
1.  Flow has decreased to the point where the water is not flowing over the dam and this requires the town to sand bag across the dam to divert more water into plant. This will occur when the water withdrawal amount from the river has decreased to approximately six (6) million gallon-per-day (mgd) or sixteen (16) cubic feet per second (cfs). At this point the town can still produce the required amount of water. 
2.  Observing and monitoring water level at the intake by physical observation. 
3.  Continuing to monitor gauging system at least two (2) to three (3) times per day. 
Specify any voluntary and mandatory conservation measures: 
1.  Issue voluntary water conservation measures for both residential, commercial and industrial users through notification to the public through the town's instant alert system, newspaper, radio, Channel 2 and flyers. 
2.  Town manger will contact Longwood University officials directly and suggest Longwood University water campus grounds and sports fields no more than every other day as a water conservation measure. 
3.  A list of waters conservation techniques shall be tabulated and distributed by the town manager. 
c.  Stage III-Drought emergency. 
Those indicators/parameters that trigger a drought emergency are as follows: 
Stage A: 
1.  The flow in the Appomattox River is below three (3) mgd or eight (8) cfs. 
Stage B: 
1.  At this point the flow is below two (2) mgd. 
Specify any voluntary and mandatory conservation measures: 
1.  Washing cars and trucks, other than at commercial car washes, shall be prohibited. 
2.  Irrigation of lawn grass, gardens and plantings outside car washes, shall be prohibited. 
3.  Recreational use, including the refilling of all swimming pools, shall be prohibited. 
4.  Washing of decks, sidewalks and driveways shall be prohibited. 
(4)  Additional measures. If measures outlined in each of the three (3) stages listed above are insufficient to reduce demand and preserve sufficient supplies of water for citizens, the following are additional drought measures that may be implemented during critical periods: 
(5)  Violations and penalties. The following specifically summarizes those actions and penalties that will be imposed upon violators of this section: 
a.  The town manager and his designees are authorized and ordered to patrol the town regularly to ensure that the intent of this section is being met. If any town employee finds that water conservation methods are not being employed, then he or she shall advise the user of the impact of the lack of water conservation on the town's water system and fellow users. 
b.  If appropriate water conservation measures are not employed by a user immediately after written notice by a town employee, the town manager or his designee may suspend water service to that user for up to twenty-four (24) hours. 
c.  Willful violations of this section shall be punishable as a class 4 misdemeanor which carries a fine of up to two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per offense. A willful violation shall be determined to exist upon discovery of a violation after the restoration of a suspended water service. Each day of a violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(6)  Appeals. The town council shall have full and exclusive authority to appoint members of any board of appeals. Upon declaration of the drought warning stage, the town council shall establish an appeals review board to review application for exemption and institutes power to approve, modify or revoke such determinations. 
(7)  Public notice and duration of restrictions. The determination of stages I, II and III by the authorized party or his designee shall become effective upon there being printed in any newspaper of general circulation within the locality, through the town's instant alert system, and/or broadcast upon any radio or television serving the locality. The drought watch, drought warning and drought emergency stage restrictions shall remain in effect until the designated authority determines that a water emergency in the locality no longer exists. 
(Ord. No. 136, 4-22-2011) 
Secs. 28-37-28-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONNECTIONS AND CHARGES 

Sec. 28-51. - Connection to system required. 
    Every house, mobile home, house trailer or other unit used as a residence and every place of business, manufacturing plant or other business establishment shall be connected to the town water system, unless the water system is inaccessible. It shall be the duty of the town manger to determine whether or not the water system is accessible in each case; if he determines that it is inaccessible, he shall certify the finding in writing to the council, which, if it approves the finding, shall cause a permanent record thereof to be recorded in its minutes. 
(Code 1973, § 28-11) 
State Law reference- Authority of town to require connection with water system, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-875. 
Sec. 28-52. - Application for service. 
    Every person desiring a supply of water shall make application therefor to the town manager on such forms as may be prescribed by the council and provided for that purpose. The application shall state fully and truly all the uses to which the water is to be applied; no different or additional use will be allowed, except by written permission made therefor. 
(Code 1973, § 28-12) 
Sec. 28-53. - Permit for connection. 
    The permit for the connection to the service pipes or water mains shall be issued by the town manager or town treasurer to some licensed plumber employed by the applicant to make such connection. 
(Code 1973, § 28-13) 
Sec. 28-54. - Each residential unit or business establishment to have separate connection; exception. 
    Not more than one (1) house, mobile home, house trailer or other unit used as a residence and not more than one (1) place of business, manufacturing plant or other business establishment shall be supplied from or through any one (1) water tap or connection, except on written permission of the council and not then in any case unless provision is made so that each house, mobile home, house trailer or other unit used as a residence, place of business, manufacturing plant or other business establishment may be shut off independently of all others. Mobile home parks, described as any lot or premises on which two (2) or more mobile homes are parked or located, shall have either a separate water meter supplying each mobile home or, with the approval of the town manager, may be supplied by one (1) or more meters if the water is purchased by the owner or operator of the mobile home park. 
(Code 1973, § 28-14) 
Sec. 28-55. - Water connection charge. 
(a)  The basic connection fee is to cover the cost of the service tap w/stop, service line, meter setter and meter box. The basic connection fee shall be assessed all residential, commercial and industrial connectors and the payment shall accompany the application for water service as set forth in the schedule of fees below: 
(1)  In town: 
a.  Residential, 3/4? tap, per unit ..... $4,000.00 
b.  Commercial/industrial, 3/4? tap, per unit ..... $4,500.00 
plus cost of labor, materials and equipment to make tap 
c.  All taps, over 3/4?×size of tap ..... $4,500.00 
plus $4,500.00 per unit in excess of one (1) 
plus cost of labor, materials and equipment to make tap 
d.  Yard, 5/8 ?tap if connected to existing service line ..... $650.00 
$3,500.00 if connected to main 
(2)  Out of town: 
a.  Residential, 3/4? tap, per unit ..... $6,000.00 
b.  Commercial/industrial, 3/4? tap, per unit ..... $7,500.00 
plus cost of labor, materials and equipment to make tap 
c.  All taps, over 3/4? × size of tap ..... $11,500.00 
plus $7,500.00 per unit in excess of one (1) 
plus cost of labor, materials and equipment to make tap 
d.  Yard, 5/8 ? tap if connected to existing service line ..... $2,500.00 
$6,000.00 if connected to a main. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, a unit is described as follows: 
(1)  The part of a building designed or used as separate living quarters. 
(2)  The part of a building designed or used as a separate business, profession, trade or occupation. 
(3)  For nursing homes, hospitals, rooming houses, boarding houses or any like structure, every four (4) beds shall constitute one (1) unit. 
(4)  For hotels, motels or any like structure, every four (4) rooms shall constitute one (1) unit. 
(5)  For mobile home parks, each space designed or used to accommodate one (1) mobile home shall constitute one (1) unit. 
(6)  For schools, daycare centers or any like structure, every fifteen (15) students shall constitute one (1) unit. 
(c)  If the town's actual cost of installing residential water service is more than the applicable basic connection fee, the applicant owner shall pay such difference plus an administrative fee equal to ten (10) percent of total cost. 
(d)  In addition to the charges imposed by this section, the developer shall also pay the entire cost of extending facilities. Facilities construction credits may be allowed by the town, in its sole discretion, for construction of facilities in excess of size necessary to adequately serve (owner) applicant. Credits will be limited to a maximum of one-half (1/2) the amount assessed for the availability fee. Credits will be based on recent construction bids of similar facilities. 
(e)  When water requirements of a connector exceed that originally applied for, the town shall require additional connection fees in accordance with the schedule of fees in effect at that time. 
(f)  The total connection fee shall be paid before connection, with twenty-five (25) percent payable at the time of plan approval. 
(g)  The town council may, in its sole discretion, by resolution, waive a portion of the connection fees for water facilities installed under federal or state funded water projects. The portion of the fee that is waived shall be indicated as town financial participation in the water project. 
(Code 1973, § 28-15; Ord. No. 15, 8-12-92; Ord. No. 21, 4-14-93; Ord. No. 56, 4-12-2000; Ord. No. 70, 1-9-2003; Ord. No. 73, 5-14-2003; Ord. No. 106, 9-13-2006; Ord. No. 115, 8-8-2007; Ord. No. 151, 11-9-2011; Ord. No. 162, 6-12-2013, enacted 7-1-2013 ) 
Sec. 28-56. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 106, adopted Sept. 11, 2006, rescinded § 28-56, which pertained to water connection charge-Availability fee and derived from Code 1973, § 28-15.1; Ord. No. 15, adopted Aug. 12, 1992; Ord. No. 38, adopted June 26, 1996; Ord. No. 70, adopted Jan. 9, 2003. 
Sec. 28-57. - Deposits. 
(a)  The treasurer is authorized to require the following deposits from persons opening new water accounts: 
(1)  Residential consumers: 
a.  In town ..... $100.00 
b.  Outside of town ..... 150.00 
(2)  Commercial consumers (on the basis of the treasurer's estimates of the prospective consumer's use): 
a.  In excess of ten thousand (10,000) gallons per month: 
1.  In town ..... $200.00 
2.  Outside of town ..... 300.00 
b.  When the person opening a new account owns the property to be supplied water, the treasurer may not require a deposit. 
(b)  Any deposit not reclaimed by the depositor within one (1) year after the depositor ceases to use town water shall be deemed abandoned by the depositor and shall not be subject to reclamation. When the person opening a new account owns the property to be supplied water, the treasurer may not require a deposit. 
(Code 1973, § 28-16; Ord. No. 70, 1-9-2003; Ord. No. 131, 11-10-2010; Ord. No. 155, 6-25-2012 ) 
Sec. 28-58. - Rate schedule. 
(a)  The charge for water within the corporate limits of the Town of Farmville shall be: 
(1)  First one thousand five hundred (1,500) gallons (based on monthly consumption) ..... $11.29 
(2)  Over one thousand five hundred one (1,501) gallons to ten thousand (10,000) gallons, per one thousand (1,000) gallons (based on monthly consumption) ..... $3.68 
(3)  Over ten thousand one (10,001) gallons, per one thousand (1,000) gallons (based on monthly consumption) ..... $5.25 
(b)  The charge for water outside the corporate limits of the Town of Farmville shall be: 
(1)  First one thousand five hundred (1,500) gallons (based on monthly consumption) ..... $16.94 
(2)  Over one thousand five hundred one (1,501) gallons to ten thousand (10,000) gallons, per one thousand (1,000) gallons (based on monthly consumption) ..... $5.52 
(3)  Over ten thousand one (10,001) gallons to five hundred thousand (500,000) [gallons] per one thousand (1,000) gallons (based on monthly consumption) ..... $7.88 
(4)  Over five hundred thousand one (500,001) gallons per one thousand (1,000) gallons (based on monthly consumption) ..... $7.35 
(Code 1973, § 28-17; Ord. No. 6, 10-10-91; Ord. No. 32, 7-12-95; Ord. No. 38, 6-26-96; Ord. No. 70, 1-9-2003; Ord. No. 106, 9-13-2006; Ord. No. 115, 8-8-2007; Ord. No. 131, 11-10-2010; Ord. No. 151, 11-9-2011; Ord. No. 155, 6-25-2012 ; Ord. No. 179 , 1-11-2017; Ord. No. 188 , 6-13-2018) 
State Law reference- Authority of town to charge for water, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-875. 
Sec. 28-59. - Surcharge on multiple units served by a single meter. 
(a)  In addition to the charges imposed by other sections of this article, there shall be added to all bills for meters serving more than one (1) unit, a monthly surcharge of four dollars ($4.00) per unit for all units in excess of one (1), whether occupied or not. For the purpose of this section, a unit is described as follows: 
(1)  The part of a building designed or used as separate living quarters. 
(2)  The part of a building designed or used as a separate business, profession, trade or occupation. 
(3)  For nursing homes, hospitals, roominghouses, boardinghouses, or any like structure, every four (4) beds shall constitute one (1) unit. 
(4)  For hotels, motels, or any like structure, every four (4) rooms shall constitute one (1) unit. 
(5)  For mobile home parks, each space designed or used to accommodate one (1) mobile home shall constitute one (1) unit. 
(b)  For customers outside the town the surcharge shall be the same as for customers inside the town, plus fifty (50) percent. 
(Ord. of 5-10-90(3); Ord. No. 131, 11-10-10; Ord. No. 151, 11-9-2011; Ord. No. 155, 6-25-2012 ) 
State Law reference- Authority of town to charge for water furnished, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-875. 
Sec. 28-60. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 155 , adopted June 25, 2012, repealed § 28-60, which pertained to charges for sprinkler systems outside of town and derived from § 28-18 of the 1973 Code. 
Sec. 28-61. - Town to maintain connections to meter box. 
    After this final inspection and approval of any service connection by the town manager or his authorized agent, the town shall maintain all connections from the water main up to and including the water meters and meter box; except that when a meter is on private property, the town's responsibility shall not extend beyond the property line. 
(Code 1973, § 28-19) 
Sec. 28-62. - Consumer to furnish connections between house and meter box. 
    Service connections between the house or premises of the property owner or consumer and the town meter shall be the responsibility of the property owner or the consumer. 
(Code 1973, § 28-20) 
Sec. 28-63. - Turning on water. 
    Water shall not be turned on in any house or private service except by order of the town manager or the council. Any person who turns on town water or who takes water from the town water system by any means except by order of the town manager or the council shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and any person who uses water so taken shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. This rule shall not be construed to prohibit plumbers from turning water into any pipe to test same or for the purpose of testing the plumbing connected thereto. Should the meter or connections be damaged in any way by the turning on of water for testing purposes, the plumber shall be responsible for all such damages. 
(Code 1973, § 28-21) 
Sec. 28-64. - Disconnection of service. 
    Water service may be disconnected on notice to the town manager whenever the premises are to be unoccupied and shall be reconnected on request. 
(Code 1973, § 28-22) 
Secs. 28-65-28-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - METERS 

Sec. 28-81. - Provided by town. 
    All water furnished by the town shall be measured by meters furnished by the town for that purpose. 
(Code 1973, § 28-23) 
Sec. 28-82. - Monthly readings; when bills due, delinquent accounts. 
(a)  Meters shall be read every month by the properly authorized persons and water bills for the same shall be due and payable at the office of the town treasurer on the first day of the following month; if not paid by the twentieth day of that month, they shall be subject to a penalty of ten (10) percent, and if not paid on or before the last day of that month, water service to the delinquent consumer may be discontinued. To be reconnected, the delinquent consumer shall pay all accounts then due and, in addition, a reconnection charge of twenty dollars ($20.00). 
(b)  If the bill is not paid by the twentieth day of such month, the town treasurer shall mail a notice to the delinquent consumer, stating that the ten-percent penalty has been applied to the bill and if the bill is not paid on or before the last day of such month, service shall be disconnected. If service is disconnected and the consumer does not choose to have it reconnected, after ten (10) days the town treasurer may apply the consumer's deposit to his unpaid account. 
(Code 1973, § 28-24; Ord. No. 155, 6-25-2012 ) 
Sec. 28-83. - Testing; deposit. 
    Any consumer may require his meter to be tested by paying to the town treasurer the sum of ten dollars ($10.00). The town manager shall thereupon see that the meter is properly tested. Should the meter register three (3) percent or more over, the consumer shall have his deposit for testing the meter returned to him. 
(Code 1973, § 28-25) 
Sec. 28-84. - Refunds when meters in error. 
    Whenever a meter is found to have an average error in registration exceeding three (3) percent, an adjustment shall be made between the town and the consumer on the basis of the error found, covering a period equal to one-half of the time elapsed since the last previous test; but in no case shall this period exceed three (3) months. 
(Code 1973, § 28-26) 
Sec. 28-85. - Failure to register. 
    If the metering equipment is found to be out of order or fails to register for a certain period, the amount of water consumed shall be estimated, using as a basis the amount consumed during a similar period and under comparable conditions. 
(Code 1973, § 28-27) 
Sec. 28-86. - Removal for illegal use or abuse. 
    If at any time it becomes necessary to remove a water meter because of improper or illegal use or abuse, the meter shall not be replaced until a ten-dollar reinstallation charge is paid to the town treasurer, in addition to all other charges properly due. 
(Code 1973, § 28-28) 
Secs. 28-87-28-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - FLUORIDATION 

Sec. 28-106. - Fluorine salts to be used in water system. 
    On receiving the permit from the state department of health and until further direction of the town council, the water department is hereby authorized and directed to provide the means and to proceed with the introduction of sodium fluoride or other suitable salt or acid of fluorine into the water supply in such quantities as are required to maintain throughout the pipe distribution system a fluoride ion concentration of approximately one (1) part per million. 
(Code 1973, § 28-29) 
Sec. 28-107. - Daily record to be kept; checking ion concentration. 
    The water department shall keep an accurate daily record showing for each supply the number of gallons treated and the fluoride ion concentration of the water before and after treatment. The water department shall also determine the fluoride ion concentration in the distribution system at such points and at such intervals as may be directed by the town manager. 
(Code 1973, § 29-30) 
Sec. 28-108. - Supervision by town manager. 
    The town manager shall have general supervision over the treatment of the public water supply with fluoride and the water department is directed to furnish him copies of records specified in section 28-107 at daily, weekly and monthly intervals as may be required by the health officer. 
(Code 1973, § 28-31) 
Sec. 28-109. - Town manager to make reports to council. 
    The town manager is hereby directed to make periodic reports to the town council on the fluoridation of the public water supply and shall seek the cooperation of educational and scientific institutions to conduct surveys and research as to the beneficial effect, if any, of the program and project on the citizens of the community. 
(Code 1973, § 28-32) 
Secs. 28-110-28-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Method of assessment for sewer improvements, § 11. 
State Law reference- General powers of town as to sewers and drains, Code of Virginia, 15.1-292; sewage disposal generally, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-317 et seq.; sewage disposal, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-163 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 28-126. - Management vested in town manager. 
    The sewerage system and sewage disposal plant shall be under the supervision and control of the town manager. The town manager shall be subject to the control of the entire council. 
(Code 1973, § 28-33) 
Sec. 28-127. - When sewer connections required; separate connections generally. 
(a)  The owner of every house, mobile home, house trailer, place of business and manufacturer abutting in any manner on a street or alley through which runs a public sewer shall connect his premises with such sewer and discontinue the use of any outside water closet, privy, privy vault or cesspool. As to any sewer hereafter constructed, such owner shall connect to it within six (6) months after being notified by the town manager or health officer. 
(b)  No sewer connection shall be required where it will be necessary to construct a private sewer line, exclusive of the branch pipes constructed by the town for the purpose of making such connections, over one hundred (100) feet in length, unless the town manager or local board of health deems it necessary for the protection of health and so notifies the owner in writing. 
(c)  Every house, mobile home, house trailer, place of business, manufacturer or building requiring a sewer connection shall, except with the consent of the council, be separately or independently connected with the sewer where one is provided. 
(d)  Mobile home parks, described as any lot or premises on which two (2) or more mobile homes are parked or located, shall have either a separate sewer tap serving each mobile home or with the approval of the town manager, the mobile home park may be served by one (1) or more taps into the town's sanitary system; provided, that the owner or operator of the park supplies a hookup to each mobile home. 
(Code 1973, § 28-34) 
State Law reference- Authority of town to require connection with sewage facilities, Code of Virginia, 15.1-876. 
Sec. 28-128. - Application and permit for connection. 
    Any person who owns a lot and desires to make a connection with the sewer system shall first file with the town manager an application therefor in such form as may be prescribed by the council and provided for that purpose. The application shall set forth the location and description of the property to be connected and for what purpose the sewer is to be used. If the use to which the sewer is to be put is practicable, the town manager shall issue a permit therefor. It shall be unlawful to make any such connection until the required permit has been secured. 
(Code 1973, § 28-35) 
Sec. 28-129. - Branch pipes-Generally. 
    No person shall connect with any sewer at any other place than through the branch pipe connections laid by the town for that purpose, unless special permission therefor is given by the council. 
(Code 1973, § 28-36) 
Sec. 28-130. - Same-Abutting property owners to pay expense of laying. 
    Branch pipes for connections with the public sewer shall be laid by the town at the expense of the abutting property owners. Such branch pipes shall extend from the public sewer to the property line; but when the abutting property is not already built upon no bill shall be rendered for the branch pipes until the property shall have been built upon and application made for a sewer connection permit. The cost of laying branch pipes for connections shall be ascertained and certified by the town manager to the treasurer, and the treasurer shall make proper entry thereof in his book and make out the necessary bills. The treasurer shall thereupon notify the owner of each lot liable for one (1) of the bills or his agents that the bill is in the hands of the treasurer for collection. Such notice shall state the location of the lot, the kind of work done, the amount of the bill and the fact that the bill will be delinquent and subject to a penalty of ten (10) percent on and after the first day of January next ensuing. In no case shall any property owner be charged a greater sum than he would otherwise be required to pay for the branch pipes for connection with the public sewer because the sewer is not placed in the center of the street or alley. 
Charter reference- Method of assessment for sewer improvements, § 11. 
Sec. 28-131. - Same-Maintenance. 
    Branch pipes connecting with the town sanitary sewer mains shall be maintained at the expense of the town whenever the branch or lateral lies under a public way. 
(Code 1973, § 28-38) 
Sec. 28-132. - Claims arising out of sewer stoppages. 
    The town manager shall investigate individual claims arising out of sewer stoppages on personal property and shall bring specific recommendations in each case to the council for such action as the council may deem appropriate. 
(Code 1973, § 28-39) 
Sec. 28-133. - Sewer to be under center of street; exception. 
    Whenever a new sewer is to be made, it shall be placed in the center of the street or alley unless to do so will interfere with some authorized connection already in the center of the street or alley; in which case, the sewer may be placed on either side of the street or alley at the option of the town manager. 
(Code 1973, § 28-40) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23. 
Sec. 28-134. - Laying private sewers. 
    The consent of the council shall be secured before laying any private sewer line along any street or alley. The provisions of the Uniform Statewide Building Code shall be complied with in laying such private sewers along any street or alley. When the sewers are laid and the connections made, the person authorized to make the connections and to lay the sewers shall notify the town manager or his authorized agent, who shall inspect such work promptly as his duties permit, and if the material used and the work done meets the requirements set forth, he shall approve the same. 
(Code 1973, § 28-41) 
Sec. 28-135. - Rain and storm water, sump pump, etc., connections. 
    Rainwater, stormwater, subsurface drainage and sump pump connections handling the same shall not be made with the sanitary sewer system. As to any present connections with the sanitary sewer system, the property owner shall disconnect these lines within six (6) months after being notified by the town. (See BOCA Code, Sec. P-802.0.) 
(Code 1973, § 28-42) 
Sec. 28-136. - Use of system. 
    It shall be unlawful to throw, place or deposit, or cause or permit to be thrown, placed or deposited in any vessel or receptacle connected with the sewer system any garbage, hair, ashes, fruit, vegetables, peelings, refuse, rags, sticks, cinders or any other matter or thing except human excrement, urine, the necessary toilet paper, liquid slops and drainage of like character. (See BOCA Code, Sec. 309.0) 
(Code 1973, § 28-43) 
Sec. 28-137. - Breaking, etc., sewers and sewer equipment. 
    It shall be unlawful to break, injure, mark, deface, interfere with or disturb any sewer line, manhole, building, machinery, apparatus or appurtenances of the sewer system or any part thereof belonging to the town or to commit any act tending to obstruct or impair the intended use of the above-mentioned property without permission of the town manager or the council or excepting cases provided for in this Code or otherwise provided by ordinance. 
(Code 1973, § 28-44) 
Secs. 28-138-28-155. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CHARGES AND RATES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of town to charge for sewage disposal services, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-876. 

Sec. 28-156. - Sewer connection charge. 
(a)  The basic connection fee is to cover the cost of the service tap w/stop, service line and clean-out. The basic connection fee shall be assessed all residential, commercial and industrial connectors and the payment shall accompany the application for sewer service as set forth in the schedule of fees below: 
(1)  In town: 
a.  Residential, 4? tap, per unit ..... $4,000.00 
b.  Commercial/industrial, 4? tap, per unit ..... $4,500.00 
plus cost of labor, materials and equipment to make tap 
c.  All taps, over 4? ..... $4,500.00 
plus $4,500.00 per inch in excess of four (4) 
plus $4,500.00 per unit in excess of one (1) 
plus cost of labor, materials and equipment 
(2)  Out of town: 
a.  Residential, 4? tap, per unit ..... $6,000.00 
b.  Commercial/industrial, 4? tap, per unit ..... $7,500.00 
plus cost of labor, materials and equipment 
c.  All taps, over 4? ..... $11,500.00 
plus $11,500.00 per inch in excess of four (4) 
d.  plus $11,500.00 per unit in excess of one (1) 
plus cost of labor, materials and equipment. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, a unit is described as follows: 
(1)  The part of a building designed or used as separate living quarters. 
(2)  The part of a building designed or used as a separate business, profession, trade or occupation. 
(3)  For nursing homes, hospitals, rooming houses, boarding houses or any like structure, every four (4) beds shall constitute one (1) unit. 
(4)  For hotels, motels or any like structure, every four (4) rooms shall constitute one (1) unit. 
(5)  For mobile home parks, each space designed or used to accommodate one (1) mobile home shall constitute one (1) unit. 
(6)  For schools, daycare centers or any like structures, every fifteen (15) students shall constitute one (1) unit. 
(c)  If the town's actual cost of installing residential sewer service is more than the applicable basic connection fee, the applicant owner shall pay such difference plus an administrative fee equal to ten (10) percent of total cost. 
(d)  In addition to the charges imposed by this section, the developer shall also pay the entire cost of extending facilities. Facilities construction credits may be allowed by the town, in its sole discretion, for construction of facilities in excess of size necessary to adequately serve (owner) applicant. Credits will be limited to a maximum of one-half (1/2) the amount assessed for the availability fee. Credits will be based on recent construction bids of similar facilities. 
(e)  When sewer requirements of a connector exceed that originally applied for, the town shall require additional connection fees in accordance with the schedule of fees in effect at that time. 
(f)  The total connection fee shall be paid before connection, with twenty-five (25) percent payable at the time of plan approval. 
(g)  The town council may, in its sole discretion, by resolution, waive a portion of the connection fees for sewer facilities installed under federal or state funded sewer projects. The portion of the fee that is waived shall be indicated as town financial participation in the water project. 
(Code 1973, § 28-45; Ord. No. 16, 8-12-92; Ord. No. 21, 4-14-93; Ord. No. 70, 1-9-2003; Ord. No. 73, 5-14-2003; Ord. No. 106, 9-13-2006; Ord. No. 115, 8-8-2007; Ord. No. 151, 11-9-2011; Ord. No. 163, 6-12-2013, enacted 7-1-2013 ) 
State Law reference- Authority of town to charge for sewage disposal services, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-876. 
Sec. 28-157. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 106, adopted Sept. 11, 2006, rescinded § 28-157, which pertained to sewer connection charge-Availability fee and derived from Code 1973, § 28-45.1; Ord. No. 16, adopted Aug. 12, 1992; Ord. No. 38, adopted June 26, 1996; Ord. No. 70, adopted Jan. 9, 2003. 
Sec. 28-158. - Sewer charge. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed against each water user having a sewer connection into the town sewer system a charge equaling one hundred twenty (120) percent of the water bill. 
(b)  For each connection into the town sewer system that is not a user of town water, there shall be a monthly charge of twenty-eight dollars and sixty-two cents ($28.62) plus a monthly charge of twenty-eight dollars and sixty-two cents ($28.62) for each additional unit, whether occupied or not. 
(c)  For the purpose of this section, a unit is described as follows: 
(1)  The part of a building designed or used as separate living quarters. 
(2)  The part of a building designed or used as a separate business, profession, trade or occupation. 
(3)  For nursing homes, hospitals, roominghouses, boardinghouses, or any like structure, every four (4) beds shall constitute one (1) unit. 
(4)  For hotels, motels, or any like structure, every four (4) rooms shall constitute one (1) unit. 
(5)  For mobile home parks, each space designed or used to accommodate one (1) mobile home shall constitute one (1) unit. 
(6)  For schools, day-care centers, or any like structure, every fifteen (15) students shall constitute one (1) unit. 
(d)  For customers outside the town that are not users of town water, the charge shall be the same as for customers inside the town, plus fifty (50) percent. 
(e)  All users contributing more than five hundred thousand (500,000) gallons per month and whose waste strength is greater than two hundred (200) mg. BOD/l or two hundred (200) mg. TSS/l or twenty-five (25) mg. TKN/l, shall prepare and file with the town manager a report that shall include pertinent data relating to the wastewater characteristics, including the methods of sampling and measurement to obtain these data, and these data shall be used to calculate the user charge for that user. The employees of the town or designated agent shall have the right to gain access to the waste stream and take its own samples. Should the employees of the town or designated agent do so and should the results be substantially different as determined by the laboratory of the town wastewater treatment facility or designated certified laboratory from the data submitted by the user, the user charge for that user shall be revised for the next billing cycle period. 
(Ord. of 4-12-90(2); Ord. No. 25, 10-13-93; Ord. No. 32, 7-12-95; Ord. No. 38, 6-26-96; Ord. No. 45, 6-11-97; Ord. No. 64, 6-12-2002; Ord. No. 70, 1-9-2003; Ord. No. 131, 11-10-2010; Ord. No. 151, 11-9-2011; Ord. No. 155, 6-25-2011 ; Ord. No. 188 , 6-13-2018) 
Sec. 28-159. - Sewer surcharge. 
    For those users whose wastewater has a greater strength than normal domestic sewage, a surcharge in addition to the normal user charge will be collected. The surcharge for operation and maintenance including replacement is: 
BOD 
Normal charge × 0.43 × BOD mg/l 
200 mg/l TSS 
Normal charge × .026 × TSS mg/l 
200 mg/l TKN 
Normal charge × 0.17 × TKN mg/l 
25 mg/l  
(Ord. No. 9, 10-10-91; Ord. No. 25, 10-13-93; Ord. No. 32, 7-12-95; Ord. No. 38, 6-26-96) 
Sec. 28-160. - Sewer user charge review. 
    The town will review the user charges at least annually and revise the rates as necessary to ensure that adequate revenues are generated to pay the costs of operation and maintenance including replacement and that the system continues to provide for the proportional distribution of operation and maintenance including replacement costs among users and user classes. Notification of any proposed rate changes will be provided to those users impacted. 
(Ord. No. 25, 10-13-93) 
Secs. 28-161-28-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - WATER CLOSETS 

Sec. 28-176. - Defined. 
    For the purpose of this division, a sanitary closet is deemed to be one which is of construction and material as provided in this division. It shall not be accessible to flies or endanger the source of drinking water or be injurious to the health or comfort of the occupants or other persons. 
(Code 1973, § 28-47) 
Sec. 28-177. - Entrance. 
    The entrance of all water closets shall be made from a hall or other passageway when the building is occupied by one (1) or more persons not of the same family group; provided, that where two (2) or more family groups are located on the same floor or story, there shall be provided water closet facilities on each floor or story. 
(Code 1973, § 28-49) 
Sec. 28-178. - Dwellings, etc. 
    Buildings which are used for dwelling purposes, apartments and duplex houses shall have separate water closet facilities for each family unit. (See BOCA National Plumbing Code, Sec. P-1200.0.) 
(Code 1973, § 28-50) 
Sec. 28-179. - When septic tanks are allowed. 
    Houses to which the sewerage system is not accessible must be provided with a septic tank which will so dispose of human excreta as not to be accessible to flies or to animals and will not endanger a source of drinking water and which shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the requirements of the town manager or the local board of health. 
(Code 1973, § 28-51) 
Sec. 28-180. - When tenant may install at cost to landlord. 
    If any landlord or owner shall fail to supply any house or building with a sanitary privy or closet as required by this division, his tenant shall supply the same in conformity with the orders of the health officer or health inspector, and may deduct the cost from any sum due the landlord for rent. 
(Code 1973, § 28-52) 
Secs. 28-181-28-195. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PLUMBING[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Plumbing code, § 6-31 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 28-196. - Minimum plumbing requirements. 
(a)  Where a health or safety hazard exists on a premises by reason of an existing plumbing installation or lack thereof, the owner or his agent shall install additional plumbing or make such corrections as may be necessary to abate such nuisance and bring the plumbing installation within the provisions as set forth in the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(b)  Plumbing systems shall be installed in a workmanlike manner conforming to generally accepted good practice. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to install any used plumbing material or equipment, unless it conforms to the standards and regulations in the above-mentioned code. 
(d)  Every plumbing fixture, drain, appliance or appurtenance which is to receive water or waste, or discharge any liquid wastes or sewage shall discharge into the town sanitary drainage system when available and if not, shall discharge into a private disposal system approved by the health inspector. 
(e)  This section applies only to buildings constructed prior to September 1, 1973. 
(Code 1973, § 28-53) 
Sec. 28-197. - Minimum number of fixtures. 
    Plumbing fixtures shall be provided for the type of building occupancy and in the minimum numbers shown in Table P-1202.1 of the latest edition of the BOCA Basic Plumbing Code, and the latest supplement. This section applies only to buildings constructed prior to September 1, 1973. 
(Code 1973, § 29-54) 
Sec. 28-198. - Compartment requirements. 
(a)  Every water closet, bathtub or shower shall be installed in a room which will afford privacy to the occupant. Each water closet compartment shall be not less than thirty (30) inches in width and there shall be not less than twenty-one (21) inches clear space in front of each water closet. 
(b)  Minimum size of floor area of shower compartments shall be not less than one thousand and twenty-four (1,024) square inches with least dimension thirty (30) inches. Shower compartment floors and walls shall be finished with a smooth, hard and nonabsorbent surface to a height of not less than six (6) feet above the floor. Doors and panels of shower and bathtub enclosures shall be substantially constructed from approved shatter-resistant materials. Glazing in doors and panels of shower and bathtub enclosures shall comply with the following requirements: Minimum thickness and type of enclosures permitted-three-sixteenths-inch tempered, one-fourth-inch laminated, one-fourth-inch wired glass or one-eighth-inch approved plastic. This section applies only to buildings constructed prior to September 1, 1973. 
(Code 1973, § 28-55) 
Sec. 28-199. - Grease traps. 
    Any restaurant, hotel kitchens, bars, cafeteria or food processing operations that are hooked up to the town's sewer system shall be required to install a grease trap in compliance with the BOCA Basic Plumbing Code. 
(Code 1973, § 28-55.1) 
Sec. 28-200. - Water required; minimum specifications. 
    Every building equipped with plumbing fixtures and used for human occupancy or habitation shall be provided with a potable supply of cold water in the amounts and the pressures specified in the BOCA Plumbing Code. For permanent residences or buildings in which people are employed, hot water shall be provided. This section applies only to buildings constructed prior to September 1, 1973. 
(Code 1973, § 28-56) 
Secs. 28-201-28-215. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CROSS-CONNECTION AND BACKFLOW PREVENTION FOR WATERWORKS 

Sec. 28-216. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Air gap separation means the unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying pure water to a tank, plumbing fixture of other device and the rim of the receptacle. 
    Auxiliary water system means any water system on or available to the premises other than the waterworks. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor's waterworks, or water from a source such as wells, lakes or streams, or process fluids, or used water. They may be polluted or contaminated or objectionable, or constitute a water source or system over which the water purveyor does not have control. 
    Backflow means the flow of contaminants, pollutants, process fluids, used water, untreated waters, chemicals, gases, or nonpotable waters into any part of a waterworks. 
    Backflow prevention device means any approved device, method or type of construction intended to prevent backflow into a waterworks. 
    Consumer means the owner or person in control of any premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a waterworks. 
    Consumer's water system means any water system located on the consumer's premises, supplied by or in any manner connected to a waterworks. 
    Contamination means any introduction into pure water of microorganics, wastes, wastewater, undesirable chemicals or gases. 
    Cross-connection means any connection or structural arrangement, direct or indirect, to the waterworks whereby backflow can occur. 
    Degree of hazard is a term derived from an evaluation of the potential risk to health and the adverse effect upon the waterworks. 
    Double gate, double check valve assembly means an approved assembly composed of two (2) single, independently acting check valves including tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly and petcocks and test gauges for testing the watertightness of each check valve. 
    Health hazard means any condition, device or practice in a waterworks or its operation that creates, or may create, a danger to the health and well-being of the water consumer. 
    Interchangeable connection means an arrangement or device that will allow alternate but not simultaneous use of two (2) sources of water. 
    Pollution means the presence of any foreign substance (chemical, physical, radiological or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute an unnecessary risk or impair the usefulness of the water. 
    Pollution hazard means a condition through which an aesthetically objectionable or degrading material may enter the waterworks or a consumer's water system. 
    Process fluids means any fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted which would constitute a health, pollutional or system hazard if introduced into the waterworks. This includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Polluted or contaminated waters. 
(2)  Process waters. 
(3)  Used water originating from the waterworks which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality. 
(4)  Cooling waters. 
(5)  Contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes, streams or irrigation systems. 
(6)  Chemicals in solution or suspension. 
(7)  Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other processes, or for firefighting purposes. 
    Pure water or potable water means water fit for human consumption and use which is sanitary and normally free of minerals, organic substances, and toxic agents in excess of reasonable amounts of domestic usage in the area served and normally adequate in supply for the minimum health requirements of the persons served. 
    Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device means a device containing a minimum of two (2) independently acting check valves together with an automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located between the two (2) check valves. During normal flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two (2) checks shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure between the check valves at less than the supply pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with properly located test cocks. These devices must be of the approved type. 
    Service connection means the terminal end of a service line from the waterworks. If a meter is installed at the end of the service, then the service connection means that downstream end of the meter. 
    System hazard means a condition posing an actual, or threat of, damage to the physical properties of the waterworks or a consumer's water system. 
    Used water means any water supplied by a water purveyor from waterworks to a consumer's water system after it has passed through the service connection. 
    Water purveyor means an individual, group of individuals, partnership, firm, association, institution, corporation, municipal corporation, county or authority which supplies water to any person within this state from or by means of any waterworks. 
    Waterworks means all structures and appliances used in connection with the collection, storage, purification and treatment of water for drinking or domestic use and the distribution thereof to the public or residential consumers as set forth in Code of Virginia, Tit. 62.1, Ch. 4, § 62.1-45a. 
(Code 1973, § 28-61) 
Sec. 28-217. - Supplement. 
    This article is a supplement to the BOCA National Plumbing Code. 
(Code 1973, § 28-62) 
Sec. 28-218. - Commonwealth regulations adopted. 
    The town council hereby adopts by reference, Section 6.00, Cross-Connection and Backflow Prevention Control in Waterworks, Commonwealth of Virginia Waterworks Regulations. 
(Code 1973, § 28-57) 
Sec. 28-219. - Inspections to be made. 
    It shall be the duty of the town council to cause inspections to be made of properties served by the waterworks where cross-connections with the waterworks are deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential health hazards involved, shall be established by the building official in the cross-connection control and backflow prevention program and as approved by the state department of health. 
(Code 1973, § 28-58) 
Sec. 28-220. - Right of entry; supply of requested information; discontinuance of service; cross-connection and backflow devices. 
(a)  The representative of the town council, upon written request to the effected property owner or occupant, shall be granted the right to enter at any reasonable time properties served by a connection to the waterworks of the town for the purpose of inspecting the piping system for cross-connections. Also upon written request, the owner or occupant of such property shall furnish to such representative any requested information regarding the piping system on such property. Failure to grant the right to enter or to supply the requested information, as described herein, shall entitle the town to immediately and without notice discontinue municipal water service to the effected premises. In the event of such discontinuance, the town shall not restore such service until an inspection of the premises has been made or the requested information has been furnished, either or both; provided however, that the town may extend such discontinuance of service under the conditions described in subsection (b), below. 
(b)  The water purveyor may deny or discontinue the water service to a consumer if the required backflow prevention device is not installed. If it is found that the device has been removed or bypassed or if a cross-connection exists on the premises, or if the pressure in the waterworks is lowered below ten (10) psi gauge, the purveyor shall take positive action to insure that the waterworks is adequately protected at all times. Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the deficiencies have been corrected or eliminated in accordance with commonwealth waterworks regulations and to the satisfaction of the purveyor. 
(Code 1973, § 28-59) 
Sec. 28-221. - Potable water protection. 
    The potable water made available on the properties served by the waterworks shall be protected from possible contamination or pollution by enforcement of this article and the town plumbing code. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled as "water unsafe for drinking" in a conspicuous manner. 
(Code 1973, § 28-60) 
Secs. 28-222-28-234. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SEWER USE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 28-235. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide for the maximum possible beneficial public use of the Town of Farmville treatment works through regulation of sewer construction, sewer use and wastewater discharges, to provide for equitable distribution of the costs of the treatment works, and to provide procedures for complying with the requirements contained herein. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 28-236. - Scope. 
(a)  The definitions of terms used in this article are found in section 28-243. The provisions of this article shall apply to the discharge of all wastewater to treatment works of the town. This article provides for use of the town's treatment works, regulation of sewer construction, control of the quantity and quality of wastewater discharged, wastewater pretreatment, equitable distribution of costs, assurance that existing customers' capacity will not be preempted, approval of sewer construction plans, issuance of user permits, minimum sewer connection standards and conditions, and penalties and other procedures in cases of violation of this article. 
(b)  This article shall apply to the Town of Farmville and to persons outside the town who are, by contract, permit or agreement with the town users of the town's treatment works. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 28-237. - Administration. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, the town manager shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 28-238. - Fees and charges. 
(a)  All fees and charges payable under the provisions of this article shall be paid to the town. Such fees and charges shall be as set forth herein or as established in the latest edition of the Town's Treatment Works User Charge Ordinance. 
(b)  All user fees, penalties and charges collected under this article (and the Treatment Works User Charge Ordinance) shall be used for the sole purpose of constructing, operating or maintaining the treatment works of the town, or the retirement of debt incurred for same. 
(c)  All fees and charges payable under the provisions of this article are due and payable upon the receipt of notice of charges. Unpaid charges shall become delinquent and shall be subject to penalty and interest charges as provided for in the latest edition of the Town's Treatment Works User Charge Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 28-239. - Inspections. 
(a)  The town manager or authorized state or federal officials, bearing the proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all premises where an effluent source or treatment system is located at any reasonable time for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and/or copying records of the wastewater discharge to ensure that discharge to the treatment works is in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The town manager or authorized town designee bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all private property through which the town holds an easement for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any of the town's treatment works lying within the easement. All entry and any subsequent work on the easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(c)  While performing any necessary work on private properties referred to in subsections (a) and (b) above, the town manager or authorized designee, shall observe all safety and occupational rules established by the owner or occupant of the property and applicable to the premises. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 28-240. - Vandalism. 
    No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the town's treatment works. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine in an amount not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 28-241. - Severability. 
    If any provision of these regulations, or the application of any provision of these regulations to any person or circumstances, is held invalid, the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances, and the remainder of the regulations, shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 28-242. - Amendments of the ordinance. 
    Public notice shall be given in accordance with applicable provisions of the Town Charter, other town ordinances, state and federal law, prior to adoption of any amendments of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 28-243. - Specific definitions. 
    Unless the context of usage indicates otherwise, the meaning of specific terms in this article shall be as follows: 
    Act shall mean the Federal Clean Water Act, 33. U.S.C. 1251 et seq. 
    Approval authority shall mean the Executive Director or Director of the State Water Control Board. 
    ASTM shall mean the American Society for Testing and Materials. 
    Authorized representative of industrial user shall mean: 
(1)  A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice president, if the industrial user is a corporation; 
(2)  A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or sole proprietorship respectively; or 
(3)  A duly authorized representative of the individual designated in (1) or (2) above, if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge to the POTW originates. The authorization must be submitted to the town manager prior to or together with any reports to be signed by the authorized representative. 
    BOD (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) shall mean the quantity of oxygen used in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at 20 degrees C, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    Building sewer shall mean the extension from a building wastewater plumbing facility to the treatment works. 
    Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard shall mean any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Sections 307(a) and 307(c) of the Act, which apply to specific categories of industrial users which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471. 
    Combined sewer shall mean a sewer intended to receive both wastewater and storm or surface water. 
    Day shall mean the 24-hour period beginning at 12:01 a.m. 
    Discharger shall mean person or persons, firm, company, industry or other similar sources of wastewater who introduce such into the POTW. 
    Easement shall mean an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
    EPA shall mean the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
    Establishment shall mean any industrial establishment, mill, factory, tannery, paper or pulp mill, mine, coal mine, colliery, breaker or coal processing operations, quarry, oil refinery, boat, vessel and each and every other industry or plant or works the operation of which produces industrial wastes or other wastes or which may otherwise alter the physical, chemical or biological properties of any state waters. 
    Existing source shall mean any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment standards which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Act. 
    Garbage shall mean the solid animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the domestic or commercial handling, storage, dispensing, preparation, cooking and serving of foods. 
    Groundwater shall mean water beneath the land surface in the zone of saturation. 
    Indirect discharge shall mean the introduction of (nondomestic) pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act. 
    Industrial user or significant discharger shall mean a source of indirect discharge or a nondomestic discharge to a treatment works. 
    Industrial wastes shall mean liquid or other wastes resulting from any process of industry, manufacture, trade or business, or from the development of any natural resources. 
    Interference shall mean an inhibition or disruption of the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, which clearly causes, in whole or in part, a violation of any requirement of the POTW's VPDES permit, including those discharges that prevent the use or disposal of sludge by the POTW in accordance with any federal or state laws, regulations, permits or sludge management plans. 
    Manager shall mean the town manager or an authorized designee. 
    May shall be permissible. 
    Municipality shall mean a city, county, town, district association, authority or other public body created under the law and having jurisdiction over disposal of sewage, industrial or other wastes. 
    Natural outlet shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or any other body of surface or groundwater. 
    New source shall have the same meaning as provided in 40 CFR Part 403.3(k) (1990). 
    Owner shall mean the Commonwealth or any of its political subdivisions, including, but not limited to, sanitation district commissions and authorities, and public or private institutions, corporations, associations, firms or companies organized or existing under the laws of this or any other state or country, or any person or group of persons acting individually or as a group. 
    Pass-through shall mean the discharge of pollutants through a POTW into state waters in quantities or concentrations which are a cause in whole or in part of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's VPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
    Person shall mean any individual, firm, company, association, society, partnership, corporation, governmental entity or other similar organization, agency or group. 
    pH shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration expressed in grams per liter of solution as determined by standard methods. 
    Pollutant shall mean any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical waste, chemical waste, industrial waste, biological materials, radioactive material, heat wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, agricultural and industrial waste, the characteristics of the wastewater (i.e. pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, odor). 
    POTW (denoting Publicly Owned Treatment Works) shall mean any sewage treatment works that is owned by a state or municipality. Sewers, pipes or other conveyances are included in this definition only if they convey wastewater to a POTW providing treatment. 
    Pretreatment shall mean the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to discharge to the town treatment works. 
    Pretreatment requirement shall mean any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on an industrial user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
    Pretreatment standard shall mean any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) or the Act, which applies to industrial users. 
    Prohibited discharges or prohibited discharge standards shall mean absolute prohibition against the discharge of certain substances. These prohibitions appear in sections 28-262 and 28-263. 
    Properly shredded garbages shall mean garbage that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under flow conditions normally prevailing in the treatment works, with no particle greater than one-half (1/2) inch in any dimension. 
    Residential user (Class I) shall mean all premises used only for human residency and which is connected to the treatment works. 
    Sanitary wastewater shall mean wastewater discharged from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings, office buildings, industrial plants or institutions. 
    Shall shall be mandatory. 
    Significant industrial user shall be defined as follows: 
(1)  Has a process wastewater* flow of 25,000 gallons or more per average work day; 
(*Excludes sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater) 
(2)  Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five (5) percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW; 
(3)  Is subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or 
(4)  Has significant impact, either singularly or in combination with other significant dischargers, on the treatment works or the quality of its effluent. 
    Slug load shall mean any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standard in section 28-263 or any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge. 
    Standard methods shall mean the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater , published by the American Public Health Association, Water Pollution Control Federation and American Water Works Association. 
    State shall mean the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    Storm sewer shall mean a sewer for conveying storm, surface and other waters, which is not intended to be transported to a treatment works. 
    Surface water shall mean: 
(1)  All waters which are currently used, were used in the past, or may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce, including all waters which are subject to the ebb and flow of the tide; 
(2)  All interstate waters, including interstate "wetlands"; 
(3)  All other waters such as inter/intrastate lakes, rivers, streams (including intermittent streams), mudflats, sandflats, "wetlands", sloughs, prairie potholes, wet meadows, playa lakes, or natural ponds the use, degradation, or destruction of which would affect or could affect interstate or foreign commerce including any such waters: 
a.  Which are or could be used by interstate or foreign travelers for recreational or other purposes; 
b.  From which fish or shellfish are or could be taken and sold in interstate or foreign commerce; or 
c.  Which are used or could be used for industrial purposes by industries in interstate commerce; 
(4)  All impoundments of waters otherwise defined as surface waters under this definition; 
(5)  Tributaries of waters identified in paragraphs (3)a. and (4) of this definition; 
(6)  The territorial sea; and 
(7)  "Wetlands" adjacent to waters, other than waters that are themselves wetlands, identified in paragraphs (1) - (6) of this definition. 
    Suspended solids shall mean the total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water or wastewater as determined by standard methods. 
    Toxics shall mean any of the pollutants designated by federal regulations pursuant to Section 307(a) (1) of the Act. 
    Treatment facility shall mean only those mechanical power driven devices necessary for the transmission and treatment of pollutants (e.g., pump stations, unit treatment processes). 
    Treatment works shall mean any devices and systems used for the storage, treatment, recycling and/or reclamation of sewage or liquid industrial waste, or other waste necessary to recycle or reuse water, including intercepting sewers, outfall sewers, sewage collection systems, individual systems, pumping, power and other equipment and their appurtenances; extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions or alterations; and any works, including land that will be an integral part of the treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from such treatment; or any other method or system used for preventing, abating, reducing, storing, treating, separating, or disposing of municipal waste or industrial waste, including waste in combined sewer water and sanitary sewer systems. 
    User shall mean a source of wastewater discharge into a POTW. 
    User permit shall mean a document issued by the POTW to the user that permits the connection and/or introduction of wastes into the treatment works under the provisions of this article. 
    VPDES shall mean Virginia Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit program, as administrated by the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    Wastewater shall mean a combination of liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industries, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water or storm water that may be present. 
    WPCF shall mean the water pollution control federation. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 28-244. - General definitions. 
    Unless the context of usage indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms in this article and not defined in section 28-243 above, shall be as defined in the glossary: Water and Wastewater Control Engineering prepared by Joint Editorial Board of the American Public Health Association, American Society of Civil Engineers, American Water Works Association, and Water Pollution Control Federation, Copyright 1969. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
DIVISION 3. - USE OF CITY'S TREATMENT WORKS AND TREATMENT FACILITY 

Sec. 28-245. - Waste disposal. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any condition that may be considered as an unsanitary or unhygienic manner on public or private property within the town, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said town, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 28-246. - Wastewater discharges. 
    It shall be unlawful under state and federal law to discharge without a VPDES permit to any natural outlet within the Town of Farmville, or in any area under its jurisdiction. Wastewater discharges to the town's treatment works are not authorized unless permitted by [the] town manager in accordance with provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 28-247. - Wastewater disposal. 
    Except as provided in this article, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 28-248. - Connection to treatment works required. 
    The owner of any house, building, or property which is used for commercial, industrial and/or residential purposes, abutting on any street, alley, or rights-of-way in which there is or may be located a sewer connected to the treatment works of the town, is required at the owner's expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly to the proper sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within sixty (60) days after notice that sewer is available within one hundred (100) feet/meters of the property line. This section shall not apply to any person served by a privately constructed, owned, operated, and maintained sewer and treatment facility which discharges directly to a natural outlet in accordance with the provisions of this article and applicable state and federal laws. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
DIVISION 4. - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 28-249. - Connection permit. 
(a)  No person shall uncover, make any connections with, use, alter or disturb any wastewater sewer or a storm sewer without first obtaining a written permit from the town manager or authorized designee. 
(b)  There shall be two (2) classes of permits for connections to the town's treatment works and treatment facilities. 
Class I-Residential 
Class II-Industrial 
In all cases, the owner shall make application for a permit to connect to the town's treatment works on a form furnished by the town. The permit application shall be supplemented by wastewater information required to administer this article. A permit and inspection fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for a Class I, or fifty dollars ($50.00) for a Class II connection permit shall be paid to the town at the time the application is filed. 
(c)  Connections to a storm sewer shall be subject to a permit and inspection fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). Such connections shall be subject to the provisions of this article and the approval of the town manager. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 28-250. - Connection costs. 
    The costs and expenses incidental to the building sewer installation and connection to the town's treatment works shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the town from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 28-251. - Separate connections required. 
    A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court yard or driveway, the building sewer serving the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. The town assumes no obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any single building sewer which serves two (2) buildings. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 28-252. - Existing building sewers. 
    Existing building sewers may be used for connection of new buildings only when they are found, on examination and testing by the town manager to meet the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 28-253. - Building sewer design. 
    The size, slope, alignment, construction materials, trench excavation and backfill methods, pipe placement, jointing and testing methods used in the construction and installation of a building sewer shall conform to the building and plumbing code or other applicable requirements of the town. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 28-254. - Building sewer elevation. 
    Whenever practicable, the building sewer shall be brought to a building at an elevation below the basement floor. In buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the town's treatment works, wastewater carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to a building sewer draining to the town's sewer. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 28-255. - Surface runoff and groundwater drains. 
(a)  No person shall connect roof, foundation, areaway, parking lot, roadway or other surface runoff or groundwater drains to any sewer which is connected to a treatment works unless such connection is authorized in writing by the town manager. The connection of such drains shall conform to codes specified in section 28-256(a) or as specified by the manager as a condition of approval of such connection. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (a) above, roof, foundation, areaway, parking lot, roadway or other surface runoff or groundwater drains shall discharge to natural outlets or storm sewers. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 28-256. - Conformance to applicable codes. 
    The connection of a building sewer into a treatment works shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable requirements of the town, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the Commonwealth of Virginia Sewerage Regulations, Uniform Building Code of Virginia and American Society of Testing Materials. The connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved in writing by the town manager before installation. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 28-257. - Connection inspection. 
    The applicant for a building sewer or other drainage connection permit shall notify the town manager when such sewer or drainage connection is ready for inspection prior to its connection to the town's treatment works. Such connection inspections and testing as deemed necessary by the town manager and shall be made by the town manager's authorized designee. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 28-258. - Excavation guards and property restoration. 
    Excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the town. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 28-259. - Protection of capacity for existing users. 
    The town manager shall not issue a permit for any class of connection to the town's treatment works or treatment facilities unless there is sufficient capacity, not legally committed to other users, in the treatment works and treatment facilities to convey and adequately treat the quantity of wastewater which the requested connection will add to the treatment works or treatment facility. The town manager may permit such a connection if there are legally binding commitments to provide the needed capacity. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
DIVISION 5. - CONDITIONS TO USE THE TOWN'S TREATMENT WORKS 

Sec. 28-260. - Special uses of treatment works. 
    All discharges of storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage or other waters not intended to be treated in the treatment facility shall be made to storm sewers or natural outlets designed for such discharges, except as authorized under section 28-255. Any connection, drain, or arrangement which will permit any such waters to enter any other sewer shall be deemed to be a violation of this section and this article. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 28-261. - Industrial user, general prohibition upon. 
    An industrial user shall not introduce any pollutants into the town's treatment works which will pass through or interfere with the operation or performance of the treatment facilities. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 28-262. - Restricted discharges. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any of the town's treatment works any substances, materials, waters or wastes in such quantities or concentrations which do or are likely to: 
(1)  Create a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW including, but not limited to, gasoline, benzene, naptha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas, wastestream with a closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit or sixty (60) degrees Centigrade using test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; 
(2)  Cause corrosive damage or hazard to structures, equipment or personnel of the wastewater facilities, but in no case discharges with the following properties: 
Having a pH lower than 5.0 or greater than 11.0; 
(3)  Cause obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the operation of treatment facilities due to accumulation of solid or viscous materials; 
(4)  Constitute a rate of discharge or substantial deviation from normal rates of discharge, ("slug discharge"), sufficient to cause interference in the operation and performance of the treatment facilities; 
(5)  Contain heat in amounts which are likely to accelerate the biodegradation of wastes, causing the formation of excessive amounts of hydrogen sulfide in the treatment works or inhibit biological activity in the treatment facilities, but in no case shall the discharge of heat cause the temperature in the town wastewater sewer to exceed sixty-five (65) degrees C (150 degrees F) or the temperature of the influent to the treatment facilities to exceed forty (40) degrees C (104 degrees F) unless the facilities can accommodate such heat and the town has obtained prior approval from the approval authority; 
(6)  Contain more than one hundred (100) milligrams per liter of nonbiodegradable oils of mineral or petroleum origin; 
(7)  Contain floatable oils, fat or grease; 
(8)  Contain toxic gases, vapors or fumes, malodorous gas or substance in quantities that may cause a public nuisance or cause acute human health or safety problems; 
(9)  Contain radioactive wastes in harmful quantities as defined by applicable state and federal regulations; 
(10)  Contain any garbage that has not been properly shredded; 
(11)  Contain any odor or color producing substances exceeding concentration limits which may be established by the town manager for purposes meeting the town's VPDES permit; 
(12)  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradeable cutting oil or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; 
(13)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants except at designated discharge points. 
(b)  If, in establishing discharge restrictions, discharge limits, or pretreatment standards pursuant to the division, the town manager establishes concentration limits to be met by a user, the town manager in lieu of concentration limits, may establish mass limits of comparable stringency for an individual user at the request of such user. Upon approval by the state such limits should become pretreatment standards. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 28-263. - Categorical pretreatment standards. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any treatment works, wastewaters containing substances subject to an applicable categorical pretreatment standard promulgated by EPA in excess of the quantity prescribed in such applicable pretreatment standards except as otherwise provided in this section. Compliance with such applicable pretreatment standards shall be within three (3) years of the date the standard is promulgated; provided however, compliance with a categorical pretreatment standard for new sources shall be required upon commencement of discharge to the treatment works. 
(b)  The town manager shall notify any industrial user affected by the provisions of this section and establish an enforceable compliance schedule for each. 
(c)  No person shall discharge trucked hazardous wastes to the town's treatment works. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 28-264. - Special agreements. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed as preventing any agreement or arrangement between the town and any user of the treatment works and treatment facility whereby wastewater of unusual strength or character (only in terms of BOD and/or suspended solids) is accepted into the system and specially treated subject to additional payments or user charges as may be applicable. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 28-265. - Water and energy conservation. 
    The conservation of water and energy shall be encouraged by the town manager. In establishing discharge restrictions upon users, the town manager shall take into account already implemented or planned conservation steps revealed by the user. Upon request of the town manager, each user will provide the town manager with pertinent information showing that the quantities of substances or pollutants have not been and will not be increased as a result of the conservation steps. Upon such a showing to the satisfaction of the town manager, he shall make adjustments to discharge restrictions, which have been based on concentrations to reflect the conservation steps. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 28-266. - Excessive discharge. 
    No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards, or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the town or state. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 28-267. - Accidental discharges (slug load). 
(a)  Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this article. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the town for review, and shall be approved by the town before construction of the facility. No user who commences contribution to the POTW after the effective date of this ordinance shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the town. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article. In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the POTW of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions. 
(b)  Within five (5) days following an accidental discharge; the user shall submit to the town manager a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the treatment works and treatment facility, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law. 
(c)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall insure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
DIVISION 6. - INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGERS 

Sec. 28-268. - Information requirements. 
(a)  All industrial dischargers shall file with the town wastewater information deemed necessary by the town manager for determination of compliance with this article, the town's VPDES permit conditions, and state and federal law. Such information shall be provided by completion of a questionnaire designed and supplied by the town manager and by supplements thereto as may be necessary. Information requested in the questionnaire and designated by the discharger as confidential is subject to the conditions of confidentiality as set out in section 28-268(c). 
(b)  Where a person owns, operates or occupies properties designated as an industrial discharger at more than one location, separate information submittals shall be made for each location as may be required by the town manager. 
(c)  Information and data on an industrial user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the town that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this article, the Virginia Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (VPDES) Permit, state disposal system permit and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. 
    Information accepted by the town as confidential, shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency or to the general public by the town until and unless a ten-day notification is given to the user. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 28-269. - User permits. 
(a)  All significant industrial users proposing to connect to or to contribute to the treatment works shall obtain a user permit before connecting to or contributing to the treatment works. All existing significant industrial users connected to or contributing to the treatment works shall obtain a user permit within one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of this article. 
(b)  Significant industrial users required to obtain a permit shall complete and file with the town an application in the form prescribed by the town, and accompanied by a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). Existing significant industrial users shall apply for a permit within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this article, and proposed new significant industrial users shall apply at least ninety (90) days prior to connecting to or contributing to the treatment works. In support of the application, the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and location, (if different from address); 
(2)  SIC number according to the Standards Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1987, as amended; 
(3)  Wastewater constituents and characteristics including but not limited to those mentioned in article V, section 2 of this ordinance as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory, sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136, as amended; 
(4)  Time and duration of contribution; 
(5)  Average daily and peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations if any; 
(6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections and appurtenances by size, location and elevation; 
(7)  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises including all materials which are or could be discharged; 
(8)  The nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge. A statement identifying the applicable pretreatment standards and requirements, and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional O&M and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards; 
(9)  If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards; the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule: 
a.  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.), 
b.  No increment referred to in paragraph a. shall exceed nine (9) months, 
c.  Not later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the town manager including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress; the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than one (1) year elapse between such progress reports to the town manager. 
(10)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production; 
(11)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); 
(12)  Number of type of employees and hours of operation of plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system; 
(13)  Any other information as may be deemed by the town to be necessary to evaluate the user permit application; 
    The town will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the town may issue a user permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein. 
(c)  Within nine (9) months of the promulgation of a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, the user permit of users subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standard if they are more restrictive than the local limits developed by the POTW within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user, subject to a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, has not previously submitted an application for a user permit as required by subsection (b), the user shall apply for a user permit within one hundred eighty (180) days after the promulgation of the applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standard. In addition, the user with an existing user permit shall submit to the town manager within one hundred eighty (180) days after the promulgation of an applicable Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standard the information required by paragraph (8) and (9) of subsection (b). 
(d)  Permit conditions. User permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this article and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the town permits may contain the following: 
(1)  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer; 
(2)  Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics. (Permits must contain this item); 
(3)  Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization. (Permits must contain this item); 
(4)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities; 
(5)  Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedule; 
(6)  Compliance schedules; 
(7)  Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports. See section 28-270. (Permits must contain this item); 
(8)  Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the town, and affording the town access thereto. (Permits must contain this item); 
(9)  Requirements for notification of the town for any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the treatment works. (Permits must contain this item); 
(10)  Requirements for immediate notification of slug discharges. (Permits must contain this item); 
(11)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the town to ensure compliance with this article; 
(12)  Statement of applicable remedies. 
(e)  User permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) (optional) years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the town during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements as identified in this section are modified or other must cause exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(f)  User permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A user permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold by the user to a new owner, new user, different premises or a new or changed operation without the approval of the town. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing permit in the interim prior to the issuance of the respective new permit. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 28-270. - Reporting requirements for permittee. 
(a)  Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the wastewater treatment facilities, any user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the town manager a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment standards and requirements and the average and maximum daily flow for these process units in the user facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards or requirements. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional O&M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. In addition, the report shall contain the results of any sampling and analysis of the discharge as specified in section 28-270(b)(2) below. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the user, and certified to by a qualified professional. 
(b)  (1) 
Any user subject to a pretreatment standard, after the compliance date of such pretreatment standard, or, in the case of such pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a new source, after commencement of the discharge into the treatment works, shall submit to the town manager during the months of June and December, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the town manager, a report indicating the nature and concentration, of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall include a record of all daily flows which during the reporting period exceeded the average daily flow reported. At the discretion of the town manager and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the town manager may agree to alter the months during which the above reports are to be submitted. 
(2)  The town manager may impose mass limitations on users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations are appropriate. In such cases, the report required by subparagraph (1) of this paragraph shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user. These reports shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration, or production and mass where requested by the town manager, of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards. The frequency of monitoring shall be prescribed in the permit. All analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by EPA pursuant to Section 304(9) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136 and amendments thereto or with any other test procedures approved by EPA. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by EPA. All samples analyzed by this method should be reported. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Editor's note- Where 40 CFR, Part 136 does not include a sampling or analytical technique for the pollutant in question sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with sampling and analytical procedures approved. 
Sec. 28-271. - Provision for monitoring. 
(a)  When required by the town manager, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying Class II wastewater discharges shall provide suitable access and such necessary meters and other devices in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastewater. Such access shall be in a readily and safely accessible location and shall be provided in accordance with plans approved by the town manager. The access shall be provided and maintained at the owner's expense so as to be safe and accessible at reasonable times. 
(b)  The town manager shall consider such factors as the volume and strength of discharge, rate of discharge, quantities of toxic materials in the discharge, treatment facility removal capabilities and cost effectiveness in determining whether or not access and equipment for monitoring Class II wastewater discharges shall be required. 
(c)  Where the town manager determines access and equipment for monitoring or measuring Class II wastewater discharges is not practicable, reliable, or cost effective, the town manager may specify alternative methods of determining the characteristics of the wastewater discharges which will, in the town manager's judgement, provide a reasonably reliable measurement of such characteristics. 
(d)  Measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of wastewater required by this article shall conform to 40 CFR Part 136 and be performed by a qualified laboratory. When such analyses are required of a discharger, the discharger may, in lieu of using the town's laboratory, make arrangement with any qualified laboratory, including that of the discharger, to perform such analyses. 
(e)  Fees for any given measurement, test or analysis of wastewater required by this article and performed by the town shall be the same for all classes of dischargers, regardless of the quantity or quality of the discharge and shall reflect only direct cost. Costs of analyses performed by an independent laboratory at the option of discharger shall be borne directly by the discharger. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 28-272. - Costs of damage. 
    If the drainage or discharge from any establishment causes a deposit, obstruction or damage to any of the town's treatment works or treatment facility, the town manager shall cause the deposit or obstruction to be promptly removed or cause the damage to be promptly repaired. The cost for such work, including materials, labor, and supervision shall be borne by the person causing such deposit, obstruction or damage. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
DIVISION 7. - PRETREATMENT 

Sec. 28-273. - Wastewaters with special characteristics. 
(a)  While the town manager should initially rely upon the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards to protect wastewater facilities or receiving waters, if any wastewater which contains substances or possesses characteristics shown to have deleterious effect upon the treatment works or treatment facilities, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or constitutes a public nuisance or hazard, is discharged or is proposed for discharge to the wastewater sewers, the town manager or his authorized designee may require any or all of the following: 
(1)  Pretreatment by the user or discharger to a condition acceptable for discharge to the treatment works; 
(2)  Control over the quantities and rates of discharge; 
(3)  The development of compliance schedules to meet any applicable pretreatment requirements; 
(4)  The submission of reports necessary to assure compliance with applicable pretreatment requirements; 
(5)  Carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring necessary to determine compliance with applicable pretreatment requirements; 
(6)  Obtain remedies for noncompliance by any user. Such remedies may include injunctive relief, the civil penalties specified in division IX of this article, or appropriate criminal penalties; or 
(7)  Reject the wastewater if evidence discloses that discharge will create unreasonable hazards or have unreasonable deleterious effects on the treatment works or treatment facilities. 
(b)  When considering the above alternatives, the town manager shall assure that conditions of the town's permit are met. The town manager shall also take into consideration cost effectiveness, the economic impact of the alternatives, and the willful noncompliance of the discharger. If the town manager allows the pretreatment or equalization of wastewater flows, the installation of the necessary facilities shall be subject to review. The town manager shall review and recommend any appropriate changes to the program, within thirty (30) days of submittal. 
(c)  Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or required for any wastewater, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation at the expense of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 28-274. - Compliance with pretreatment requirements. 
    Persons required to pretreat wastewater in accordance with section 28-273 above, shall provide a statement, reviewed by an authorized representative of the user and certified by such representative indicating whether applicable pretreatment requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, describe the additional operation and maintenance or additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the pretreatment requirements. If additional pretreatment or operation and maintenance will be required to meet the pretreatment requirements the user shall submit a plan (including schedules) to the town manager as described in section 28-269(b)(9). The plan (including schedules) shall be consistent with applicable conditions of the town's permit or other local, state or federal laws. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 28-275. - Monitoring requirements. 
    Discharges of wastewater to the town's treatment works from the facilities of any user shall be monitored in accordance with provisions of the user's permit. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 28-276. - Effect of federal law. 
    In the event that the federal government promulgates a regulation for a given new or existing user in a specific industrial subcategory that establishes pretreatment standards or establishes that such user is exempt from pretreatment standards, such federal regulations shall immediately supersede section 28-273, if they are more stringent. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 28-277. - Certification. 
    All reports and permit applications must be signed by the industrial user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional O&M and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
DIVISION 8. - WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES AND INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY 

Sec. 28-278. - Wastewater service charges. 
    Charges and fees for the use of the public treatment works and treatment facility shall be based upon the actual use of such system, or contractual obligations for a level of use in excess of current actual use. Property value may be used to collect the amount due as permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 28-279. - Industrial cost recovery. 
    Users of the town's treatment works and treatment facilities will also be assessed industrial cost recovery charges as required by law. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 28-280. - Determination of system use. 
(a)  The use of the town's treatment works and treatment facilities shall be based upon actual measurement and analysis of each user's wastewater discharge, in accordance with provisions of section 28-271 to the extent such measurement and analysis is considered by the town manager to be feasible and cost-effective. 
(b)  Where measurement and analysis is considered not feasible, determination of each user's use of the treatment works and treatment facilities shall be based upon the quantity of water used whether purchased from a public water utility or obtained from a private source, or an alternative means as provided by subsection (c) below. 
(c)  The town manager when determining actual use of the town's treatment works and treatment facilities based on water use, shall consider consumptive, evaporative, or other use of water which results in a significant difference between a discharger's water use and wastewater discharge. Where appropriate, such consumptive water use may be metered to aid in determining actual use of the treatment works and treatment facilities. The meters used to measure such water uses shall be of a type and installed in a manner approved by the town manager. 
The actual average water use by each residential user (Class I) during the three (3) months of (January, February and March) shall be used as the measure of each respective residential user's actual use of the sewer system throughout the year. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
DIVISION 9. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 28-281. - Harmful contributions. 
(a)  The town may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or a user permit when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the town, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of person, to the environment, causes interference to the treatment facilities or causes the town to violate any condition of its VPDES permit. 
(b)  Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or the user permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the town shall take such steps as deemed necessary including immediate severance of the sewer connection and/or the seeking of legal and equitable relief in the circuit court, to prevent or minimize damage to the wastewater treatment facilities or endangerment to any individuals. The town shall reinstate the user permit and/or the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the non-complying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the town within fifteen (15) days of the date of occurrence. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 28-282. - Revocation of permit. 
    Any user who violates the following conditions of this article, or applicable state and federal regulations, is subject to having his permit revoked in accordance with the procedures of division IX of this article for: 
(1)  Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of his discharge; 
(2)  Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(3)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or 
(4)  Violation of conditions of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 28-283. - Notification of violation. 
    Whenever the town finds that any user has violated or is violating this article, user permit, or any prohibition, limitation or requirements contained herein, the town may serve upon such person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice, a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the town by the user. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 28-284. - Show cause hearing. 
(a)  The town may order any user who causes or allows an unauthorized discharge to show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Such hearings shall be preceded by a notice being served on the user specifying the time and place of the hearing, the reasons why the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the user to show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation. 
(b)  The town manager may conduct the hearing and take the evidence or may designate any of its members or any officer or employee of the public works department to: 
(1)  Issue in the name of the town manager notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearing; 
(2)  Take the evidence; 
(3)  Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the town manager for action thereon. 
(c)  At any hearing held pursuant to this article, testimony taken must be under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the transcript costs. 
(d)  After the town manager has reviewed the evidence, he may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances shall have been installed on existing treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 28-285. - Legal action. 
    If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the town's treatment works contrary to the provisions of this article, applicable federal or state pretreatment requirements, or any order of the town or if any industrial user refuses access to the manager or his designee for purposes of inspection, the town attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the circuit court. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 28-286. - Penalties. 
    The town manager shall have the authority to assess on any user who is found to have violated an order of the manager or who failed to comply with any provision of this article and the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder a penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day per violation. Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Sec. 28-287. - Falsifying information. 
    Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, or user permit, or who falsifies any monitoring device or method required under this article, shall upon conviction, be guilty of a Class I misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 19, 2-10-93) 
Chapter 29 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Adoption of master plan, establishment of districts, setback lines, uses, locations, etc., § 24. 
Cross reference- Animals, Ch. 5; buildings, Ch. 6; cable television, Ch. 7; cemeteries, Ch. 8; junkyards, car lots and automobile graveyards, Ch. 13; licenses and permits, Ch. 14; peddlers and solicitors, Ch. 19; planning, Ch. 20; subdivisions, Ch. 24. 
State Law reference- Notice of planning or zoning matters, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-33.1; zoning, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-486 et seq.; miscellaneous provisions relating to planning, subdivision of land and zoning, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-499 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 29-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    Abattoir means a commercial slaughterhouse. 
    Accessory use or structure means a subordinate use or structure customarily incidental to and located on the same lot occupied by the main use or building but not attached to the main building. Attached structures shall be considered part of the main building. 
    Acreage means a parcel of land, regardless of area, described by metes and bounds which is not a numbered lot on any recorded subdivision plat. 
    Administrator means the official charged with the enforcement of this chapter. He may be any appointed or elected official who is by formal resolution designated the position by the governing body. He may serve with or without compensation as determined by the governing body. 
    Alteration means any change in the total floor area, use, adaptability or external appearance of an existing structure. 
    Area means that portion of a parcel of land which the owner or developer demonstrates is usable by the inhabitants or future inhabitants of the parcel. Excessive slopes and floodplains may be deemed unusable. 
    Automobile graveyard means any lot or place which is exposed to the weather upon which more than five (5) motor vehicles of any kind, incapable of being operated, and which it would not be economically practical to make operative, are placed, located or found. 
State Law reference- "Automobile graveyard" defined, Code of Virginia, § 33.1-348(b)(2). 
    Basement means a story having part but not more than one-half of its height below grade. A basement shall be counted as a story for the purpose of height regulations if it is used for business purposes or for dwelling purposes by other than a janitor employed on the premises. 
    Bed and breakfast (B and B). means a temporary lodging facility, which serves as the property owner's and B and B manager's primary residence and shall be permitted to have up to five (5) guest rooms wherein food service shall be limited to breakfast and light fare for guests of the B and B only. 
    Boardinghouse and roominghouse means a single detached dwelling, where the property owner/lessee must reside on the premises, and who has obtained the necessary business license, as required, and where, for compensation, and prearrangement for definite periods of time, lodging and/or meals shall be provided for not more than four (4) persons, not of the same family as the resident owner. There shall be no more than one (1) boarding or rooming house on each recorded lot. Operation of a boarding or rooming house shall not be deemed a home occupation. 
    Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the housing or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels. 
    Building, accessory, means a subordinate structure customarily incidental to and located on the same lot occupied by the main structure. No such accessory structure shall be used for housekeeping purposes. 
    Building, height of, means the vertical distance measured from the level of the curb or the established curb grade opposite the middle of the front of the structure to the highest point of the roof; if a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the mean height between the eaves and ridge of a gable, hip, or gambrel roof. For buildings set back from the street line, the height shall be measured from the average elevation of the ground surface along the front of the building. 
    Building, main, means the principal structure or one (1) of the principal buildings on a lot or the building or one (1) of the principal buildings housing the principal use of the lot. 
    Church means a structure originally designed for worship and normal church function, not to include converted residential structures. 
    Commission means the planning commission of the town. 
    Condominium means a multiple dwelling or development where individual property owners typically own the dwelling unit in which they live, but the land the structure is situated on is owned by some other individual. 
    District means districts as referred to in Code of Virginia, § 15.1-486. 
    Domestic violence shelter means a temporary safe housing shelter for those who experience domestic violence. 
    Dump heap (trash pile) means any area of one hundred (100) square feet or more lying within one thousand (1,000) feet of a state highway, a residence, a dairy barn, a food handling establishment where trash, garbage, or other waste or scrap material is dumped or deposited without being covered by a sanitary fill. 
    Dwelling means a structure which is designed for use for residential purposes, except hotels, boardinghouses, lodginghouses, tourist cabins, apartments and mobile homes. 
    Dwelling, condominium means a building or portion thereof, designed for ownership and occupancy by one (1) family which is connected to another structure similarly designed by a common party wall constructed to meet minimum firewall specifications as specified in the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, as amended. 
    Dwelling, multiple-family, means a structure arranged or designed to be occupied by three (3) or more families and any structure having three (3) or more dwelling units, including townhouses and condominiums. 
    Dwelling, single-family, means a structure arranged or designed to be occupied by one (1) family, the structure having only one (1) dwelling unit. (See "Dwelling.") 
    Dwelling, townhouse , means a row of three (3) or more dwelling units, each separated from one another by a continuous vertical wall without opening from basement floor to roof between units which is commonly known as a firewall. 
    Dwelling, two-family, means a structure arranged or designed to be occupied by two (2) families, the structure having only two (2) dwelling units. 
    Dwelling unit means any building or portion of a building intended to be used for residential purposes by a single family and designed or arranged in such a manner that none of the facilities or areas customarily provided for cooking, sleeping, eating, sanitation or other residential functions is shared by any other family or persons residing in the same structure. 
    Family means: 
(1)  An individual; or 
(2)  Two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship; or 
(3)  Two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship and not more than two (2) unrelated persons; or 
(4)  A group of not more than three (3) persons not related by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship. The exception is in an R-4 zone where you may have a group of not more than four (4) persons not related by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship. 
    Frontage means the minimum width of a lot measured from one (1) side lot line to the other along a straight line parallel to the street or if curved, parallel to the tangent to the curve of the street, on which no point shall be farther away from the street on which the lot fronts than the building setback line as defined and required herein. 
    Garage, private, means accessory building designed or used for the storage of not more than three (3) automobiles owned and used by the occupants of the building to which it is accessory. On a lot occupied by a multiple-unit dwelling, the private garage may be designed and used for the storage of one and one-half (11/2) times as many automobiles as there are dwelling units. 
    Garage, public, means a building or portion thereof, other than a private garage, designed or used for servicing, repairing, equipping, renting, selling or storing motor-driven vehicles. 
    Gasoline service station means an area of land, including structures thereon, or any building or part thereof, or any devices used for the sale and direct delivery to motor vehicles of fuel. 
    Golf course means any golf course, publicly or privately owned, on which the game of golf is played, including accessory uses and buildings customary thereto but excluding golf driving ranges as defined herein. 
    Golf driving range means a limited area on which golf players do not walk but onto which they drive golf balls from a central driving tee. 
    Governing body means the town council. 
    Guestroom means a room which is intended, arranged or designed to be occupied or which is occupied by one (1) or more guests paying direct or indirect compensation therefor, but in which no provision is made for cooking. Dormitories are excluded. 
    Home occupation means an occupation carried on by the occupant of a dwelling as a secondary use in connection with which there is no display and where no one is employed other than members of the family residing on the premises, such as dressmaking, milliners, hairdressing and manicuring, preserving and home cooking; provided, that not more than the equivalent of the area of one (1) floor shall be used for such occupation and no display of products made shall be visible from the street. 
    Hospital means an institution rendering medical, surgical, obstetrical or convalescent care, including nursing home, home for the aged and sanitarium, but in all cases excluding veterinary hospitals and hospitals specializing in the care and treatment of mental illnesses, narcotic addicts or alcoholics, unwed mothers and those about to become mothers out of wedlock. 
    Hospital, special care, means an institution rendering care primarily for mental or feeble- minded patients, alcoholics or drug addicts. 
    Hotel means a building designed or occupied as the more or less temporary abiding place for fourteen (14) or more individuals who are lodged for compensation, with or without meals, and in which provision is not generally made for cooking in individual rooms or suites. 
    Junkyard means the use of any area of land lying within one hundred (100) feet of a state highway or the use of more than two hundred (200) square feet of land area in any location for storage, keeping or abandonment of junk, including scrap metals or other scrap materials. The term "junkyard" shall include the term "automobile graveyard" as defined in Code of Virginia, § 33.1-348. 
    Kennel means a place to house, board, breed, handle or otherwise keep or care for dogs for sale or in return for compensation. 
    Livestock market means a commercial establishment wherein livestock is collected for sale and auctioned off. 
    Lodge means the local chapter or hall of a fraternal organization, not including college fraternities. 
    Lot means a parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by a main structure or group of main structures and accessory structures, together with such yards, open spaces, lot width, and lot areas as are required by this chapter, and having frontage on a street, either shown on a plat of record or considered as a unit of property and described by metes and bounds. 
    Lot, corner, means a lot abutting on two (2) or more streets at their intersection. Of the two (2) sides of a corner lot the front shall be deemed to be the shortest of the two (2) sides fronting on streets. 
    Lot, depth of, means the average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
    Lot, double frontage, means an interior lot having frontage on two (2) streets. 
    Lot, interior, means any lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot, width of, means the average horizontal distance between side lot lines. 
    Lot of record means a lot which has been recorded in the clerk's office of the circuit court. 
    Manufacture and/or manufacturing means the processing and/or converting of raw, unfinished material or products or either of them into articles or substances of a different character or for use for a different purpose. 
    Mobile home means a unit originally designed as a living unit and also designed for transportation, after fabrication, on streets and highways on its own wheels or on a flatbed or other trailers and arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operation, location of jacks or permanent foundations, connection to utilities and the like. The term "mobile home" does not include travel trailers nor does it necessarily include modular housing. 
    Mobile home park means any area of five (5) acres or more designed to accommodate twenty-five (25) or more mobile homes intended for immediate residential use where residence is in mobile homes exclusively. A mobile home park may include a rental office but may not include mobile home sales. 
    Nonconforming activity means the otherwise legal use of a building or structure or of a tract of land that does not conform to the use regulations of this chapter for the district in which it is located, either at the effective date of this chapter or as a result of subsequent amendments to this chapter. 
    Nonconforming lot means an otherwise legally platted lot that does not conform to the minimum area or width requirements of this chapter for the district in which it is located, either at the effective date of this chapter or as a result of subsequent amendments to this chapter. 
    Nonconforming structure means an otherwise legal building or structure that does not conform with the lot area, yard, height, lot coverage, or other area regulations of this chapter, or is designed or intended for a use that does not conform to the use regulations of this chapter for the district in which it is located, either at the effective date of this chapter or as a result of subsequent amendments to this chapter. 
    Off-street parking area means space provided for vehicular parking outside the dedicated street right-of-way. 
    Public water and sewer systems means a water or sewer system owned and operated by a municipality or county or owned and operated by a private individual or a corporation approved by the governing body and properly licensed by the state corporation commission and subject to special regulations as herein set forth. 
    Required open space means any space required in any front, side or rear yard. 
    Restaurant means any building in which, for compensation, food or beverages are dispensed for consumption on the premises including cafes, tearooms, confectionery shops or refreshment stands, also drive-through service for consumption off the premises. 
    Restaurant, drive-in, means an establishment from which, for compensation, food or beverages are dispensed for consumption within automobiles or informal facilities on the premises, or facilities on the premises. 
    Retail stores and shops means buildings for display and the sale of merchandise at retail or for the rendering of personal services (but specifically exclusive of coal, wood, and lumber yards), e.g. drugstore, newsstand, food store, candy shop, milk dispensary, drygoods and notions store, antique store and gift shop, hardware store, household appliance store, furniture store, florist, optician, music and radio store, tailor shop, barbershop and beauty shop. 
    Sawmill means a portable sawmill located on a private property for the processing of timber cut only from that property or from property immediately contiguous and adjacent thereto. 
    School, day and kindergarten, means a facility for care and/or instruction of children of preschool age. 
    School, elementary, intermediate, and secondary, means an educational institution offering instruction between the grade of one (1) and twelve (12) or as defined by the state department of education. 
    School, trade or vocational, means a facility where instruction is given in business, industrial and cultural arts other than that normally provided in colleges and secondary schools. 
    Setback means the minimum distance by which any building or structure shall be separated from the front lot line. 
    Sign means any display of any letters, words, numerals, figures, devices, emblems, pictures or any parts or combinations thereof by any means whereby the same are made visible for the purpose of marking anything known, whether such display be made on, attached to, or as a part of a structure, surface or any other natural object, which display is visible beyond the boundaries of the parcel of land on which the same is made. A display of less than one (1) square foot in area is excluded from this definition. 
    Sign, business, means a sign which directs attention to a product, commodity or service available on the premises. 
    Sign, directional, means a sign, one (1) end of which may be pointed or on which an arrow may be painted, indicating the direction to which attention is called, four (4) square feet or less in area, giving the name only of the firm or business responsible for the erection of the same. 
    Sign, general advertising, mea ns a sign which directs attention to a product, commodity or service not necessarily available on the premises. 
    Sign, home occupation, means a sign not exceeding four (4) square feet in area directing attention to a product, commodity or service available on the premises but which product, commodity or service is clearly a secondary use of the dwelling. 
    Sign, location, means a sign which directs attention to the approximate location of an establishment from which the advertised product may be obtained. 
    Sign, structure, includes the supports, uprights, bracing and framework of any structure, be it single-faced, double-faced, v-type or otherwise, exhibiting a sign. 
    Sign, temporary, means a sign applying to a seasonal or other brief activity such as, but not limited to, summer camps, horse shows or auctions or sale of land. Temporary signs shall conform in size and type to directional signs. 
    Store. See "Retail stores and shops." 
    Street line means the dividing line between a street or road right-of-way and the contiguous property. 
    Street, road means a public thoroughfare which affords principal means of access to the abutting property. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground. This includes, among other things, dwellings, buildings and signs. 
    Tourist court, auto court, motel, hotel, cabins, motor lodge means one (1) or more buildings containing individual sleeping rooms designed for or used temporarily by automobile tourists or transients with garage or parking space conveniently located to each unit. Cooking facilities may be provided for each unit. 
    Townhouse means a multiple dwelling or development where individual property owners own the dwelling unit in which they live and the land it is situated on. 
    Transmission line, electrical, means any electrical line other than those supported by single poles normally used for the distribution of electrical power and/or those in excess of fifty (50) feet in height. 
    Travel trailer means a mobile unit less than twenty-nine (29) feet in length and less than four thousand five hundred (4,500) pounds in weight which is designed for human habitation but not used for permanent residence. No appendage such as a tongue, stoop or awning shall be used in computing length. 
    Use, accessory, means a subordinate use, customarily incidental to and located on the same lot occupied by the main use. 
    Variance means a relaxation of the terms of this chapter where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the action of the applicant, a literal enforcement of this chapter would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. As used in this chapter, a variance is authorized only for height, area and size of structure or size of yards and open spaces; establishment or expansion of a use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed by variance nor shall a variance be granted because of the presence of nonconformities in the zoning division or district or adjoining zoning divisions or districts. 
    Wayside stand, roadside stand, wayside market mean any structure or land used for sale of agricultural or horticultural produce, livestock or merchandise produced by the owner or his family on their farm. 
    Yard means an open space on a lot, other than a court, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein. 
    Yard sale means casual sale of personal property owned by the seller and usual to a household. For the purpose of this section, a "yard sale" includes garage sale, lawn sale, attic sale, rummage sale or any similar or casual sale. 
    Yard, front, means an open space on the same lot as a building between the front line of the building (excluding steps) and the front lot or street line and extending across the full width of the lot. 
    Yard, rear, means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot as a building between the rear line of the building (excluding steps) and the rear line of the lot and extending the full width of the lot. 
    Yard, side, means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot as a building between the side line of the building (excluding steps) and the side line of the lot and extending from the front yard line to the rear yard line. 
(Ord. of 5-10-90(4)); Ord. No. 35, 12-13-95; Ord. No. 49, 1-13-99; Ord. No. 117, 10-10-2007; Ord. No. 119, 6-11-2008; Ord. No. 120, 1-14-2009; Ord. No. 180 , 1-11-2017) 
Sec. 29-2. - Purpose of chapter. 
    For the purpose of promoting the health, safety, convenience or general welfare of the public and of accomplishing the objectives of Code of Virginia, § 15.1-486, this chapter is hereby adopted as the zoning ordinance of the town, together with the zoning districts map. This chapter has been designed to: 
(1)  Provide for adequate light, air, convenience of access and safety from fire, flood and other dangers. 
(2)  Reduce or prevent congestion in the public streets. 
(3)  Facilitate the creation of a convenient, attractive and harmonious community. 
(4)  Expedite the provision of adequate police and fire protection, disaster evacuation, civil defense, transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, forests, playgrounds, recreational facilities, airports and other public requirements. 
(5)  Protect against destruction of or encroachment on historic areas. 
(6)  Protect against one (1) or more of the following: Overcrowding of land, undue density of population in relation to the community facilities existing or available, obstruction of light and air, danger and congestion in travel and transportation or loss of life, health or property from fire, flood, panic or other dangers. 
(7)  Encourage economic development activities that provide desirable employment and enlarge the tax base. 
(Code 1973, § 29-2) 
State Law reference- Purpose of zoning ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-489. 
Sec. 29-3. - Administration of chapter. 
    This chapter shall be enforced by the administrator who shall be appointed by the governing body. The administrator shall serve at the pleasure of that body. Compensation for such shall be fixed by resolution of the governing body. 
(Code 1973, § 29-3) 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 
Sec. 29-4. - Interpretation of boundaries. 
    Unless district boundary lines are fixed by dimensions or otherwise clearly shown or described and where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the aforesaid districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following or being at right angles to the centerlines of streets, highways, alleys or railroad main tracks, such centerlines or lines at right angles to such centerlines shall be construed to be such boundaries as the case may be. 
(2)  Where a district boundary is indicated to follow a river, creek or branch or other body of water, such boundary shall be construed to follow the centerline at low water or at the limit of the jurisdiction; in the event of change in the shoreline, such boundary shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline. 
(3)  If no distance, angle, curvature description or other means is given to determine a boundary line accurately and the foregoing provisions do not apply, the same shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on the zoning map. In case of subsequent dispute, the matter shall be referred to the board of zoning appeals which shall determine the boundary. 
(4)  For any landowner who conveys any land to the town or the state department of highways either voluntarily or under compulsion of eminent domain for the purpose of widening any street or highway, such loss of land will not affect any zoning, and the land so conveyed shall be included in the total square footage of parcel for the purpose of zoning and minimum square foot requirements of the code, so long as the total taking does not diminish the total area more than ten (10) percent. In the event the taking is more, then the council may in its own discretion include or exclude such footage. 
(Code 1973, § 29-4) 
Sec. 29-5. - Districts. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the incorporated area of the town is hereby divided into the following districts: 
(1)  Residential R-1. 
(2)  Residential R-1A. 
(3)  Residential R-2. 
(4)  Residential R-3. 
(5)  Residential R-3A. 
(6)  Residential R-4. 
(7)  Residential R-5. 
(8)  Business B-1. 
(9)  Business B-2. 
(10)  Business B-3. 
(11)  Business B-4. 
(12)  Industrial M-1. 
(Code 1973, § 29-5) 
State Law reference- Authority of council to classify town into districts, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-486. 
Sec. 29-6. - Amendments. 
    The regulations, restrictions and boundaries established in this chapter from time to time, may be amended, supplemented, changed, modified or repealed by a favorable majority of votes of the governing body; provided, that: 
(1)  At least one (1) public hearing shall be held in relation thereto at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. 
(2)  Notice shall be given of the time and place of such hearings by publication once a week for two (2) successive weeks in some newspaper having a general circulation in the jurisdiction. Such notice shall specify the time and place of hearing at which persons affected may appear and present their views, not less than five (5) days nor more than twenty-one (21) days after final publication. After enactment of any such plan, ordinance or amendment, further publication thereof shall not be required. 
(3)  Changes shall be made by the governing body in this chapter or the zoning map only after such changes have been referred to the planning commission for a report. Action shall be taken by the governing body only after a report has been received from the planning commission unless a period of sixty (60) days has elapsed after date of referral to the commission, after which time it may be assumed the commission has approved the change or amendment. 
(4)  Any area annexed shall be considered as residential R-1 until and unless designated otherwise after the required public hearings. 
(5)  Any rezoning or zoning amendment request by a private organization or individual shall be accompanied by a certified check for five hundred dollars ($500.00) made payable to the town treasurer. Any rquest by a private organization or individual for a zoning certification/compliance letter shall be accomapanied by a certified check for fifty dollars ($50.00) made payable to the town treasurer. 
(Code 1973, § 29-6; Ord. No. 119, 6-11-2008) 
State Law reference- Amendments to zoning ordinance, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-491. 
Sec. 29-7. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person whether as principal, agent, employed or otherwise, violating, causing or permitting the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, may be fined up to two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Such person shall be deemed to be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during which any portion of any violation of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall be punishable as herein provided. 
(Code 1973, § 29-7) 
Secs. 29-8-29-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES 

Sec. 29-26. - Zoning permit-Required. 
(a)  No building or structure shall be started, reconstructed, enlarged or altered until a zoning permit has been obtained from the administrator. The administrator may refer any request for a zoning permit to the planning commission and town council. 
(b)  The commission may request a review of the zoning permit approved by the administrator in order to determine if the contemplated use is in accordance with the district in which the construction lies. 
(Code 1973, § 29-8) 
Cross reference- Licenses and permits, Ch. 14. 
Sec. 29-27. - Same-Application. 
    Each application for a zoning permit shall be accompanied by two (2) copies of a drawing showing dimensions of the structure and lot. The drawing shall show the size and shape of the parcel of land on which the proposed building is to be constructed, the nature of the proposed use of the building or land, and the location of such building or use with respect to the property lines of the parcel of land and to the right-of-way of any street or highway adjoining the parcel of land. Any other information which the administrator may deem necessary for consideration of the application may be required. If the proposed building or use is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, a permit shall be issued to the applicant by the administrator. One (1) copy of the drawing shall be returned to the applicant with the permit. 
(Code 1973, § 29-9) 
Sec. 29-28. - Permits granted prior to effective date of chapter. 
    Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the plans or construction of any building or structure for which a permit was granted prior to the effective date of this chapter; provided, that such construction shall commence within thirty (30) days after this chapter becomes effective. If construction is discontinued for a period of six (6) months or more, further construction shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter for the district in which the operation is located. 
(Code 1973, § 29-10) 
Sec. 29-29. - Permits issued to conform to chapter. 
    All departments, officials and public employees of this jurisdiction which are vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall conform to the provisions of this chapter. They shall issue permits for uses, buildings or purposes only when they are in harmony with the provisions of this chapter. Any such permit, if issued in conflict with the provisions of this chapter shall be null and void. 
(Code 1973, § 29-11) 
Sec. 29-30. - Certificate of occupancy. 
    No land may be used or occupied and no buildings structurally altered or erected shall be used or changed in use until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the administrator. Such a permit shall state that the building or the proposed use or the use of the land complies with the provisions of this chapter. A similar certificate shall be issued for the purpose of maintaining, renewing, changing or extending a nonconforming use. A certificate of occupancy either for the whole or a part of a building shall be applied for simultaneously with the application for a zoning permit. The permit shall be issued within ten (10) days after the erection or structural alteration of such building or part has conformed with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 29-12) 
Cross reference- Buildings, Ch. 6. 
Sec. 29-31. - Conditional use permit. 
    Where required by this chapter the location of certain permitted uses shall require, in addition to the zoning permit and certificate of occupancy, a conditional use permit. These permits shall be subject to such conditions as the governing body deems necessary to carry out the intent of this chapter. These conditions may include, but not be limited to parking, screening, setbacks, area, hours of operation, illumination, noise level, pollution control and control of odors, control of traffic and public safety. Any conditional use permit request by a private organization or individual shall be accompanied by a certified check for five hundred dollars ($500.00) made payable to the town treasurer. 
(Code 1973, § 29-13; Ord. No. 119, 6-11-2008) 
Sec. 29-32. - Permit required-Apartments, rooming and boarding houses. 
    No apartment, duplex, multifamily dwelling and/or boarding and rooming house shall be occupied until the owner/agent registers with the treasurer's office, by October first of each year, furnishing the address of the apartment building, the number of units in the building/complex, the names of the tenants occupying such building, and the name of a local agent who can be contacted, in the event of an emergency. The town building inspection department will have the right to inspect the property, prior to renting and when there is a change in occupancy. 
(Code 1973, § 29-13.1) 
Sec. 29-33. - Same-Temporary mobile home parks. 
    Conditional use permits for temporary mobile home parks in any district may be issued by the governing body, within any zoning district subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The location of a temporary mobile home park is necessary for the housing of construction workers employed on an industrial or construction project. 
(2)  The request is filed by or certified to by the state department of highways or the builder as being essential to the construction. 
(3)  A minimum area of two thousand (2,000) square feet be provided for each space. 
(4)  Sanitary facilities conform to the state health department's "Trailer Camp Sanitation" requirements. 
(5)  The period for operating such temporary park shall concur with the anticipated period of the construction. Applications for renewal may be submitted if more time is required to complete the project; provided, that such renewal applications must be filed at least ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the original temporary use permit. 
(6)  The governing body in granting such a conditional use permit may require the posting of a bond to insure that the temporary mobile home park will be removed and the site left in good order at the expiration of the permit. 
(7)  The governing body shall establish such additional requirements as are in the best interest of the public. 
(Code 1973, § 29-14) 
Sec. 29-34. - Temporary signs. 
    Temporary directional or informational signs not over six (6) square feet in area; provided, that the activity which the sign promotes is one (1) permitted under the use regulations applicable to the district where the sign is located. Signs for temporary events, sales or special promotions may be erected not more than one (1) month before the event or activity and shall be removed within one (1) week of its conclusion. In no case shall any such temporary sign be displayed for a period longer than two (2) months in any calendar year. There shall be no more than two (2) such temporary signs per establishment at any time. 
(Code 1973, § 29-14.1) 
Sec. 29-35. - Modification from zoning ordinance. 
    The zoning administrator shall be authorized to grant a modification from any provision contained in the zoning ordinance with respect to physical requirements on a lot or parcel of land, including but not limited to size, height, location or features of or related to any building, structure, or improvements, if the administrator finds in writing that: 
(1)  The strict application of the ordinance would produce undue hardship; 
(2)  Such hardship is not shared generally by other properties in the same zoning district and the same vicinity; and 
(3)  Authorization of the modification will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property and the character of the zoning district will not be changed by granting of the modification. 
    Prior to the granting of a modification, the zoning administrator shall give, or require the applicant to give, all adjoining property owners written notice of the request for modification, and an opportunity to respond to the request within twenty-one (21) days of the date of the notice. The zoning administrator shall make a decision on the application for modification and issue a written decision with a copy provided to the applicant and any adjoining landowner who responded in writing to the notice sent pursuant to this paragraph. The decision of the zoning administrator shall constitute a decision within the purview, and may be appealed to the board of zoning appeals as provided by that section. Decisions of the board of zoning appeals may be appealed to the circuit court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 100, 6-15-2006) 
Secs. 29-36-29-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 29-51. - Uses not provided for. 
    If in any district established under this chapter a use compatible with the district is not specifically permitted and an application is made by a property owner to the administrator for such use, the administrator may refer the application to the planning commission which shall make its recommendations to the governing body within sixty (60) days. If the recommendation of the planning commission is approved by the governing body, this chapter shall be interpreted to list the use as a permitted use in that district. 
(Code 1973, § 29-15) 
Sec. 29-52. - Widening of highways and streets; setback requirements. 
    Whenever there shall be plans in existence approved by either the state department of highways or by the governing body for the widening of any street or highway the commission may recommend additional front yard setbacks for any new construction or any structures altered or remodeled adjacent to the future planned right-of-way in order to preserve and protect the right-of-way for such proposed street or highway widening. 
(Code 1973, § 29-16) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23. 
Sec. 29-53. - Off-street parking. 
(a)  With the exception of business district B-1 in which public parking is provided, there shall be provided at the time of erection of any main building or at the time any main building is enlarged, or the initiated land use or at the time any land use is expanded, minimum off-street parking space with adequate provision for entrance and exit by standard-sized automobiles as follows: 
(1)  In all residential districts there shall be provided on the lot, space for the parking of two (2) automobiles for each dwelling unit in a new building and two (2) parking spaces on the lot for each dwelling unit added to the existing building. 
(2)  "Bed and breakfast establishments" motels, rooming, lodging or boarding houses shall provide on the premises, one (1) parking space for each accommodation. Fraternity or sorority houses, one (1) parking space for each two (2) beds. 
(3)  For churches, theaters, general auditoriums, stadiums, sports arenas and other similar places of assembly, at least one (1) parking space for every five (5) fixed seats provided. 
(4)  Restaurant, night club, dance halls, cafe or similar business recreation or amusement establishment, community centers, assembly or exhibition hall (without seats), clubs, lodges or similar organizations, one (1) parking space for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area. Library, museum, art gallery or other similar uses, one (1) parking space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor area. 
(5)  Hospitals, sanitariums, convalescence homes, homes for the aged or similar institutions, at least one (1) parking space for each two (2) beds, including infants' cribs and children's beds. 
(6)  Medical office, at least ten (10) parking spaces. Five (5) additional parking spaces shall be furnished for each doctor or technician using same office, in excess of one (1) doctor or technician. 
a.  Dental, optometrist, veterinarian, or chiropractor office, at least seven (7) parking spaces. Five (5) additional parking spaces shall be furnished for each dentist, optometrist, veterinarian, chiropractor or technician using same office, in excess of one (1) dentist, optometrist, veterinarian, chiropractor or technician. 
b.  Other business and professional offices, studios, bank and similar uses, one (1) parking space for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area. 
(7)  Bowling alleys, two (2) parking spaces for each alley. Billiard parlors, two (2) parking spaces for each billiard table, to include coin-operated tables. 
a.  Putting greens, miniature golf course or any similar land use, one (1) parking space for each five hundred (500) square feet of such land use. Driving ranges, two (2) parking spaces per tee. 
(8)  Grocery, drug, department, sundry and variety stores and similar businesses, one (1) parking space for each two hundred (200) square feet, excluding storage space. 
a.  Furniture and appliance stores, hardware stores, wholesale businesses, machinery or equipment sales and service, repair and service shops, printing, plumbing businesses or similar businesses, one (1) parking space for each four hundred (400) square feet. 
(9)  Manufacturing or industrial establishment, research or testing laboratory, creamery, bottling plant, processing plant, warehouse or similar establishments, one (1) parking space for each two (2) employees on the maximum working shift, plus space to accommodate expected customers and all trucks and other vehicles used in connection therewith. 
(10)  At any time that the use of a building or land use is changed to a use which requires more parking spaces than required before the change, the owner or operator shall provide the number of parking spaces as required by this chapter for such use. The parking space requirement for a use not specifically mentioned herein shall be the same as required for a use of similar nature. 
(11)  A shopping center, described as any lot or parcel of land, not less than two (2) acres in area, and containing three (3) or more individual establishments developed by an individual, partnership, firm or corporation for commercial retail sales areas and parking shall provide within the shopping center one (1) parking space for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of total floor area. 
(b)  All parking required herein shall be located on the same lot with the building or use, or may be located on an adjacent lot (with conditional use permit); except, that where an increase of spaces is required by a change or enlargement of use, the additional required spaces may be located not to exceed three hundred (300) feet from the building or use served. Every parcel of land hereafter serving as a parking area shall be surfaced with concrete or a four-inch stone base surface with asphalt, except in the case of one- or two-family dwellings, in which case the parking area may be surfaced with gravel or stone. It shall be accessible and have appropriate guards where needed as determined by the administrator. Any lights used to illuminate the parking areas shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining premises in a residential district. 
(Code 1973, § 29-17; Ord. No. 120, 1-14-2009; Ord. No. 132, 10-13-2010) 
Cross reference- Off-street parking facilities for taxicabs, § 26-35. 
Sec. 29-54. - Yard sales. 
    Yard sale-Permitted. 
(1)  Items purchased elsewhere expressly for resale at a yard sale or garage sale shall be prohibited; 
(2)  Goods intended for sale shall not be stored or displayed in the front or side yards of a dwelling except on the day of the sale. 
(3)  Yard sales will be permitted with an interval of at least one month between sales; 
(4)  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed tho be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 117, 10-10-2007) 
Secs. 29-55-29-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT R-1 

Sec. 29-71. - Statement of intent. 
    Residential district R-1 encompasses low-density single-family residential areas, both existing and planned. The following regulations are designed to stabilize, protect and promote this type of development. This district should provide a suitable environment for families who desire quiet spacious homesites with the amenities of suburban living without fear of encroachment of dissimilar uses. 
(Code 1973, § 29-18) 
Sec. 29-72. - Uses. 
    Only one (1) main building and its accessory buildings may be erected on any lot or parcel of land in residential district R-1. Structures to be erected or land to be used shall be for one (1) or more of the following uses: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Churches. 
(3)  Parks and playgrounds. 
(4)  Off-street parking as required by this chapter. 
(5)  Accessory uses and structures customarily incident to any use permitted by this section, such as servants' quarters, greenhouses or workshops; provided, that none shall be conducted for gain and that no accessory buildings shall be inhabited by other than those who are employees of the owner, leasor or tenant of the premises. No accessory building may be closer than five (5) feet to any property line. 
(6)  Private garage on the same lot with the building, not maintained for the service of the public or operated or conducted for commercial or industrial use. No such private garage shall be hereafter located or erected on any residential block closer to the street than the setback line for the residence on that street or side street. 
(7)  Private group garages, not exceeding four (4), fronting on alleys; provided, that no commercial repair work is done, further provided, that it must be set back not less than five (5) feet from alley. 
(8)  Public utilities including poles, lines, distribution transformers, pipes, meters and other facilities necessary for the provision and maintenance of public utilities, including water and sewerage facilities. Electrical transmission lines and substations are excluded. 
(9)  Identification signs, not exceeding two (2) square feet in area. 
(10)  Church bulletin boards and church identification signs for church activities not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in area. 
(11)  Temporary real estate signs not exceeding six (6) square feet in area no part of which shall be nearer than five (5) feet from any property line and used only to advertise the premises upon which erected. 
(12)  Day schools and kindergartens, with conditional use permit. 
(13)  Home occupations conducted by the owner. A conditional use permit shall be required, and there shall be: no delivery or pickup by commercial vehicle; no customers coming to the home; no products or displays to be stored outside; no work concerning home occupation to be performed outside of home; no advertising with address "listed"; business must be conducted in such a manner as not to be offensive to the neighbors. Any change would have to go before the board of zoning appeals. 
(Code 1973, § 29-19) 
Sec. 29-73. - Minimum area. 
    The minimum lot area in a residential district R-1 shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet unless a greater area is required under section 24-126 in which case the requirements of that section shall prevail. 
(Code 1973, § 29-20) 
Sec. 29-74. - Setback. 
    Setbacks in a residential district R-1 shall be located thirty-five (35) feet or more from any street right-of-way which is fifty (50) feet or greater in width for sixty (60) feet or more from the center of any street right-of-way less than fifty (50) feet in width. This shall be known as the "setback line." 
(Code 1973, § 29-21) 
Sec. 29-75. - Frontage. 
    The minimum lot width at the setback line in a residential district R-1 shall be one hundred (100) feet. 
(Code 1973, § 29-22) 
Sec. 29-76. - Yards. 
(a)  The minimum side yard for each main structure in a residential district R-1 shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
(b)  The minimum rear yard for each main structure shall be thirty-five (35) feet. 
(Code 1973, § 29-23) 
Sec. 29-77. - Height. 
    Structures in a residential district R-1 may be erected up to thirty-five (35) feet in height; except, that: 
(1)  The height limit for dwellings may be increased up to forty-five (45) feet and up to three (3) stories; provided, that each side yard is thirty (30) feet, plus one (1) foot or more of side yard for each additional foot of building height over thirty-five (35) feet. 
(2)  Churches may be erected to a height of sixty (60) feet from grade; provided, that required front, side and rear yards shall be increased one (1) foot for each foot in height over thirty-five (35) feet. 
(3)  Church spires, belfries, cupolas, municipal water towers, chimneys, flues, flagpoles, television antennas and radio aerials are exempt. Parapet walls may be up to four (4) feet above the height of the building on which the walls rest. 
(4)  Accessory buildings over one (1) story in height shall be at least twenty (20) feet from any lot line. All accessory buildings shall be less than the main building in height. 
(Code 1973, § 29-24) 
Sec. 29-78. - Corner lots. 
(a)  Of the two (2) sides of a corner lot in a residential district R-1 the front shall be deemed to be the shortest of the two (2) sides fronting on streets. 
(b)  The side yard on the side facing the side street shall be thirty-five (35) feet or more for both main and accessory buildings. 
(c)  For subdivisions platted after February 18, 1971, each corner lot shall have a minimum width at the setback line of one hundred twenty-five (125) feet. 
(Code 1973, § 29-25) 
Secs. 29-79-29-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT R-1-A 

Sec. 29-96. - Statement of intent. 
    Residential district R-1-A encompasses low-density single-family residential areas, both existing and planned. The following regulations are designed to stabilize, protect and promote this type of development. This district should provide a suitable environment for families who desire quiet spacious homesites with the amenities of suburban living, without fear of encroachment of dissimilar uses. 
(Code 1973, § 29-25.1) 
Sec. 29-97. - Uses. 
    Only one (1) main building and its accessory buildings may be erected on any lot or parcel of land in residential district R-1-A. Structures to be erected or land to be used shall be for one (1) or more of the following uses: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Churches. 
(3)  Parks and playgrounds. 
(4)  Off-street parking as required by this chapter. 
(5)  Accessory uses and structures customarily incident to any use permitted by this section, such as servants' quarters, greenhouses or workshops, provided none shall be conducted for gain and that no accessory buildings shall be inhabited by other than those who are employees of the owner, leasor or tenant of the premises. No accessory building may be closer than five (5) feet to any property line. 
(6)  Private garage on the same lot with the building, not maintained for the service of the public or operated or conducted for commercial or industrial use, but no such private garage shall be hereafter located or erected on any residential block closer to the street than the setback line for the residence on that street or side street. 
(7)  Private group garages, not exceeding four (4), fronting on alleys, provided no commercial repair work is done, must be set back not less than five (5) feet from alley. 
(8)  Public utilities including poles, lines, distribution transformers, pipes, meters, and other facilities necessary for the provision and maintenance of public utilities, including water and sewerage facilities. Electrical transmission lines and substations are excluded. 
(9)  Identification signs, not exceeding two (2) square feet in area. 
(10)  Church bulletin boards and church identification signs for church activities but not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in area. 
(11)  Temporary real estate signs not exceeding six (6) square feet in area no part of which shall be nearer than five (5) feet from any property line and used only to advertise the premises upon which erected. 
(12)  Day schools and kindergartens, with conditional use permit. 
(13)  Home occupations conducted by the owner. A conditional use permit shall be required, and there shall be: no delivery or pickup by commercial vehicle; no customers coming to the home; no products or displays to be stored outside; no work concerning home occupation to be performed outside of home; no advertising with address "listed"; business must be conducted in such a manner as not to be offensive to the neighbors. Any change would have to go before the board of zoning appeals. 
(14)  Bed and breakfast with a conditional use permit. 
(Code 1973, § 29-25.2; Ord. No. 120, 1-14-2009) 
Sec. 29-98. - Minimum area. 
    The minimum lot area shall be fourteen thousand (14,000) square feet unless a greater area is required under section 24-126, in which case the requirements of chapter 24 shall prevail. 
(Code 1973, § 29-25.3) 
Sec. 29-99. - Setback. 
    Setbacks shall be located thirty-five (35) feet or more from any street right-of-way which is fifty (50) feet or greater in width, or sixty (60) feet or more from the center of any street right-of-way less than fifty (50) feet in width. This shall be known as the "setback line." 
(Code 1973, § 29-25.4) 
Sec. 29-100. - Frontage. 
    The minimum lot width at the setback line shall be one hundred (100) feet. 
(Code 1973, § 29-25.5) 
Sec. 29-101. - Yards. 
(a)  Side. The minimum side yard for each main structure shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
(b)  Rear. The minimum rear yard for each main structure shall be thirty-five (35) feet. 
(Code 1973, § 29-25.6) 
Sec. 29-102. - Height. 
    Structures may be erected up to thirty-five (35) feet in height except that: 
(1)  The height limit for dwellings may be increased up to forty-five (45) feet and up to three (3) stories provided each side yard is thirty (30) feet plus one (1) foot or more of side yard for each additional foot of building height over thirty-five (35) feet. 
(2)  Churches may be erected to a height of sixty (60) feet from grade provided that required front, side and rear yards shall be increased one (1) foot in height over thirty-five (35) feet. 
(3)  Church spires, belfries, cupolas, municipal water towers, chimneys, flues, flagpoles, television antennas and radio aerials are exempt. Parapet walls may be up to four (4) feet above the height of the building on which the walls rest. 
(4)  Accessory buildings over one (1) story in height shall be at least twenty (20) feet from any lot line. All accessory buildings shall be less than the main building in height. 
(Code 1973, § 29-25.7) 
Sec. 29-103. - Corner lots. 
(a)  Of the two (2) sides of a corner lot, the front shall be deemed to be the shortest of the two (2) sides fronting on streets. 
(b)  The side yard on the side facing the side street shall be thirty-five (35) feet or more for both main and accessory buildings; except: For lots of record at the time of passage of this chapter, the side yard on the side facing the side street shall be twenty-five (25) feet or more for both main and accessory buildings. 
(c)  For subdivisions platted after the enactment of this chapter, each corner lot shall have a minimum width at the setback line of one hundred twenty-five (125) feet. 
(Code 1973, § 29-25.8) 
Secs. 29-104-29-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT R-2 

Sec. 29-121. - Statement of intent. 
    Residential district R-2 encompasses medium-density residential areas, both existing and planned, as well as certain compatible public and semipublic land uses. The following regulations are designed to stabilize, protect and promote this type of development. This district should provide a suitable environment for persons who desire a predominantly single-family area but prefer lesser yard acreage and closer proximity to shopping and employment centers. 
(Code 1973, § 29-26) 
Sec. 29-122. - Uses. 
    Only one (1) building and its accessory building may be erected on any lot or parcel of land in residential district R-2. Structures to be erected or land to be used shall be for one (1) or more of the following uses: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings or two (2) housekeeping units. 
(3)  Home occupation conducted by the occupant. 
(4)  University related facilities, with a conditional use permit. 
(5)  Churches, lodges, armories and other public and semipublic facilities, including hospitals but excepting veterinary hospitals and hospitals specializing in the care and treatment of mental illnesses, narcotic addicts or alcoholics, unwed mothers and those about to become mothers out of wedlock, not including rescue missions or revival tents. A conditional use permit may be required for these uses. 
(6)  Parks and playgrounds of a noncommercial nature. 
(7)  Off-street parking, as required by this chapter. 
(8)  Accessory uses and structures customarily incident to any use permitted by this section, such as servants' quarters, greenhouses or workshops; provided that none shall be conducted for gain and that no accessory buildings shall be inhabited by other than those who are employees of the owner, leasor or tenant of the premises. No accessory building shall be closer than five (5) feet to any property line. 
(9)  Private garage on the same lot with the building, not maintained for the service of the public or operated or conducted for commercial or industrial use, but no such private garage shall be hereafter located or erected on any residential block closer to the street than the setback line for the residence on that street or side street. 
(10)  Day schools and kindergartens, with conditional use permits. 
(11)  Private group garages, not exceeding four (4), fronting on alleys; provided, that no commercial repair work is done, further provided, that it must be set back not less than five (5) feet from alley. 
(12)  Public utilities including poles, lines, distribution transformers, pipes, meters, and other facilities necessary for the provision and maintenance of public utilities, including water and sewerage facilities. Electrical transmission lines and substations are excluded. 
(13)  Small professional or announcement signs not exceeding three (3) square feet in area no part of which shall be nearer than one (1) foot to any town property line and nonelectrical temporary real estate signs not over six (6) square feet in area no part of which shall be nearer than five (5) feet from any property line and used only to advertise the premises upon which erected. 
(14)  Church bulletin boards and church identification signs for church activities only not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in area, no part of which shall be nearer than five (5) feet to any town property line and no overhang may project closer than one (1) foot to any property line. 
(Ord. of 5-10-90(1); Ord. No. 119, 6-11-2008) 
Sec. 29-123. - Minimum area. 
(a)  The minimum lot area in a residential district R-2 shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet for lots containing individual single-family dwellings and served by public water and sewer. The minimum lot area for two-family dwellings served by water and sewer shall be fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. 
(b)  For lots not served by water and/or sewer, the minimum area shall be as required in section 24-126. The required area for any such use shall be approved by the health official. The administrator may require a greater area if considered necessary by the health official. Private schools must conform to land area requirements of the state board of education. 
(Code 1973, § 29-28) 
Sec. 29-124. - Setback. 
    Setbacks in a residential district R-2 shall be located thirty-five (35) feet or more from any street right-of-way which is fifty (50) feet or greater in width or sixty (60) feet or more from the center of any street right-of-way less than fifty (50) feet in width. This shall be known as the "setback line." 
(Code 1973, § 29-29) 
Sec. 29-125. - Frontage. 
    The minimum lot width at the setback line in a residential district R-2 shall be seventy-five (75) feet. 
(Code 1973, § 29-30) 
Sec. 29-126. - Yards. 
(a)  The minimum side yard for each main structure in a residential district R-2 shall be ten (10) feet. 
(b)  Each main structure shall have a rear yard of twenty-five (25) feet or more. 
(Code 1973, § 29-31) 
Sec. 29-127. - Height. 
    Structures in a residential district R-2 may be erected up to thirty-five (35) feet in height from grade; except, that: 
(1)  The height limits for dwellings may be increased up to forty-five (45) feet and up to three (3) stories; provided, that each side yard is twenty (20) feet, plus one (1) foot or more of side yard for each additional foot of building height over thirty-five (35) feet. 
(2)  College structures may be erected to a height of one hundred twenty-five (125) feet from grade; provided, that required front, side and rear yards shall be increased one (1) foot for each foot in height over thirty-five (35) feet. 
(3)  Church spires, belfries, cupolas, municipal water towers, chimneys, flues, flagpoles, television antennas and radio aerials are exempt. Parapet walls may be up to four (4) feet above the height of the building on which the walls rest. 
(4)  Accessory buildings over one (1) story in height shall be at least ten (10) feet from any lot line. All accessory buildings shall be less than the main building in height. 
(Code 1973, § 29-32) 
Sec. 29-128. - Corner lots. 
(a)  Of the two (2) sides of a corner lot in a residential district R-2 the front shall be deemed to be the shortest of the two (2) sides fronting on streets. 
(b)  The side yard on the side facing the side street shall be twenty-five (25) feet or more for both main and accessory buildings. 
(c)  For subdivisions platted after February 18, 1971, each corner lot shall have a minimum width at the setback line of one hundred (100) feet or more. 
(Code 1973, § 29-33) 
Secs. 29-129-29-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT R-3 

Sec. 29-146. - Statement of intent. 
    Residential district R-3 encompasses high-density residential areas, both existing and planned, as well as certain compatible public, semipublic and very limited commercial land uses. The following regulations are designed to stabilize, protect and promote this type of development. This district should provide a suitable environment for persons desiring the amenities of apartment living and the convenience of being closest to shopping and employment centers and other community facilities. 
(Code 1973, § 29-34) 
Sec. 29-147. - Uses. 
    Only one (1) building and its accessory buildings may be erected on any lot or parcel of land in residential district R-3. Structures to be erected or land to be used shall be for one (1) or more of the following uses: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings or two (2) housekeeping units. 
(3)  Multiple-family dwellings with a conditional use permit. 
(4)  Rooming and boarding houses. 
(5)  Reserved. 
(6)  University related facilities, with a conditional use permit. 
(7)  Elementary, intermediate and secondary schools, both public and private, with a conditional use permit. 
(8)  Day schools and kindergartens with conditional use permit. 
(9)  Churches, lodges, armories and other public and semipublic facilities, including hospitals, excepting veterinary hospitals and hospitals specializing in the care and treatment of mental illnesses, narcotic addicts or alcoholics, unwed mothers and those about to become mothers out of wedlock. A conditional use permit may be required for these uses. 
(10)  Rest, convalescent or nursing homes but not penal or mental institutions. 
(11)  Parks and playgrounds. 
(12)  Professional offices. 
(13)  Home occupations conducted by the occupant. 
(14)  Off-street parking as required by this chapter. 
(15)  Accessory uses and structures customarily incident to any user permitted by this section, such as servants' quarters, greenhouses or workshops; provided, that none shall be conducted for gain and that no accessory buildings shall be inhabited by other than those who are employees of the owner, leasor or tenant of the premises. No accessory building may be closer than two (2) feet to any property line and no overhang may project closer than one (1) foot to any property line. 
(16)  Private garage on the same lot with the building not maintained for the service of the public or operated or conducted for commercial or industrial use, but no such private garage shall be hereafter located or erected on any residential block closer to the street than the setback line for the residence on that street or side street. 
(17)  Private group garages, not exceeding four (4), fronting on alleys; provided, that no commercial repair work is done; further provided, that it must be set back not less than five (5) feet from alley. 
(18)  Public utilities, including poles, lines, distribution transformers, pipes, meters, and other facilities necessary for the provision and maintenance of public utilities, including water and sewerage facilities. Electrical transmission lines and substations are excluded. 
(19)  Business or identification signs not exceeding six (6) square feet in area per side and not more than two (2) sides, no part of which shall be nearer than five (5) feet to any town property line. 
(20)  Church bulletin boards and church identification signs for church activities, only not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in area no part of which shall be nearer than five (5) feet to any town property line. 
(21)  Temporary real estate signs not over six (6) square feet in area no part of which shall be nearer than five (5) feet to any property line and used only to advertise the premises upon which erected. 
(Code 1973, § 29-35; Ord. No. 119, 6-11-2008; Ord. No. 120, 1-14-2009; Ord. No. 186 , 12-6-2017) 
Sec. 29-148. - Minimum area. 
(a)  The minimum lot area in a residential district R-3 shall be five thousand (5,000) square feet, plus two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet for each additional dwelling unit under one (1) roof for lots served by public water and sewer; however, the overall density shall not exceed ten (10) dwelling units per acre. 
(b)  For single-family residential lots not served by water and/or sewer, the minimum area shall be as required in section 24-126. The required area for any such use shall be approved by the health official. All other permitted uses shall be served by public water and sewerage systems. 
(Code 1973, § 29-36) 
Sec. 29-149. - Setback. 
    Setbacks in a residential district R-3 shall be located thirty-five (35) feet or more from any street right-of-way which is fifty (50) feet or greater in width or sixty (60) feet or more from the center of any street right-of-way less than fifty (50) feet in width. This shall be known as the "setback line." 
(Code 1973, § 29-37) 
Sec. 29-150. - Frontage. 
    The minimum lot width at the setback line in a residential district R-3 shall be fifty (50) feet, plus fifteen (15) feet for each additional dwelling unit more than one (1). 
(Code 1973, § 29-38) 
Sec. 29-151. - Yards. 
(a)  The minimum side yard for each main structure in a residential district R-3 shall be seven (7) feet or ten (10) percent of lot width but not less than four (4) feet. 
(b)  Each main structure shall have a rear yard of fifteen (15) feet. 
(Code 1973, § 29-39) 
Sec. 29-152. - Height. 
    Structures in a residential district R-3 may be erected up to thirty-five (35) feet in height from grade; except that: 
(1)  The height limit for structures may be increased up to forty-five (45) feet and up to three (3) stories; provided, that each side yard is seven (7) feet, plus one (1) foot of side yard for each additional foot of building height over thirty-five (35) feet. 
(2)  A public or semipublic building, such as a school, church, library or hospital may be erected to a height of seventy (70) feet from grade; provided, that required front, side and rear yards shall be increased one (1) foot for each foot in height over thirty-five (35) feet. 
(3)  College structures may be erected to a height of one hundred twenty-five (125) feet from grade; provided, that required front, side and rear yards shall be increased one (1) foot for each foot in height over thirty-five (35) feet. 
(4)  Church spires, belfries, cupolas, monuments, municipal water towers, chimneys, flues, flagpoles, television antennas and radio aerials are exempt. Parapet walls may be up to four (4) feet above the height of the building on which the walls rest. 
(Code 1973, § 29-40) 
Sec. 29-153. - Corner lots. 
(a)  Of the two (2) sides of a corner lot in a residential district R-3 the front shall be deemed to be the shortest of the two (2) sides fronting on streets. 
(b)  The side yard on the side facing the side street shall be twenty (20) feet or more for both main and accessory buildings. 
(c)  For subdivisions platted after February 18, 1971, each corner lot shall have a minimum width at the setback line of seventy-five (75) feet or more. 
(Code 1973, § 29-41) 
Secs. 29-154-29-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT R-3A 

Sec. 29-171. - Statement of intent. 
    Residential district R-3A encompasses high-density residential areas, both existing and planned, as well as certain compatible public, semipublic and very limited commercial land uses. The following regulations are designed to stabilize, protect and promote this type of development. This district should provide a suitable environment for persons desiring the amenities of apartment living and the convenience of being closest to shopping and employment centers and other community facilities. 
(Code 1973, § 29-41.1) 
Sec. 29-172. - Uses. 
    Only one (1) building and its accessory buildings may be erected on any lot or parcel of land in residential district R-3A. Structures to be erected or land to be used shall be for one (1) or more of the following uses: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings or two (2) housekeeping units. 
(3)  Rooming and boarding houses. 
(4)  Reserved. 
(5)  University related facilities, with a conditional use permit. 
(6)  Elementary, intermediate and secondary schools, both public and private, with a conditional use permit. 
(7)  Day schools and kindergartens with conditional use permit. 
(8)  Churches, lodges, armories and other public and semipublic facilities, including hospitals, excepting veterinary hospitals and hospitals specializing in the care and treatment of mental illnesses, narcotic addicts or alcoholics, unwed mothers and those about to become mothers out of wedlock. A conditional use permit may be required for these uses. 
(9)  Rest, convalescent or nursing homes but not penal or mental institutions. 
(10)  Parks and playgrounds. 
(11)  Professional offices. 
(12)  Home occupations conducted by the occupant. 
(13)  Off-street parking as required by this chapter. 
(14)  Accessory uses and structures customarily incident to any user permitted by this section, such as servants' quarters, greenhouses or workshops; provided, that none shall be conducted for gain and that no accessory buildings shall be inhabited by other than those who are employees of the owner, lessee or tenant of the premises. No accessory building may be closer than two (2) feet to any property line, and no overhang may project closer than one (1) foot to any property line. 
(15)  Private garage on the same lot with the building not maintained for the service of the public or operated or conducted for commercial or industrial use, but no such private garage shall be hereafter located or erected on any residential block closer to the street than the setback line for the residence on that street or side street. 
(16)  Private group garages, not exceeding four (4), fronting on alleys; provided, that no commercial repair work is done; further provided, that it must be set back not less than five (5) feet from alley. 
(17)  Public utilities, including poles, lines, distribution transformers, pipes, meters and other facilities necessary for the provision and maintenance of public utilities, including water and sewerage facilities. Electrical transmission lines and substations are excluded. 
(18)  Business or identification signs not exceeding six (6) square feet in area per side and not more than two (2) sides, no part of which shall be nearer than five (5) feet to any town property line. 
(19)  Church bulletin boards and church identification signs for church activities, only not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in area no part of which shall be nearer than five (5) feet to any town property line. 
(20)  Temporary real estate signs not over six (6) square feet in area no part of which shall be nearer than five (5) feet to any property line and used only to advertise the premises upon which erected. 
(Code 1973, § 29-41.2; Ord. No. 119, 6-11-2008; Ord. No. 120, 1-14-2009) 
Sec. 29-173. - Minimum area. 
(a)  The minimum lot area in a residential district R-3A shall be five thousand (5,000) square feet, plus two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet for each additional dwelling unit under one (1) roof for lots served by public water and sewer; however, the overall density shall not exceed ten (10) dwelling units per acre. 
(b)  For single-family residential lots not served by water or sewer, the minimum area shall be as required in section 24-126. The required area for any such use shall be approved by the health official. The administrator may require a greater area if considered necessary by the health official. All other permitted uses shall be served by public water and sewerage systems. 
(Code 1973, § 29-41.3) 
Sec. 29-174. - Setback. 
    Setbacks in a residential district R-3A shall be located thirty-five (35) feet or more from any street right-of-way which is fifty (50) feet or greater in width or sixty (60) feet or more from the center of any street right-of-way less than fifty (50) feet in width. This shall be known as the "setback line." 
(Code 1973, § 29-41.4) 
Sec. 29-175. - Frontage. 
    The minimum lot width at the setback line in a residential district R-3A shall be fifty (50) feet, plus fifteen (15) feet for each additional dwelling unit more than one (1). 
(Code 1973, § 29-41.5) 
Sec. 29-176. - Yards. 
(a)  The minimum side yard for each main structure in a residential district R-3A shall be seven (7) feet or ten (10) percent of lot width but not less than four (4) feet. 
(b)  Each main structure shall have a rear yard of fifteen (15) feet. 
(Code 1973, § 29-41.6) 
Sec. 29-177. - Height. 
    Structures in a residential district R-3A may be erected up to thirty-five (35) feet in height from grade; except, that: 
(1)  The height limit for structures may be increased up to forty-five (45) feet and up to three (3) stories; provided, that each side yard is seven (7) feet, plus one (1) foot of side yard for each additional foot of building height over thirty-five (35) feet. 
(2)  A public or semipublic building, such as a school, church, library or hospital may be erected to a height of seventy (70) feet from grade; provided, that required front, side and rear yards shall be increased one (1) foot for each foot in height over thirty-five (35) feet. 
(3)  College structures may be erected to a height of one hundred twenty-five (125) feet from grade; provided, that required front, side and rear yards shall be increased one (1) foot for each foot in height over thirty-five (35) feet. 
(4)  Church spires, belfries, cupolas, monuments, municipal water towers, chimneys, flues, flagpoles, television antennas and radio aerials are exempt. Parapet walls may be up to four (4) feet above the height of the building on which the walls rest. 
(Code 1973, § 29-41.7) 
Sec. 29-178. - Corner lots. 
(a)  Of the two (2) sides of a corner lot in a residential district R-3A the front shall be deemed to be the shortest of the two (2) sides fronting on streets. 
(b)  The side yard on the side facing the side street shall be twenty (20) feet or more for both main and accessory buildings. 
(c)  For subdivisions platted after February 18, 1971, each corner lot shall have a minimum width at the setback line of seventy-five (75) feet or more. 
(Code 1973, § 29-41.8) 
Secs. 29-179-29-195. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT R-4 

Sec. 29-196. - Statement of intent. 
    Residential district R-4 encompasses medium-density residential area, both existing and planned. The following regulations are designed to accommodate this type of development. This district should provide a suitable environment for persons who desire a predominantly single-family area where a variety of housing types are permitted. 
(Code 1973, § 29-42; Ord. No. 94, 3-9-2005) 
Sec. 29-197. - Uses. 
    Only one (1) building and its accessory building may be erected on any lot or parcel of land in residential district R-4. Structures to be erected on land to be used shall be for one (1) or more of the following uses: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings or two (2) housekeeping units. 
(3)  Multiple family dwellings with a conditional use permit. 
(4)  Rooming or boarding houses which may accommodate not more than four (4) roomers and/or boarders. 
(5)  Home occupations conducted by the occupant. 
(6)  University related facilities, with a conditional use permit. 
(7)  Churches, lodges, armories and other public and semipublic facilities including hospitals, but excepting veterinary hospitals and hospitals specializing in the care and treatment of mental illnesses, narcotic addicts or alcoholics, unwed mothers and those about to become mothers out of wedlock. A conditional use permit may be required for those uses. 
(8)  Parks and playgrounds of a noncommercial nature. 
(9)  Day schools and kindergartens with conditional use permit. 
(10)  Off-street parking as required by this chapter. 
(11)  Accessory uses and structures customarily incident to any use permitted by this section, such as servants' quarters, greenhouses or workshops; provided, that none shall be conducted for gain and that no accessory buildings shall be inhabited by other than those who are employees of the owner, [lessor] or tenant of the premises. No accessory building may be closer than five (5) feet to any property line. 
(12)  Private garage on the same lot with the building not maintained for the service of the public or operated or conducted for commercial or industrial use, but no such private garage shall be hereafter located or erected on any residential block closer to the street than the setback line for the residence on that street or side street. 
(13)  Private group garages, not exceeding four (4), fronting on alleys; provided, that no commercial repair work is done; further provided, that it must be set back not less than five (5) feet from alley. 
(14)  Public utilities, including poles, lines, distribution transformers, pipes, meters, and other facilities necessary for the provision and maintenance of public utilities, including water and sewerage systems. Electrical transmission lines and substations are excluded. 
(15)  Church bulletin boards and church identification signs for church activities only not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in area. 
(16)  Small professional or announcement signs not exceeding three (3) square feet in area no part of which shall be nearer than one (1) foot to any town property line and nonelectrical temporary real estate signs not over six (6) square feet in area no part of which shall be nearer than five (5) feet from any property line and used only to advertise the premises upon which erected. 
(17)  Condominium and townhouse developments. Overall density shall not exceed ten (10) dwelling units per acre. A conditional use permit shall be required. 
(Code 1973, § 29-43; Ord. of 9-9-98; Ord. No. 62, 3-14-2002; Ord. No. 119, 6-11-2008) 
Sec. 29-198. - Minimum area. 
(a)  The minimum lot area in a residential district R-4 shall be five thousand (5,000) square feet, plus two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet for each additional dwelling unit under one (1) roof for lots served by public water and sewer; however, the overall density shall not exceed ten (10) dwelling units per acre. 
(b)  For lots not served by water and/or sewer, the minimum area shall be as required in section 24-126. The required area for any such use shall be approved by the health official. The administrator may require a greater area if considered necessary by the health official. Private schools must conform to land area requirements of the state board of education. 
(c)  Minimum lot area for townhouses/condominiums shall be at least one thousand (1,000) square feet. 
(Code 1973, § 29-44; Ord. No. 154, 1-9-2013 ) 
Sec. 29-199. - Setback. 
(a)  Setbacks in a residential district R-4 shall be located thirty-five (35) feet or more from any street right-of-way which is fifty (50) feet or greater in width of sixty (60) feet or more from the center of any street right-of-way less than fifty (50) feet in width. This shall be known as the "setback line." 
(b)  Setbacks for townhouses/condominiums shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet from the front, fifteen (15) feet from the rear yard and no side yard. 
(Code 1973, § 29-45; Ord. No. 154, 1-9-2013 ) 
Sec. 29-200. - Frontage. 
(a)  The minimum lot width at the setback line in a residential district R-4 shall be fifty (50) feet. 
(b)  Minimum frontage for townhouses/condominiums shall be twenty (20) feet. 
(Code 1973, § 29-46; Ord. No. 154, 1-9-2013 ) 
Sec. 29-201. - Yards. 
(a)  The minimum side yard for each main structure in a residential district R-4 shall be seven (7) feet or ten (10) percent of lot width but not less than four (4) feet. 
(b)  Each main structure shall have a rear yard of fifteen (15) feet or more. 
(Code 1973, § 29-47) 
Sec. 29-202. - Height. 
    Structures in a residential district R-4 may be erected up to thirty-five (35) feet in height from grade; except, that: 
(1)  The height limit for dwellings may be increased up to forty-five (45) feet and up to three (3) stories; provided, that each side yard is twenty (20) feet, plus one (1) foot or more for each additional foot of building height over thirty-five (35) feet. 
(2)  A public or semipublic building, such as a school, church or library, may be erected to a height of seventy (70) feet from grade; provided, that required front, side and rear yards shall be increased one (1) foot for each foot in height over thirty-five (35) feet. 
(3)  College structures may be erected to a height of one hundred twenty-five (125) feet from grade; provided, that required front, side and rear yards shall be increased one (1) foot for each foot in height over thirty-five (35) feet. 
(4)  Church spires, belfries, cupolas, municipal water towers, chimneys, flues, flagpoles, television antennae and radio aerials are exempt. Parapet walls may be up to four (4) feet above the height of the building on which the walls rest. 
(5)  Accessory buildings over one (1) story in height shall be at least ten (10) feet from any lot line. All accessory buildings shall be less than the main building in height. 
(6)  Townhouses/condominiums may be constructed to a height of forty-five (45) feet from grade. 
(Code 1973, § 29-48; Ord. No. 154, 1-9-2013 ) 
Sec. 29-203. - Corner lots. 
(a)  Of the two (2) sides of a corner lot in a residential district R-4 the front shall be deemed to be the shortest of the two (2) sides fronting on streets. 
(b)  The side yard on the side facing the side street shall be twenty (20) feet or more for both main and accessory buildings. 
(c)  The side yard for townhouse/condominiums on the side facing the side street shall be ten (10) feet or more for both main and accessory buildings. 
(d)  For subdivisions platted after February 18, 1971, each corner lot shall have a minimum width at the setback line of seventy-five (75) feet or more. 
(Code 1973, § 29-49; Ord. No. 154, 1-9-2013 ) 
Secs. 29-204-29-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT R-5 

Sec. 29-221. - Statement of intent. 
    Residential district R-5 is intended to accommodate mobile home parks exclusively. This district is based on the premise that the demand for mobile homes can best be supplied by the designation of one (1) or certainly not more than several mobile home parks. The following regulations are designed to provide an attractive and harmonious environment for mobile home dwellings with all the amenities normally found in a substantial residential neighborhood. 
(Code 1973, § 29-50) 
Sec. 29-222. - Uses. 
    In residential district R-5 structures to be erected or land to be used shall be for some combination of the following uses: 
(1)  Mobile home parks with conditional use permit. 
(2)  Accessory structures. 
(3)  Home occupations conducted by the occupant. 
(4)  Parks and playgrounds. 
(5)  Streets, accessways and off-street parking as required by this chapter. 
(6)  Public utilities, including poles, lines, distribution transformers, pipes, meters and other facilities necessary for the provision and maintenance of public utilities, including water and sewerage. 
(7)  Small professional or announcement signs not exceeding three (3) square feet in area no part of which shall be nearer than one (1) foot to any town property line and nonelectrical temporary real estate signs not over six (6) square feet in area. 
(Code 1973, § 29-51) 
Sec. 29-223. - Minimum area. 
(a)  Minimum size, number of spaces. The minimum area for each mobile home park shall be five (5) acres. Minimum number of spaces completed and ready for occupancy before first occupancy is permitted shall be twenty-five (25). 
(b)  Maximum density of units per acre. The total density of any mobile home park shall not exceed eight (8) units per gross acre. 
(c)  Minimum size per space. The minimum area for an individual mobile home space shall be five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
(d)  Minimum width of space. The minimum average width for each mobile home lot shall be fifty (50) feet; except, that for any mobile home unit greater than twelve (12) feet in width, the minimum average lot width shall be sixty (60) feet. This average shall be maintained between points ten (10) feet in front of the mobile home stand and ten (10) feet to the rear of the stand. 
(Code 1973, § 29-52) 
Sec. 29-224. - Yards. 
(a)  Minimum distance between mobile homes. No mobile home shall be placed within twenty-five (25) feet of another. 
(b)  Yards abutting common areas. The distance from the line or corner of the mobile home stand to a private access drive, a common parking area, a common walk or other common area shall be twenty (20) feet minimum. Patios, carports and individual storage facilities shall be disregarded in determining yard width. 
(Code 1973, § 29-53) 
Sec. 29-225. - Setback. 
    No mobile home shall be placed a lesser distance from the mobile home park boundary than the side yard width required in the zoning district in which the property adjoining each such boundary lies. In no case shall any mobile home be placed less than fifteen (15) feet from the mobile home park boundary. The distance from the line or corner of the mobile home stand to a public street shall be as designated on the setback map or, if the setback is not designated on such map, shall be located thirty-five (35) feet or more from any street right-of-way which is fifty (50) feet or greater in width or sixty (60) feet or more from the center of any street right-of-way less than fifty (50) feet in width. This shall be known as the "setback line." 
(Code 1973, § 29-54) 
Sec. 29-226. - Mobile home stand. 
(a)  Generally. A mobile home stand is part of an individual lot which has been reserved for the placement of the mobile home. 
(b)  Placement. The mobile home stand placement shall provide for the practical placement on and removal from the lot of both the mobile home and its appurtenant structures and the retention of the home on the lot in a stable condition and in satisfactory relationship to its surroundings. 
(c)  Size. The size of the mobile home stand shall be suitable for the general market to be served by the individual proposal and suitable to fit dimensions of mobile homes anticipated, including mobile home appurtenant structures or appendages. 
(d)  Location. The location of each mobile home stand shall be at such elevation, distance and angle in relation to the access street and the mobile home accessway that placement and removal of the mobile home is practical. 
(e)  Construction. The construction of the mobile home stand shall be of appropriate material, properly graded, placed and compacted so as to be durable and adequate for the support of the maximum anticipated loads during all seasons. 
(f)  Gradient. There shall be zero percent of five (5) percent longitudinal gradient and adequate crown or cross gradient for surface drainage. 
(g)  Markers for mobile home lots. Every mobile home lot shall be clearly defined on the ground by permanent markers. There shall be posted and maintained in a conspicuous place on each lot a number corresponding to the number of each lot as shown on the site plan submitted as required in section 29-225 so that each lot may be easily identified. 
(Code 1973, § 29-55) 
Sec. 29-227. - Patios. 
(a)  Required. Each mobile home lot shall provide an appropriate outdoor living space to supplement the limited interior space of a mobile home. 
(b)  Size. The minimum size of each mobile home lot outdoor living space shall be one hundred eighty (180) square feet. 
(c)  Location. Every patio location shall be convenient to the entrance of the mobile home, appropriately related to open areas of the lot and other facilities, fitted to terrain and natural features and related to anticipated mobile home models. 
(d)  Elevation. The patio shall be at an elevation at least as high as the elevation of its mobile home stand. Where topographical conditions permit, the patio and adjoining yard area on the entry side of the mobile home stand may be as much as two (2) feet higher than the mobile home stand in order that the level of the patio and outdoor living areas will be close to the floor level of an in-place mobile home. The grade difference between the patio and the stand may be taken up by a retaining wall or cribbing or by an earth slope. Where the patio is higher than the mobile home stand, adequate surface drainage of the mobile home stand shall be provided across the other side or ends of the stand. There shall be adequate crown or cross gradient for surface drainage. 
(e)  Construction. Any subgrading shall be well-drained, uniformly graded and compacted. Construction shall provide a useful outdoor surface constructed or formed either monolithically or in movable units with weather-resistant materials placed sufficiently close together to create a paved area. 
(Code 1973, § 29-56) 
Sec. 29-228. - Tenant storage. 
(a)  Generally. Tenant storage shall provide storage facilities on or conveniently near each mobile home for the active storage of outdoor equipment, furniture and tools and for the inactive storage of such other material as is used only seasonally or infrequently by the typical tenant and cannot be conveniently stored in the typical mobile home. 
(b)  Size. There shall be a minimum of ninety (90) cubic feet provided for general storage for each mobile home lot. 
(c)  Design and location of storage facilities. Storage facilities shall be provided on the lot or in compounds located within a reasonable distance not more than one hundred (100) feet from each stand located not closer to private streets and public streets than the mobile home unit itself. Storage facilities shall be designed in a manner that will enhance the appearance of the park and shall be constructed of suitable weather-resistant materials appropriate under the use and maintenance contemplated. 
(Code 1973, § 29-57) 
Sec. 29-229. - Streets. 
(a)  General requirements. All streets, both public and private, serving mobile home lots shall conform to the construction standards of the state department of highways. Curbs and gutters are encouraged; however, in the event that they are not provided, paved drainage facilities shall be provided. 
(b)  Pavement widths. Pavements shall be of adequate widths to accommodate the contemplated parking and traffic load in accordance with the type of street, with ten (10) feet minimum for moving lanes, with eight (8) feet minimum land for parallel guest parking and two (2) feet minimum additional width for pedestrian use where adjacent sidewalk is not provided. 
(c)  Alignment and gradient. Streets shall be adapted to the topography and shall have suitable alignment and gradient for safety of traffic, satisfactory surface and groundwater drainage and proper functioning of sanitary and storm sewer systems. 
(d)  Intersections. Street intersections shall generally be at right angles. Offsets at intersections and intersections of more than two (2) streets at one (1) point shall be avoided. 
(e)  Extent of improvements. The street improvements shall extend continuously from the existing improved street system to provide suitable access to the mobile home stands and other important facilities on the property, to provide adequate connections to existing or future streets at the boundaries of the property and to provide convenient circulation of vehicles with origins or destinations on the property. 
(f)  Grading. Grading shall be for the full width of the street to provide suitable finish grades for pavement and any sidewalks with adequate surface drainage and convenient access to the mobile home stands and other important facilities on the property. 
(Code 1973, § 29-58) 
Sec. 29-230. - Walks. 
    Walks shall be provided for safe, convenient, all-season pedestrian access of adequate width for intended use and durable and convenient to maintain. There shall be: 
(1)  Individual walks to each mobile home stand from a paved street or from a paved driveway or parking space connecting to a paved street. 
(2)  Common walks in locations where pedestrian traffic is concentrated, for example, at the court entrance and to the court office and other important facilities. Common walks should preferably be through interior areas removed from the vicinity of streets. 
(3)  Width, alignment and gradient of walks shall be appropriate for safety, convenience and appearance and shall be suitable for use both by pedestrians and for the circulation of small-wheeled vehicles such as baby carriages and service carts. Sudden changes in alignment and gradient should be avoided. 
(4)  Width shall generally be at least three (3) feet for walks on individual lots and at least four (4) feet for common walks. 
(5)  Gradients shall be between one-eighth inch per foot or one (1) percent and five-eighths inch per foot or five (5) percent wherever possible, especially in areas subject to ice conditions. 
(6)  Maximum cross-slope should be one-fourth inch per foot and minimum shall be one-eighth inch per foot or one (1) percent. 
(7)  No required walk shall be used as drainageway. 
(8)  Pavement shall be cement concrete at least four (4) inches in depth. Joints shall be at regular intervals not exceeding twice the width of the walk. The base should be a minimum of four (4) inches thick and shall consist of crushed stone, gravel or other appropriate durable material compacted to maximum practical density. 
(Code 1973, § 29-59) 
Sec. 29-231. - Parking spaces. 
    Parking spaces shall be provided at the rate of at least two (2) car spaces for each mobile home lot. Each such parking space shall be not less than ten (10) feet wide and twenty-two (22) feet deep; shall be surfaced for its entire area with durable, hard material, suitable for all-weather use; and shall have unobstructed access to a public street or common street highway. 
(Code 1973, § 29-60) 
Sec. 29-232. - Water supply. 
    An adequate supply of potable water approved by the health department shall be furnished from a public water supply system or from a private water system conforming to all applicable laws, regulations, resolutions and ordinances, with supply faucets located on each mobile home lot. 
(Code 1973, § 29-61) 
Sec. 29-233. - Sewerage facilities. 
    In each mobile home park all waste or wastewater from a faucet, toilet, tub, shower, sink, slop-sink, drain, washing machine, garbage disposal unit or laundry shall empty into an approved sewer system. The discharge of waste or wastewater into a septic tank is hereby prohibited. 
(Code 1973, § 29-62) 
Sec. 29-234. - Garbage and trash disposal. 
    Corrosion-resistive metal garbage cans or other noncombustible containers with tight-fitting covers shall be provided in quantities adequate to permit disposal of all garbage and rubbish. Each mobile home lot shall have at least one (1) garbage can within one hundred (100) feet of it. The cans shall be kept in sanitary condition as determined by inspection of the health department. Garbage and rubbish shall be collected and disposed of as frequently as may be necessary, but not less than twice weekly, at least three (3) days apart, to insure that the garbage cans shall not overflow. 
(Code 1973, § 29-63) 
Sec. 29-235. - Electric lighting and outlets. 
    All entrances, exits and driveways shall be lighted at night. Not less than a one-hundred-watt electric light shall be provided for each two hundred (200) lineal feet of internal driveway and at each entrance and exit to the mobile home park. At least one (1) receptacle outlet for each mobile home space shall be provided; this receptacle and other electric wiring shall conform to the National Electrical Code. 
(Code 1973, § 29-64) 
Sec. 29-236. - Storage tanks. 
(a)  Gasoline, liquefied petroleum, gas or oil storage tanks shall be so installed as to comply with all town, state and national fire prevention code regulations. 
(b)  Where oil heating of a mobile home is provided, an underground storage facility shall be provided in each mobile home lot. In lieu of this, a central storage facility may be constructed to serve the mobile home park. 
(Code 1973, § 29-65) 
Sec. 29-237. - Playgrounds. 
(a)  There shall be provided areas and facilities for recreational purposes appropriate to the needs of the occupants. 
(b)  Each mobile home park shall provide one (1) multiple purpose playground of at least twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, plus two thousand (2,000) square feet for each mobile home space in the mobile home park, to be provided in a convenient location and to consist of one (1) usable contiguous area. If the mobile home park is designated to accommodate over one hundred (100) mobile homes, the required playground area may be provided in two (2) or more locations; provided that the areas are large enough to accommodate normal play activities. 
(Code 1973, § 29-66) 
Sec. 29-238. - Additions to mobile homes. 
    No permanent or semipermanent structure shall be affixed to any mobile home as an addition to such mobile home nor shall any accessory structure be permitted on any mobile home lot or in any mobile home park except those accessory structures required by the chapter and a structure to house an office. If an office structure is provided, its construction shall comply with all applicable laws and ordinances. The prohibition herein against any addition or accessory to a mobile home shall not apply to a canopy or awning designed for use with a mobile home nor to any expansion unit or accessory structure specifically manufactured for mobile homes. The lot coverage of a mobile home, together with an expansion or accessory structure permitted thereto by this chapter, shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the total mobile home lot area. 
(Code 1973, § 29-67) 
Sec. 29-239. - Height. 
    No mobile home shall exceed fourteen (14) feet in height nor shall any storage facility or other accessory structure exceed the height of any mobile home which it serves. Utilities, television antennas and radio aerials are exempt. 
(Code 1973, § 29-68) 
Sec. 29-240. - Mobile home standards. 
(a)  Every mobile home occupied as a dwelling unit located in the town after the date of the adoption of this chapter shall meet the minimum standards for plumbing, heating and electric systems as defined by the United States Standards Institute Publication A 1119.1. Mobile homes that do not meet these minimum standards for plumbing, heating and electrical systems shall not be issued an occupancy permit by the zoning administrator. 
(b)  The minimum standards for plumbing, heating and electrical systems as defined by the United States Standards Institute Publication A119 (1963), as amended and revised periodically, are hereby made a part of and incorporated by reference into this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 29-69) 
Sec. 29-241. - Requirements for permitted uses. 
    Before a zoning permit shall be issued or construction begun on any permitted use in this district, detailed site plans indicating compliance with the substantive provisions of this chapter shall be submitted to the zoning administrator for study. The administrator may refer these plans to the planning commission for its recommendations. Modifications of the plans may be required. 
(Code 1973, § 29-70) 
Secs. 29-242-29-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - BUSINESS DISTRICT B-1 

Sec. 29-261. - Statement of intent. 
    Business district B-1 is intended to encompass the existing major downtown retailing center. Business district B-1 should provide a framework for a strong nucleus of the business community in which each business can enhance other businesses and where all the amenities and services of downtown can be provided. Since business district B-1 is intended to include only the existing built-up downtown area, off street parking is not required, except as provided for in subsection 29-262(40). 
(Code 1973, § 29-71; Ord. No. 93, 3-9-2005) 
Sec. 29-262. - Uses. 
    In business district B-1 structures to be erected or land to be used shall be for one (1) or more of the following uses: 
(1)  Department stores. 
(2)  Variety stores. 
(3)  Wearing apparel stores. 
(4)  Furniture stores. 
(5)  Household appliance stores. 
(6)  Drugstores. 
(7)  Banks. 
(8)  Jewelry stores. 
(9)  Off-street parking. 
(10)  Hardware stores. 
(11)  Grocery stores. 
(12)  Restaurants. 
(13)  Theaters, assembly halls. 
(14)  Hotels, motels. 
(15)  Clubs and lodges. 
(16)  Churches. 
(17)  Libraries. 
(18)  Professional and public offices. 
(19)  Business offices and display rooms. 
(20)  Billiard parlors and poolrooms. 
(21)  Bowling alleys. 
(22)  Recreation centers. 
(23)  Newspaper printing establishments. 
(24)  Barber and beauty shops. 
(25)  Shops for the repair of bicycles, shoes, locks, guns, electrical equipment and similar commodities. 
(26)  Bakeries. 
(27)  Gift, record and tobacco shops. 
(28)  Bookstores. 
(29)  Magazine and newsstands. 
(30)  Liquor stores. 
(31)  Animal hospital with conditional use permit. 
(32)  Laundries, laundromats and dry cleaners. 
(33)  Transportation terminals, automobile and truck sales, service, storage and repairs. 
(34)  Trade or vocational schools with a conditional use permit. 
(35)  Public utilities including poles, lines, distribution transformers, pipes, meters, and/or facilities necessary for the provision and maintenance of public utilities. Electrical transmission lines and substations are excluded. 
(36)  Business or identification signs. 
(37)  Residence, provided occupant is the principal owner of the building and operator of the business contained within the structure. The residence may not be occupied by any persons other than the immediate family of the owner/operator of the business. Off-street parking is required. 
(38)  Auction barns with a conditional use permit. 
(39)  Secondhand stores including flea market sales, provided such activity is conducted wholly within an enclosed building, meeting all the requirements as set forth in town ordinances and the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(40)  Mixed use commercial and residential use by conversion of existing structure, provided that: 
a.  All applicable local and state codes are strictly complied with in the siting and construction of the structure; 
b.  All residential use must be located on the second story of the building or above, immediately above the street level (not including the basement in any such calculation or use); 
c.  A separate street level entrance must be provided for the residential use; 
d.  Each residential unit must be between seven hundred (700) and fifteen hundred (1,500) square feet in finished habitable space as defined by the current building code (excluding bathrooms, closets, halls, storage, or utility spaces); 
e.  Occupancy density shall insure at least three hundred fifty (350) square feet of finished habitable space per occupant as defined by the current building code (excluding bathrooms, closets, halls, storage, or utility spaces); 
f.  Off-street parking under the legal control of the property owner for which the space is made available must be provided in the amount of one (1) parking space per housing unit up to two (2) bedrooms and one (1) additional space for each additional bedroom or room usable as a bedroom, to include any offsite parking within five hundred (500) feet of site (as opposed to normal requirement of three hundred (300) feet). 
g.  All mixed use structures, as outlined in this subsection (40) of this section, that are over seventy-five (75) percent damaged by fire or other disaster will only be allowed to be built back as a commercial use structure. 
(Code 1973, § 29-72; Ord. No. 81, 1-14-2004) 
Sec. 29-263. - Minimum area. 
    There are no area regulations in a business district B-1, except if permitted uses utilize individual water supply or sewage disposal systems, the required area shall be established by the health official. 
(Code 1973, § 29-73) 
Sec. 29-264. - Setback. 
    Setbacks in a business district B-1 shall be located twenty-five (25) feet or more from the center of any street right-of-way. This shall be known as the "setback line." 
(Code 1973, § 29-74) 
Sec. 29-265. - Frontage and yards. 
    For permitted uses in a business district B-1, the minimum side yard or rear adjoining or adjacent to a residential district shall be twenty-five (25) feet and off-street parking shall be in accordance with the provisions contained herein. Provision must be made for loading and unloading commercial supplies and goods. 
(Code 1973, § 29-75) 
Sec. 29-266. - Height. 
    Buildings in a business district B-1 may be erected up to sixty-five (65) feet in height from grade. Church spires, belfries, cupolas, monuments, cooling towers, municipal water towers, chimneys, flues, flagpoles, television antennas and radio aerials are exempt. Parapet walls may be up to four (4) feet above the height of the building on which the walls rest. 
(Code 1973, § 29-76) 
Sec. 29-267. - Requirements for permitted uses. 
    Before a zoning permit shall be issued or construction begun on any permitted use in a business district B-1, or a permit issued for a new use, detailed site plans indicating compliance with the substantive provision of this chapter and in sufficient detail to show the operations and processes shall be submitted to the zoning administrator for study. The administrator may refer these plans to the planning commission and/or town council for their recommendation. Modification of the plans may be required. 
(Code 1973, § 29-77) 
Secs. 29-268-29-285. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - BUSINESS DISTRICT B-2 

Sec. 29-286. - Statement of intent. 
    Business district B-2 is intended to encompass the expanding major downtown retailing center and to provide for its orderly expansion. Business district B-2 should provide a framework for the perpetuation of a strong nucleus for the business community in which each business can enhance other businesses and where all the amenities and services of downtown can be provided. 
(Code 1973, § 29-78) 
Sec. 29-287. - Uses. 
    In business district B-2 structures to be erected or land to be used shall be for one (1) or more of the following uses: 
(1)  Department stores. 
(2)  Variety stores. 
(3)  Wearing apparel stores. 
(4)  Furniture stores. 
(5)  Household appliance stores. 
(6)  Drugstores. 
(7)  Banks. 
(8)  Hardware stores. 
(9)  Grocery stores. 
(10)  Restaurants. 
(11)  Theaters, assembly halls. 
(12)  Hotels, motels. 
(13)  Clubs and lodges. 
(14)  Churches. 
(15)  Libraries. 
(16)  Professional and public offices. 
(17)  Business offices and display rooms. 
(18)  Billiard parlors and poolrooms. 
(19)  Bowling alleys. 
(20)  Recreation centers. 
(21)  Newspaper printing establishments. 
(22)  Barber and beauty shops. 
(23)  Shoe repair shops. 
(24)  Bakeries. 
(25)  Gift, record and tobacco shops. 
(26)  Bookstores. 
(27)  Magazine and newsstands. 
(28)  Liquor stores. 
(29)  Animal hospital with conditional use permit. 
(30)  Laundries, laundromats, and dry cleaners. 
(31)  Transportation terminals, automobile and truck sales, service, storage, and repairs. 
(32)  Trade or vocational schools with a conditional use permit. 
(33)  Off-street parking as required by this chapter. 
(34)  Public utilities including poles, lines, distribution transformers, pipes, meters, and/or facilities necessary for the provision and maintenance of public utilities. Electrical transmission lines and substations are excluded. 
(35)  Business or identification signs. 
(36)  Auction barns with a conditional use permit. 
(37)  Secondhand stores, including flea market sales, provided such activity is conducted wholly within an enclosed building, meeting all the requirements as set forth in town ordinances and the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(38)  Mixed use commercial and residential use by conversion of existing structure, provided that: 
a.  All applicable local and state codes are strictly complied with in the siting and construction of the structure; 
b.  All residential use must be located on the second story of the building or above, immediately above the street level (not including the basement in any such calculation or use); 
c.  A separate street level entrance must be provided for the residential use; 
d.  Each residential unit must be between seven hundred (700) and fifteen hundred (1,500) square feet in finished habitable space as defined by the current building code (excluding bathrooms, closets, halls, storage, or utility spaces); 
e.  Occupancy density shall insure at least three hundred fifty (350) square feet of finished habitable space per occupant as defined by the current building code (excluding bathrooms, closets, halls, storage, or utility spaces); 
f.  Off-street parking under the legal control of the property owner for which the space is made available must be provided in the amount of one (1) parking space per housing unit up to two (2) bedrooms and one (1) additional space for each additional bedroom or room usable as a bedroom, to include any offsite parking within five hundred (500) feet of site (as opposed to normal requirement of three hundred (300) feet). 
g.  All mixed use structures, as outlined in this subsection (38) of this section, that are over seventy-five (75) percent damaged by fire or other disaster will only be allowed to be built back as a commercial use structure. 
(39)  Colleges and campus related [dwellings] for up to four (4) persons not related by blood, marriage, adoption, or guardianship per dwelling unit with a conditional use permit. 
(Code 1973, § 29-79; Ord. No. 81, 1-14-2004; Ord. No. 90, 2-1-2005) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 90, adopted Feb. 1, 2005, set out provisions intended for use as § 29-287(38). For purposes of classification and to avoid duplicate numbering in this subsection of the Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 29-287(39). 
Sec. 29-288. - Minimum area. 
    There are no area regulations in a business district B-2, except if permitted uses utilize individual water supply or sewage disposal systems, the required area shall be established by the health official. 
(Code 1973, § 29-80) 
Sec. 29-289. - Setback. 
    Setbacks in a business district B-2 shall be located twenty-five (25) feet or more from the center of any street right-of-way. This shall be known as the "setback line." 
(Code 1973, § 29-81) 
Sec. 29-290. - Frontage and yards. 
    For permitted uses in a business district B-2 the minimum side yard or rear yard adjoining or adjacent to a residential district shall be twenty-five (25) feet and off-street parking shall be in accordance with the provisions contained herein. Provision must be made for loading and unloading commercial supplies and goods. 
(Code 1973, § 29-82) 
Sec. 29-291. - Height. 
    Buildings in a business district B-2 may be erected up to sixty-five (65) feet in height from grade. Church spires, belfries, cupolas, monuments, cooling towers, municipal water towers, chimneys, flues, flagpoles, television antennae and radio aerials are exempt. Parapet walls may be up to four (4) feet above the height of the building on which the walls rest. 
(Code 1973, § 29-83) 
Sec. 29-292. - Requirements for permitted uses. 
    Before a zoning permit shall be issued or construction begun on any permitted use in a business district B-2 or a permit issued for a new use, detailed site plans indicating compliance with the substantive provisions of this chapter and in sufficient detail to show the operations and processes shall be submitted to the zoning administrator for study. The administrator may refer these plans to the planning commission and/or town council for their recommendation. Modification of the plans may be required. 
(Code 1973, § 29-84) 
Secs. 29-293-29-310. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - BUSINESS DISTRICT B-3 

Sec. 29-311. - Statement of intent. 
    Business district B-3 is intended to accommodate general business areas, highway-oriented commercial uses and wholesaling operations which by nature or space requirements do not lend themselves to being concentrated within a centralized shopping area. Business district B-3 recognizes the demand for a variety of commercial land uses which might not be compatible with the land uses in many areas of town. 
(Code 1973, § 29-85) 
Sec. 29-312. - Uses. 
    In business district B-3 structures to be erected or land to be used shall be for one (1) or more of the following uses; a conditional use permit may be required for each use: 
(1)  Gasoline service stations (with major repair under cover). 
(2)  Churches. 
(3)  Restaurants, including drive-in restaurants with conditional use permit, commercial recreational or amusement facilities with conditional use permit. 
(4)  Automobile, truck, mobile home sales, services, storage and repairs. 
(5)  Machinery sales and services. 
(6)  Motels. 
(7)  Building, plumbing, woodworking, wholesaling, air-conditioning, sheet metal, electrical and painting contractors' establishments, offices and display rooms; provided, that any material or supplies in an enclosed area must be arranged so as not to detract from the orderly appearance of the area. 
(8)  Tire recapping and vulcanizing. 
(9)  Funeral homes. 
(10)  Grocery stores. 
(11)  Branch banks. 
(12)  Professional and public offices. 
(13)  Veterinary hospitals with conditional use permit. 
(14)  Furniture stores. 
(15)  Billiard parlors and poolrooms. 
(16)  Printing establishments. 
(17)  Appliance stores. 
(18)  Laundries, laundromats and dry cleaners. 
(19)  Transportation terminals, automobile and truck sales, service, storage and repairs. 
(20)  Trade or vocational school with conditional use permit. 
(21)  Off-street parking as required by this chapter. 
(22)  Public utilities, including poles, lines, distribution transformers, pipes, meters and facilities necessary for the provision and maintenance of public utilities; electrical transmission lines and substations are excluded. 
(23)  Business or identification signs. 
(24)  One (1) single-dwelling unit situated within the existing business structure with two (2) off-street parking spaces provided on the property. 
(25)  Nursing homes, with conditional use permit. 
(26)  Auction barns with a conditional use permit. 
(27)  Secondhand stores including flea market sales, provided such activity is conducted wholly within an enclosed building, meeting all the requirements as set forth in town ordinances and the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(28)  Private or public detention or holding facilities for adult immigrant detainees, with a conditional use permit. 
(29)  Mixed use commercial and residential provided that all residential be located on the second story of the building or above, with a conditional use permit. 
(30)  Domestic violence shelters, with a conditional use permit. 
(Code 1973, § 29-86; Ord. No. 43, 5-14-97; Ord. No. 113, 6-13-2007; Ord. No. 145, 9-14-2011; Ord. No. 149, 11-9-2011; Ord. No. 180 , 1-11-2017) 
Sec. 29-313. - Minimum area. 
    There are no area regulations in a business district B-3, except if permitted uses utilize individual water supply or sewage disposal systems, the required area for any such use shall be established by the health official. 
(Code 1973, § 29-87) 
Sec. 29-314. - Setback. 
    Setbacks in a business district B-3 shall be located twenty-five (25) feet or more from the center of any street right-of-way. This shall be known as the "setback line." 
(Code 1973, § 29-88) 
Sec. 29-315. - Frontage and yards. 
    For permitted uses in a business district B-3 the minimum side yard or rear yard adjoining or adjacent to a residential district shall be twenty-five (25) feet, and off-street parking shall be in accordance with the provision contained herein. Provisions must be made for loading and unloading commercial supplies and goods. 
(Code 1973, § 29-89) 
Sec. 29-316. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 150, adopted Nov. 9, 2011, deleted § 29-316, which pertained to height and derived from the Code of 1973, § 29-90. 
Sec. 29-317. - Requirements for permitted uses. 
    Before a zoning permit shall be issued or construction begun on any permitted use in a business district B-3, or a permit issued for a new use, detailed site plans indicating compliance with the substantive provisions of this chapter and in sufficient detail to show the operations and processes shall be submitted to the zoning administrator for study. The administrator may refer these plans to the planning commission and/or town council for their recommendations. Conditional use permit may be required. Modification of the plans may be required. 
(Code 1973, § 29-91) 
Secs. 29-318-29-335. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - BUSINESS DISTRICT B-4 

Sec. 29-336. - Statement of intent. 
    Business district B-4 is intended to accommodate shopping facilities which can supply the needs of families living in the immediate area. At the same time, business district B-4 is intended to be relatively free of the nuisance effects which businesses can render on adjacent residential areas. For this reason only limited types of businesses are allowed with a conditional use permit to insure that the business area is most compatible with adjacent residential areas. 
(Code 1973, § 29-92) 
Sec. 29-337. - Uses. 
    In business district B-4, structures to be erected or land to be used shall be for one (1) or more of the following uses. A conditional use permit may be required for each use. 
(1)  Hotel/motel. 
(2)  University related facilities, with a conditional use permit. 
(3)  Elementary, intermediate and secondary schools, both public and private, with a conditional use permit. 
(4)  Day schools and kindergartens with conditional use permit. 
(5)  Churches, lodges, armories and other public and semipublic facilities, including hospitals, excepting veterinary hospitals and hospitals specializing in the care and treatment of mental illnesses, narcotic addicts or alcoholics, unwed mothers and those about to become mothers out of wedlock. A conditional use permit may be required for these uses. 
(6)  Rest, convalescent or nursing homes but not penal or mental institutions. 
(7)  Parks and playgrounds. 
(8)  Grocery stores. 
(9)  Drugstores. 
(10)  Department stores. 
(11)  Variety stores. 
(12)  Hardware stores. 
(13)  Home shops. 
(14)  Auto supply stores. 
(15)  Laundries, laundromats and dry cleaners. 
(16)  Barber and beauty shops. 
(17)  Professional offices. 
(18)  Branch banks. 
(19)  Shoe repair shops. 
(20)  Restaurants. 
(21)  Bakeries. 
(22)  Gift, record and tobacco shops. 
(23)  Bookstores. 
(24)  Magazine and newsstands. 
(25)  Household furnishings and appliance stores. 
(26)  Off-street parking as required by this chapter. 
(27)  Public utilities, including poles, lines, distribution transformers, pipes, meters and/or facilities necessary for the provision and maintenance of public utilities, including water and sewerage facilities. Electrical transmission lines and substations are excluded. 
(28)  Business or identification signs. 
(29)  Apartment, condominium and townhouse development. Overall density shall not exceed ten (10) dwelling units per acre. A conditional use permit shall be required. 
(30)  Church bulletin boards and church identification signs for church activities, only not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in area no part of which shall be nearer than five (5) feet to any town property line. 
(31)  Temporary real estate signs not over six (6) square feet in area, no part of which shall be nearer than five (5) feet to any property line, and used only to advertise the premises upon which erected. 
(32)  Recreation facilities. 
(33)  Funeral homes with a minimum of twenty (20) parking spaces. 
(34)  Secondhand stores including flea market sales, provided such activity is conducted wholly within an enclosed building. 
(35)  Gas station. 
(Code 1973, § 29-93; Ord. No. 119, 6-11-2008; Ord. No. 154, 1-9-2013 ; Ord. No. 170 , 3-11-2015; Ord. No. 4-2015 , 4-8-2015; Ord. No. 171 , 11-12-2015) 
Sec. 29-338. - Minimum area. 
    There are no area regulations in a business district B-4, except for permitted uses utilizing individual water supply or sewage disposal systems, the required area use shall be established by the health official. 
(Code 1973, § 29-94; Ord. No. 140, 6-11-2008) 
Sec. 29-339. - Setback. 
    Setbacks in a business district B-4 shall be located thirty (30) feet or more from any street right-of-way which is fifty (50) feet or greater in width or sixty (60) feet or more from the centerline of any street right-of-way less than fifty (50) feet in width; except, that signs advertising sale or rent of premises may be erected up to the property line. This shall be known as the "setback line." 
(Code 1973, § 29-95) 
Sec. 29-340. - Frontage and yards. 
    For permitted uses in a business district B-4 the minimum side yard adjoining or adjacent to a residential district shall be twenty-five (25) feet or more and off-street parking shall be in accordance with the provisions contained herein. 
(Code 1973, § 29-96; Ord. No. 140, 6-11-2008) 
Sec. 29-341. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 170, adopted March 11, 2015, repealed § 29-341, which pertained to height and derived from Code 1973, § 29-97. 
Sec. 29-342. - Requirements for permitted uses. 
    Before a zoning permit shall be issued or construction begun on any permitted use in a business district B-4, or a permit issued for a new use, detailed site plans indicating compliance with the substantive provisions of this chapter and in sufficient detail to show the operations and processes shall be submitted to the zoning administrator for study. The administrator may refer these plans to the planning commission and/or town council for their recommendations. Modification of the plans may be required. 
(Code 1973, § 29-98) 
Secs. 29-343-29-360. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 181 , adopted Mar. 8, 2017, rescinded div. 13 §§ 29-361-29-368 entitled "Industrial District M-1", which derived from Code 1973, §§ 29-99-29-106. 

Secs. 29-361-29-385. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 14. - NONCONFORMING USES 

Sec. 29-386. - Continuation. 
(a)  If on February 18, 1971, any legal activity which is being pursued or any lot or structure legally utilized in a manner or for a purpose which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter, such manner of use of purpose may be continued as herein provided; except, that advertising structures that become nonconforming because of a rezoning have twenty-four (24) months within which to relocate in a permitted area. If any change in title of possession or renewal of a lease of any such lot or structure occurs, the use existing may be continued. 
(b)  If any nonconforming use (structure or activity) is discontinued for a period exceeding two (2) years after February 18, 1971, it shall be deemed abandoned and any subsequent use shall conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  Whenever a nonconforming structure, lot or activity has been changed to a more limited nonconforming use, such existing use may only be changed to an even more limited use. 
(Code 1973, § 29-107) 
State Law reference- Nonconforming uses, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-492. 
Sec. 29-387. - Dilapidated structures. 
    Any nonconforming residential structure that is in a state of disrepair, or dilapidated may be torn down to the foundation and rebuilt, provided that a permit is obtained prior to any demolition work from the town manager or his designee, the nonconforming structure is rebuilt in accordance with the USBA, and that the footprint of the foundation is not enlarged. All reconstruction work to such a nonconforming structure shall be completed within twelve (12) months of the date of the permit. 
(Code 1973, § 29-108; Ord. No. 3-2015 , 4-8-2015) 
Sec. 29-388. - Repairs and maintenance. 
    On any building devoted in which or in part to any nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of twelve (12) consecutive months on ordinary repairs or on repairs or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing to an extent not exceeding ten (10) percent of the current replacement value of the structure; provided, that the cubic content of the structure as it existed on February 18, 1971, or at the time of amendment of this chapter shall not be increased. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any structure or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety on order of such official. 
(Code 1973, § 29-109) 
Sec. 29-389. - Expansion or enlargement. 
(a)  A nonconforming structure to be extended or enlarged shall conform with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  A nonconforming activity may be extended throughout any part of a structure which was arranged or designed for such activity at the time of enactment of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 29-110) 
Sec. 29-390. - Restoration and replacement. 
(a)  If a nonconforming activity is destroyed or damaged in any manner to the extent that the cost of restoration to its condition before the occurrence shall exceed fifty (50) percent of the cost of reconstructing the entire activity or structure, it shall be restored only if such use complies with the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  If a nonconforming structure is destroyed or damaged in any manner to the extent that the cost of restoration to its condition before the occurrence shall exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the cost of reconstructing the entire structure, it shall be restored only if it complies with the requirements of this chapter. Nonconforming residential structures may be restored; provided, that any expansion of the original structure shall conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  Where a conforming structure devoted to a nonconforming activity is damaged less than fifty (50) percent of the cost of reconstructing the entire structure or where a nonconforming structure is damaged less than seventy-five (75) percent of the cost of reconstructing the entire structure, either may be repaired or restored; provided, that any such repair or restoration is started within twelve (12) months and completed within eighteen (18) months from the date of partial destruction. 
(d)  The cost of land or any factors, other than the cost of the structure, are excluded in the determination of cost of restoration for any structure or activity devoted to a nonconforming use. 
(Code 1973, § 29-111) 
Sec. 29-391. - Changes in district boundaries. 
    Whenever the boundaries of a district are changed, any uses of land or buildings which become nonconforming as a result of such change shall become subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 29-112) 
Sec. 29-392. - Nonconforming lots. 
    Where a lot of record on February 18, 1971, has less area or width than herein required in the district in which it is located and the owner of such lot does not own any other parcel or tract adjacent thereto and the lot is within eighty (80) percent of the required area and width, the lot may nevertheless be used for a single-family dwelling or for any other nondwelling use permitted in the district in which it is located; provided, that setbacks and side and rear yard requirements are met. A lot that is less than eighty (80) percent of the required area or width may be used when the requirements of the board of zoning appeals regarding setbacks and side and rear yards are met. 
(Code 1973, § 29-113) 
Secs. 29-393-29-410. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 

Sec. 29-411. - Appointment and term. 
(a)  A board consisting of five (5) members shall be appointed by the circuit court of Prince Edward County. The board shall receive compensation as set by council and members shall be removable for cause upon written charges and after a public hearing. 
(b)  The term of office shall be for five (5) years, except that of the first five (5) members appointed, one (1) shall serve for five (5) years, one (1) for four (4) years, one (1) for three (3) years, one (1) for two (2) years, and one (1) for one (1) year. One (1) of the five (5) appointed members may be an active member of the planning commission. Appointments for vacancies occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall in all cases be for the unexpired term. 
(c)  The board shall choose annually its own chairman and vice-chairman, who shall act in the absence of the chairman. 
(Code 1973, § 29-114; Ord. No. 126, 12-9-2009) 
State Law reference- Creation of board of zoning appeals, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-494. 
Sec. 29-412. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  The board of zoning appeals shall adopt such rules and regulations as it may consider necessary. 
(b)  The meeting of the board shall be held at the call of its chairman or at such times as a quorum of the board may determine. A quorum shall be at least three (3) members. 
(c)  The chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. 
(d)  The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member on each question of if absent or failing to vote indicating such fact. It shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. 
(e)  A favorable vote of three (3) members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any administrative official or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter on which the board is required to pass or to effect any variance from this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 29-115) 
Sec. 29-413. - Conflict of interest. 
    Any member of the board of zoning appeals shall be disqualified to act on a matter before the board with respect to property in which the member has an interest. 
(Code 1973, § 29-116) 
Sec. 29-414. - Powers. 
(a)  The board of zoning appeals shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision or determination made by administrative officer in the administration or enforcement of this chapter. 
(2)  To authorize on appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest when, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions will result in unnecessary hardship; provided, that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed and substantial justice done. 
(b)  When a property owner can show that his property was acquired in good faith and where by reason of the exceptional narrowness, shallowness, size or shape of a specific piece of property at the time of the effective date of this chapter, or where by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary situation or condition of such piece of property, or of the condition, situation or development of property immediately adjacent thereto, the strict application of the terms of this chapter would effectively prohibit or unreasonably restrict the utilization of the property or where the board is satisfied, upon the evidence heard by it, that the granting of such variance will alleviate a clearly demonstrable hardship approaching confiscation, as distinguished from a special privilege or convenience sought by the applicant; provided, that all variances shall be in harmony with the intended spirit and purpose of this chapter. 
(c)  No such variance shall be authorized by the board of zoning appeals: 
(1)  Unless the board finds: 
a.  That the strict application of this chapter would produce undue hardships. 
b.  That such hardship is not shared generally by other properties in the same zoning district and the same vicinity. 
c.  That the authorization of such variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property and that the character of the district will not be changed by the granting of the variance. 
(2)  Except after notice and hearing as required by Code of Virginia, § 15.1-431. 
(3)  Unless the board finds that the condition or situation of the property concerned or the intended use of the property is not of so general or recurring a nature as to make reasonably practicable the formulation of a general regulation to be adopted as an amendment to the ordinance. 
(d)  In authorizing a variance the board may impose such conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed structure for use as it may deem necessary in the public interest and may require a guarantee or bond to ensure that the conditions imposed are being and will continue to be complied with. 
(Code 1973, § 29-117) 
State Law reference- Powers and duties of board of zoning appeals, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-495. 
Sec. 29-415. - Appeals to board. 
    An appeal to the board of zoning appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the town affected by any decision of the zoning administrator or from any order, requirement, decision or determination made by any other administrative officer in the administration or enforcement of this chapter. Such appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) days after the decision appealed from by filing with the zoning administrator, and with the board, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The zoning administrator shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the zoning administrator certifies to the board that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would in his opinion cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order granted by the board or by a court of record, on application and on notice to the zoning administrator and for good cause shown. 
(Code 1973, § 29-118) 
State Law reference- Appeals to board of zoning appeals, Code of Virginia, § 15.1-496.1. 
Sec. 29-416. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  Appeals shall be mailed to the board of zoning appeals in care of the zoning administrator and a copy of the appeal mailed to the secretary of the planning commission. A third copy shall be mailed to the individual, official, department or agency concerned, if any. 
(b)  Appeals requiring an advertised public hearing shall be accompanied by a certified check for two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) payable to the town treasurer. 
(Code 1973, § 29-119) 
Sec. 29-417. - Procedure on appeal. 
    The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an application or appeal, give public notice thereof as well as due notice to the parties in interest and decide the same within ninety (90) days of the filing of the application or appeal. In exercising its powers the board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify, an order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from. The concurring vote of a majority of the membership of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of an administrative officer or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under the ordinance or to effect any variance from this chapter. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings and other official actions which shall be filed in the office of the board and shall be public records. The chairman of the board, or in his absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. 
(Code 1973, § 29-120) 
Sec. 29-418. - Certiorari to review decision of board. 
(a)  Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the board of zoning appeals, or any taxpayer or any officer, department, board or bureau of the town, may present to the circuit court of the county a petition specifying the grounds on which aggrieved within thirty (30) days after the filing of the decision in the office of the board. 
(b)  Upon the presentation of such petition, the court shall allow a writ of certiorari to review the decision of the board of zoning appeals and shall prescribe therein the time within which a return thereto must be made and served upon the relator's attorney, which shall not be less than ten (10) days and may be extended by the court. The allowance of the writ shall not stay proceedings upon the decision appealed from, but the court may, on application, on notice to the board and on due cause shown, grant a restraining order. 
(c)  The board of zoning appeals shall not be required to return the original papers acted upon by it but it shall be sufficient to return certified or sworn copies thereof or of such portions thereof as may be called for by such writ. The return shall concisely set forth such other facts as may be pertinent and material to show the grounds of the decision appealed from and shall be verified. 
(d)  If, upon the hearing, it shall appear to the court that testimony is necessary for the proper disposition of the matter, it may take evidence or appoint a commissioner to take such evidence as it may direct and report the same to the court with his findings of fact and conclusions of law, which shall constitute a part of the proceedings upon which the determination of the court shall be made. The court may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision brought up for review. 
(e)  Costs shall not be allowed against the board, unless it shall appear to the court that it acted in bad faith or with malice in making the decision appealed from. In the event the decision of the board is affirmed and the court finds that the appeal was frivolous, the court may order the person or persons who requested the issuance of the writ of certiorari to pay the costs incurred in making a return of the record pursuant to the writ of certiorari. 
(Code 1973, § 29-121) 
Secs. 29-419-29-434. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 124, adopted Aug. 12, 2009, repealed the former Art. V, Div. 1, §§ 29-436-29-442, Div. 2, §§ 29-461-29-470 and enacted a new Art. V as set out herein. The former Art. V pertained to floodplain districts and derived from Code 1973, §§ 29-122-29-137; Ord. No. 8, 10-10-91. Ord No. 124 enacted provisions intended for use as Art. V, Div. 1, §§ 29-436-29-441, Div. 2, Div. 3, §§ 29-461-29-465, Div. 4, §§ 29-470-29-476, Div. 5, and Div. 6. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been designated as Art. V. Div. 1, §§ 29-435-29-441, Div. 2, §§ 29-461-29-465, Div. 3, §§ 29-470-29-476, Div. 4, § 29-481 and Div. 5, § 29-484. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 29-435. - Definitions. 
    Base flood. The flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Base flood elevation. The Federal Emergency Management Agency designated one hundred-year water surface elevation. 
    Basement. Any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Board of zoning appeals. The board appointed to review appeals made by individuals with regard to decisions of the zoning administrator in the interpretation of this article. 
    Development. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Elevated building. A non-basement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, or columns (posts and piers). 
    Encroachment. The advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufacturing homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Flood or flooding. 
(1)  A general or temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
a.  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or, 
b.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
(2)  The collapse or subsistence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in subsection (1)a. of this definition. 
(3)  Mudflows which are proximately caused by flooding as defined in paragraph [(2)] of this definition and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). An official map of a community on which the administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study (FIS). An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudflow and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
    Floodplain or flood-prone area. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. 
    Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Freeboard. A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization in the watershed. 
    Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure. Any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of the interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior; or 
b.  Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs. 
    Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of Federal Code 44CFR §60.3. 
    Manufactured home. A structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes the term manufactured home also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed one (1) a site for greater than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    New construction. For the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial flood insurance rate map on or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, new construction means structures for which start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Recreational vehicle. A vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Special flood hazard area. The land in the floodplain subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of being flooded in any given year as determined in this article. 
    Start of construction. The date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, substantial improvement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of the construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure. For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Structure. For insurance rating purposes, means a walled and roofed building, other than a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground and affixed to a permanent site, as well as a manufactured home on a permanent foundation. For the latter purpose, the term includes a building while in the course of construction, alteration or repair, but does not include building materials or supplies intended for use in such construction, alteration or repair, unless such materials or supplies are within an enclosed building on the premises. 
    Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
    Watercourse. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
    Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 124, 8-12-2009) 
Sec. 29-436. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of these provisions is to prevent: the loss of life and property, the creation of health and safety hazards, the disruption of commerce and governmental services, the extraordinary and unnecessary expenditure of public funds for flood protection and relief, and the impairment of the tax base by: 
(a)  Regulating uses, activities, and development which, alone or in combination with other existing or future uses, activities, and development, will cause unacceptable increases in flood heights, velocities, and frequencies; 
(b)  Restricting or prohibiting certain uses, activities, and development from locating within districts subject to flooding; 
(c)  Requiring all those uses, activities, and developments that do occur in flood-prone districts to be protected and/or floodproofed against flooding and flood damage; and 
(d)  Protecting individuals from buying land and structures which are unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. 124, 8-12-2009) 
Sec. 29-437. - Applicability. 
    These provisions shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of Town of Farmville and identified as being in the one hundred-year floodplain by the Federal Insurance Administration. 
(Ord. No. 124, 8-12-2009) 
Sec. 29-438. - Compliance and liability. 
(a)  No land shall hereafter be developed and no structure shall be located, relocated, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, or structurally altered except in full compliance with the terms and provisions of this article and any other applicable ordinances and regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this article. 
(b)  The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on acceptable engineering methods of study. 
Larger floods may occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This article does not imply that districts outside the floodplain district, or that land uses permitted within such district will be free from flooding or flood damages. 
(d)  Records of actions associated with administering this article shall be kept on file and maintained by the floodplain administrator and manager. 
(e)  This article shall not create liability on the part of the town or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 124, 8-12-2009) 
Sec. 29-439. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This article supersedes any ordinance currently in effect in flood-prone districts. However, any underlying ordinance shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that its provisions are more restrictive than this article. 
(Ord. No. 124, 8-12-2009) 
Sec. 29-440. - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this article shall be declared invalid for any reason whatever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. The remaining portions shall remain in full force and effect; and for this purpose, the provisions of this article are hereby declared to be severable. 
(Ord. No. 124, 8-12-2009) 
Sec. 29-441. - Penalty for violations. 
    Any person who fails to comply with any of the requirements or provisions of this article or directions of the director of planning or any authorized employee of the town shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first class and subject to the penalties therefore. 
    In addition to the above penalties, all other actions are hereby reserved, including an action in equity for the proper enforcement of this article. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of, or noncompliance with, this article shall not excuse the violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or noncompliances within a reasonable time. Any structure constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered or relocated in noncompliance with this article may be declared by the town council to be a public nuisance and abatable as such. Flood insurance may be withheld from structures constructed in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 124, 8-12-2009) 
Secs. 29-442-29-460. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 29-461. - Description of districts. 
(a)  Basis of districts. The various floodplain districts shall include special flood hazard areas. The basis for the delineation of these districts shall be the flood insurance study (FIS) and the flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) for the town prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Federal Insurance Administration, dated October 2, 2009, as amended. 
(1)  The floodway district is delineated, for purposes of this article, using the criterion that certain areas within the floodplain must be capable of carrying the waters of the one hundred-year flood without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one (1) foot at any point. The areas included in this district are specifically defined in table 2 of the above-referenced flood insurance study and shown on the accompanying flood boundary and floodway map or flood insurance rate map. 
(2)  The special floodplain district shall be those areas identified as an AE zone on the maps accompanying the flood insurance study for which one hundred-year flood elevations have been provided. 
(3)  The approximated floodplain district shall be those areas identified as an A zone on the maps accompanying the flood insurance study. In these zones, no detailed flood profiles or elevations are provided, but the one hundred-year floodplain boundary has been approximated. 
(4)  The shallow flooding district shall be those areas identified as zone AO or AH on the maps accompanying the flood insurance study. 
(b)  Overlay concept. 
(1)  The floodplain districts described above shall be overlays to the existing underlying districts as shown on the official zoning ordinance map, and as such, the provisions for the floodplain districts shall serve as a supplement to the underlying district provisions. 
(2)  If there is any conflict between the provisions or requirements of the floodplain districts and those of any underlying district, the more restrictive provisions and/or those pertaining to the floodplain districts shall apply. 
(3)  In the event any provision concerning a floodplain district is declared inapplicable as a result of any legislative or administrative actions or judicial decision, the basic underlying provisions shall remain applicable. 
(Ord. No. 124, 8-12-2009) 
Sec. 29-462. - Official zoning map. 
    The boundaries of the special flood hazard area and floodplain districts are established as shown on the flood boundary and floodway map and/or flood insurance rate map which is declared to be a part of this article and which shall be kept on file at the town offices. 
(Ord. No. 124, 8-12-2009) 
Sec. 29-463. - District boundary changes. 
    The delineation of any of the floodplain districts may be revised by the town council where natural or manmade changes have occurred and/or where more detailed studies have been conducted or undertaken by the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers or other qualified agency, or an individual documents the need for such change. However, prior to any such change, approval must be obtained from the Federal Insurance Administration. 
(Ord. No. 124, 8-12-2009) 
Sec. 29-464. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
    Initial interpretations of the boundaries of the floodplain districts shall be made by the zoning officer. Should a dispute arise concerning the boundaries of any of the districts, the board of zoning appeals shall make the necessary determination. The person questioning or contesting the location of the district boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present his case to the board and to submit his own technical evidence if he so desires. 
(Ord. No. 124, 8-12-2009) 
Sec. 29-465. - Submitting technical data. 
    A community's base flood elevations may increase or decrease resulting from physical changes affecting flooding conditions. As soon as practicable, but not later than six (6) months after the date such information becomes available, a community shall notify the Federal Insurance Administrator of the changes by submitting technical or scientific data. Such a submission is necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements will be based upon current data. 
(Ord. No. 124, 8-12-2009) 
Secs. 29-466-29-469. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DISTRICT PROVISIONS 

Sec. 29-470. - Permit and application requirements. 
(a)  Permit requirement. All uses, activities, and development occurring within any floodplain district shall be undertaken only upon the issuance of a zoning permit. Such development shall be undertaken only in strict compliance with the provisions of [this article] and with all other applicable codes and ordinances, as amended, such as the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code (VA USBC) and the town subdivision regulations. Prior to the issuance of any such permit, the zoning officer shall require all applications to include compliance with all applicable state and federal laws. Under no circumstances shall any use, activity, and/or development adversely affect the capacity of the channels or floodways of any watercourse, drainage ditch, or any other drainage facility or system. 
(b)  Alteration or relocation of a watercourse. Prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of any channel or of any watercourse within this jurisdiction, a permit shall be obtained from the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers, the state department of environmental quality, and the state marine resources commission (a joint permit application is available from any one of these organizations). Further notification of the proposal shall be given to all adjacent jurisdictions, the division of dam safety and floodplain management (department of conservation and recreation), and the Federal Insurance Administration. 
(c)  Site plans and permit applications. All applications for development within any floodplain district and all building permits issued for the floodplain shall incorporate the following information: 
(1)  The elevation of the base flood at the site. 
(2)  The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement). 
(3)  For structures to be floodproofed (non-residential only), the elevation to which the structure will be floodproofed. 
(Ord. No. 124, 8-12-2009) 
Sec. 29-471. - General standards. 
In all special flood hazard areas the following provisions shall apply: 
(a)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be according to the VA USBC, and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(b)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(c)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(d)  New construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(e)  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment and other service facilities, including duct work, shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(f)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. 
(g)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters. 
(h)  Onsite waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(i)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building that is in compliance with the provisions of this article shall meet the requirements of "new construction" as contained in this article. 
(j)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building that is not in compliance with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if said non-conformity is not furthered, extended, or replaced. 
(k)  Prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of any channels or of any watercourse, stream, etc., within this jurisdiction a permit shall be obtained from the U. S. Corps of Engineers, the state department of environmental quality, and the state marine resources commission (a joint permit application is available from any of these organizations). Furthermore, notification of the proposal shall be given by the applicant to all affected adjacent jurisdictions, the department of conservation and recreation (division of dam safety and floodplain management) and the Federal Insurance Administration. 
(l)  The flood carrying capacity within an altered or relocated portion of any watercourse shall be maintained. 
(Ord. No. 124, 8-12-2009) 
Sec. 29-472. - Specific standards. 
    In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevations have been provided in the flood insurance study or generated according to the floodplain ordinance, the following provisions shall apply: 
(a)  Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. 
(b)  Nonresidential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or nonresidential building (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. Buildings located in all A, AE, and AH zones may be floodproofed in lieu of being elevated provided that all areas of the building components below the elevation corresponding to the BFE plus one (1) foot are water tight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and use structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. 
(c)  Elevated buildings. Enclosed areas, of new construction or substantially improved structures, which are below the regulatory flood protection elevation shall: 
(1)  Not be designed or used for human habitation, but shall only be used for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment (standard exterior door), or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). 
(2)  Be constructed entirely of flood resistant materials below the regulatory flood protection elevation. 
(3)  In the Coastal High Hazard District, follow the standards for elevation outlined in the floodplain ordinance. 
(4)  Include, in zones A, AO, and AE, measures to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the openings must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum design criteria: 
a.  Provide a minimum of two (2) openings on different sides of each enclosed area subject to flooding. 
b.  The total net area of all openings must be at least one (1) square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. 
c.  If a building has more than one (1) enclosed area, each area must have openings to allow floodwaters to automatically enter and exit. 
d.  The bottom of all required openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above the adjacent grade. 
e.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other opening coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions. 
f.  Foundation enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not require openings. Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is considered an enclosure and requires openings as outlined above. 
(d)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. 
(1)  All manufactured homes placed, or substantially improved, on individual lots or parcels, in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, in a new manufactured home park or subdivision or in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, must meet all the requirements for new construction, including the elevation and anchoring requirements [is] in accordance with [this article]. 
(2)  All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision in which a manufactured home has not incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood shall elevated so that either: 
a.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation; or 
b.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade; 
c.  And be securely anchored to the adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
(3)  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; 
b.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions); or 
c.  Meet all the requirements for manufactured homes in accordance with the [this article]. 
(Ord. No. 124, 8-12-2009) 
Sec. 29-473. - Standards for the floodway district. 
The following provisions shall apply within the floodway district: 
(a)  Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other developments are prohibited unless certification (with supporting technical data) by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood. 
Development activities which increase the water surface elevation of the base flood may be allowed, provided that the applicant first applies - with the town's endorsement - for a conditional flood insurance rate map and floodway revision, and receives the approval of the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(b)  If the standards for subdivisions are satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of standards for subdivision proposals section of [this article]. 
(c)  The placement of manufactured homes (mobile homes) is prohibited, except in an existing manufactured homes (mobile homes) park or subdivision. A replacement manufactured home may be placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision provided the anchoring, elevation, and encroachment standards are met. 
(Ord. No. 124, 8-12-2009) 
Sec. 29-474. - Standards for the special floodplain district. 
The following provisions shall apply within the special floodplain district: 
Until a regulatory floodway is designated, no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within the areas of special flood hazard, designated as zones A and AE on the flood rate insurance map, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the town. 
Development activities in zones A, AE, and AH, on the town flood insurance rate map which increase the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one (1) foot may be allowed, provided that the applicant first applies - with the town's endorsement - for a conditional flood insurance rate map revision, and receives the approval of the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(Ord. No. 124, 8-12-2009) 
Sec. 29-475. - Standards for approximated floodplain. 
The following provisions shall apply with the approximate floodplain district: 
The approximated floodplain district shall be that floodplain area for which no detailed flood profiles or elevations are provided, but where a one hundred-year floodplain boundary has been approximated. Such areas are shown as zone A on the maps accompanying the flood insurance study. For these areas, the one hundred-year flood elevations and floodway information from federal, state, and other acceptable sources shall be used, when available. Where the specific one hundred-year flood elevation cannot be determined for this area using other sources of data, such as the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers Floodplain Information Reports, U. S. Geological Survey Flood-Prone Quadrangles, etc., then the applicant for the proposed use, development and/or activity shall determine this elevation in accordance with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently-accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough review by the floodplain administrator and manager. 
When such base flood elevation data is utilized, the lowest floor shall be one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. During the permitting process, the applicant shall obtain: 
(1)  The elevation of the lowest floor (including the basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; and 
(2)  If the structure has been floodproofed in accordance with the requirements of this article, the elevation to which the structure has been floodproofed. 
(Ord. No. 124, 8-12-2009) 
Sec. 29-476. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(b)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(c)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. 124, 8-12-2009) 
Secs. 29-477-29-480. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - VARIANCES; FACTORS TO BE CONSIDERED 

Sec. 29-481. - Variance factors. 
    In passing upon applications for variances, the board of zoning appeals shall satisfy all relevant factors and procedures specified in other sections of the zoning ordinance and consider the following additional factors: 
(a)  The showing of good and sufficient cause. 
(b)  The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments. No variance shall be granted for any proposed use, development, or activity within any floodway district that will cause any increase in the one hundred-year flood elevation. 
(c)  The danger that materials may be swept on to other lands or downstream to the injury of others. 
(d)  The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions. 
(e)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owners. 
(f)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community. 
(g)  The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location. 
(h)  The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use. 
(i)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future. 
(j)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area. 
(k)  The safety of access by ordinary and emergency vehicles to the property in time of flood. 
(l)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site. 
(m)  The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(n)  Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this article. 
    The board of zoning appeals may refer any application and accompanying documentation pertaining to any request for a variance to any engineer or other qualified person or agency for technical assistance in evaluating the proposed project in relation to flood heights and velocities, and the adequacy of the plans for flood protection and other related matters. 
    Variances shall be issued only after the board of zoning appeals has determined that the granting of such will not result in: 
a.  Unacceptable or prohibited increases in flood heights; 
b.  Additional threats to public safety; 
c.  Extraordinary public expense. 
And will not 
d.  Create nuisances; 
e.  Cause fraud or victimization of the public; or 
f.  Conflict with local laws or ordinances. 
    Variances shall be issued only after the board of zoning appeals has determined that the variance will be the minimum required to provide relief. 
    The board of zoning appeals shall notify the applicant for a variance, in writing, that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the one hundred-year flood elevation: 
(1)  Increases the risks to life and property; and 
(2)  Will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance. 
A record shall be maintained of the above notification as well as all variance actions, including justification for the issuance of the variances. Any variances that are issued shall be noted in the annual or biennial report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administrator. 
(Ord. No. 124, 8-12-2009) 
Secs. 29-482, - 29-483. Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - EXISTING STRUCTURES IN FLOODPLAIN AREAS 

Sec. 29-484. - Existing structures in floodplain. 
    A structure or use of a structure or premises which lawfully existed before the enactment of these provisions, but which is not in conformity with these provisions, may be continued subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  Existing structures in the floodway area shall not be expanded or enlarged unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practices that the proposed expansion would not result in any increase in the base flood elevation. 
(b)  Any modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to a structure and/or use located in any floodplain areas to an extent or amount of less than fifty (50) percent of its market value shall conform to the VA USBC. 
(c)  The modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to a structure and/or use, regardless of its location in a floodplain area to an extent or amount of fifty (50) percent or more of its market value shall be undertaken only in full compliance with this article and shall require the entire structure to conform to the VA USBC. 
(Ord. No. 124, 8-12-2009) 
Sec. 29-485. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SATELLITE ANTENNAS 

Sec. 29-486. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Satellite dish antenna or earth station means an accessory use that is a combination of: 
(1)  Antenna or dish antenna whose purpose is to receive communication or other signals from orbiting satellites and other extraterrestrial sources. 
(2)  A low-noise amplifier (LNA) which is situated at the focal point of the receiving component and whose purpose is to magnify and transfer signals. 
(3)  A coaxial cable whose purpose is to carry the signals to the exterior of the building. 
    Satellite dish antenna (or earth station) height means the height of the antenna or dish measured vertically from the highest point of the antenna or dish, when positioned for operation, to the grade or permanent structure to which the antenna or its base is attached. 
(Code 1973, § 29-138) 
Sec. 29-487. - Location, number and size. 
(a)  Number. Only one (1) satellite antenna not exceeding twelve (12) feet in diameter may be erected or installed on any one (1) building lot in the town regardless of the zoning district in which it is located. 
(b)  Location generally. Any such antenna shall be located only in the rear yard of such lot no closer than five (5) feet to any side or rear lot nor less than ten (10) feet from the rear of a main building, provided however, in lieu of any such antenna in a rear yard, one (1) satellite antenna four (4) feet or less in diameter may be suitably mounted to the roof area of a building. 
(c)  Corner lot. In addition to the provisions of subsection (b), no satellite antenna on any corner lot shall be erected forward of the building line of any adjoining lot nor closer than five (5) feet to the side of such adjoining lot. 
(d)  Height limitation. No satellite antenna mounted in any such yard shall exceed sixteen (16) feet measured vertically from the highest point of the signal receiving apparatus, when positioned for operation, to the bottom of the base which supports the satellite antenna except any antenna which pursuant to this section may be located and suitably mounted to the roof of a building. 
(Code 1973, § 29-139) 
Sec. 29-488. - Mounting. 
    All satellite antennae shall be ground-mounted at ground level pursuant to all requirements of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code after securing the proper building permits, and sufficiently secured to withstand a seventy-five-mile-per-hour wind; except such antenna four (4) feet or less in diameter which is otherwise permitted by this section to be mounted to the roof of a building. All electrical cable will be buried in accordance with the applicable provisions of the building code. 
(Code 1973, § 29-140) 
Sec. 29-489. - Variances by board of zoning appeals. 
    Upon application to the board of zoning appeals by any property owner, and upon showing by such property owner to the satisfaction of the board that a usable satellite signal cannot be obtained on such owner's property solely by reason of one (1) or more of the requirements established by this article, the board may grant such variance as may be necessary to permit reception of a usable signal and under such special conditions as the board may deem proper under the circumstances, whereupon perpetual compliance with such special conditions by the property owner shall be a prerequisite to continued maintenance and use of such antenna. 
(Code 1973, § 29-141) 
Chapter 30 - TOURISM ZONE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Statement of purpose. 
    The Virginia Code authorizes Virginia localities to establish, by ordinance, one or more tourism zones for the purpose of granting incentives and providing regulatory flexibility to qualified businesses. This tourism zone is a specific geographic area(s) created in accordance the Code of Virginia §58.1-3851. 
    The purpose the tourism zone is to promote the Town of Farmville's tourism industry by providing incentives to eligible businesses within the town's designated tourism zone that will attract visitors, create new employment opportunities and/or promote education opportunities while increasing travel-related revenue in the Farmville area. 
    In addition, this chapter is a required step which may allow private businesses to access the state financing program available to businesses in a tourism zone. 
(Ord. No. 173 , 1-13-2016) 
Sec. 30-2. - Boundaries of the Town of Farmville tourism zone. 
    The boundaries of Farmville's tourism zone will include all areas within the town's enterprise zone in addition to all town owned property at the Farmville Regional Airport and Farmville Municipal Golf Course, both located in Cumberland County. 
(Ord. No. 173 , 1-13-2016) 
Sec. 30-3. - Incentives. 
    Qualifying businesses are eligible for the following incentives (the incentives listed below mirror the incentives offered under the town's enterprise zone): 
(1)  Waiver of twenty-five (25) percent or one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), whichever is greater for water and sewer availability and tap fees (within the Town of Farmville). 
(2)  A five (5) year real estate tax reinvestment credit on one hundred (100) percent of value of improvements resulting from renovation work (within the Town of Farmville). 
(3)  Accelerated development review process (within the Town of Farmville). 
(4)  Town will reimburse property owner up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for architectural design fees for downtown façade improvements in the historic district upon completion of construction work and approval by town. 
(5)  Waiver of land disturbance/soil and erosion permit fees. (West Third Street). 
(Ord. No. 173 , 1-13-2016) 
Sec. 30-4. - Qualifications for incentives. 
    For a business to qualify for local tourism zone incentives, the business must be located within the boundaries of the tourism zone and meet the following criteria: 
(1)  An existing business that makes a minimum fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) capital improvements. 
(2)  A new business that makes a minimum two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) capital improvement. 
(Ord. No. 173 , 1-13-2016) 
Sec. 30-5. - Application. 
    The qualified applicant will apply for incentives, by letter, on a reimbursement basis after construction completion and a certificate of occupancy has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 173 , 1-13-2016) 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Year Chapter Section  Section 
this Charter 1968 508 1 3 580 1 26.1 30  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1973 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1973 Code, as updated through April 11, 1990, which are included herein. Sections of the 1973 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1973 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1-1-5 1-1-1-5 1-6-1-11 1-7-1-12 2-1-2-4 2-1-2-4 2-5-2-10 2-21-2-26 2-11 2-4 2-12-2-14 2-46-2-48 2-15-2-21 2-66-2-72 3-1-3-3 3-1-3-3 4-1-4-9 4-1-4-9 5-1, 5-2 5-2, 5-3 5-3 5-1 5-4 5-46 5-5-5-9 5-4-5-8 5-10-5-12 5-26-5-28 5-13 5-27 5-14, 5-15 5-29, 5-30 5-16-5-21 5-47-5-52 7-1 6-1 6-11 6-51 7-3-7-9 6-2-6-8 7-9.1 6-9 7-10, 7-11 6-10, 6-11 7-12 6-92 7-12-7-21 6-91 7-13-7-21 6-93-6-101 7-22 6-12 8-1-8-8 8-1-8-8 8-8.1 8-9 8-9 8-10 8-9.1 8-11 8-10 8-12 8-10.1 8-13 8-11-8-17 8-14-8-20 10-1-10-4 6-71-6-74 10.1-1-10.1-11 10-1-10-11 11-1-11-6 11-1-11-6 12-1-12-6 12-1-12-6 12-7-12-10 12-26-12-29 12-13, 12-14 12-30, 12-31 12-15, 12-16 12-51, 12-52 12-17-12-19 12-54-12-56 12-20-12-29 12-76-12-85 12-30-12-33 12-101-12-104 13-1-13-5 22-1-22-5 13-6-13-12 22-21-22-27 13-12.1 22-28 13-13, 13-14 22-29, 22-30 13-15, 13-16 22-46, 22-47 13-17-13-25 22-66-22-74 14-1-14-12 13-1-13-12 15-1-15-16 14-1-14-16 15-18, 15-19 14-17, 14-18 15-19.1 14-19 15-20-15-32 14-20-14-32 15-33 14-18 15-34 14-33 15-35 14-51 15-35.1 14-52 15-36, 15-37 14-53, 14-54 15-41 14-55 15-45 14-56 15-48 14-57 15-50 14-58 15-53 14-59 15-55, 15-56 14-60, 14-61 15-62 14-63 15-64-15-68 14-64-14-68 15-70, 15-71 14-69, 14-70 15-74-15-77 14-71-14-74 15-79 14-75 15-80-15-83 14-91-14-94 15-85 14-95 15-93-15-104 14-111-14-122 15-110-15-117 14-141-14-148 16-1, 16-2 15-1, 15-2 16-3.1 15-3 16-4, 16-5 15-4, 15-5 16-5-16-13 15-6-15-14 16-15-16-23 15-15-15-23 16-24-16-27 15-41-15-44 16-28-16-35 15-61-15-68 16-35.1-16-35.4 15-92-15-95 16-35.5 15-91 16-35.6- 
16-35.12 15-96-15-102 16-36 15-69 16-37, 16-38 15-71, 15-72 16-38.1 15-73 16-39-16-54 15-121-15-136 16-55-16-66 15-156-15-167 16-67 15-70 17-1-17-6 17-1-17-6 18-1-18-13 18-2-18-14 18-14-18-19 18-16-18-21 18-20 18-33 18-21 18-22 18-22 12-51 18-23 12-53 18-24 18-23 18-25, 18-26 18-25, 18-26 18-27 18-1 18-28 18-27 18-28.1 18-29 18-29 18-28 18-30-18-32 18-30-18-32 18-34 18-42 18-35-18-43 18-33-18-41 18-44, 18-45 18-44, 18-45 18-46 18-43 18-47-18-51 18-46-18-50 18-53 18-24 19-1 19-1 19-2-19-9 19-26-19-33 20-1 20-1 20-2-20-7 20-26-20-31 20-8-20-11 20-51-20-54 21-1 6-31 21-2 6-7 21-3, 21-4 6-32, 6-33 22-1-22-10 21-1-21-10 23-1 15-156 23-1 23-2-23-11 23-3-23-12 23-12-23-16 23-31-23-35 24-1-24-8 24-1-24-8 24-9-24-22 24-26-24-39 24-23-24-26 24-56-24-59 24-27-24-37 24-76-24-86 24-38-24-41 24-106-24-109 24-42-24-47 24-126-24-131 24-49, 24-50 24-132, 24-133 24-50.1 24-134 24-51-24-53 24-151-24-153 24-54-24-58 24-171-24-175 24-59-24-61 24-191-24-193 25-1 25-26 25-1.1, 25-1.2 25-27, 25-28 25-1.4 25-29 25-2-25-13 25-46-25-57 25-14-25-21 25-76-25-83 25-23 25-84 25-24, 25-25 25-101, 25-102 25-27, 25-28 25-104, 25-105 25-28.1 25-106 25-29-25-35 25-107-25-113 25-36, 25-37 25-131, 25-132 25-39-25-46 25-134-25-141 26-1 26-1 26-2-26-11 26-3-26-12 26-12-26-19 26-31-26-38 26-20-26-25 26-56-26-61 27-1-27-8 27-1-27-8 28-1-28-10 28-26-28-35 28-11-28-15 28-51-28-55 28-15.1 28-56 28-16, 28-17 28-57, 28-58 28-18-28-22 28-60-28-64 28-23-28-28 28-81-28-86 28-29 28-106 28-31, 28-32 28-108, 28-109 28-33-28-36 28-126-28-129 28-38-28-44 28-131-28-137 28-45 28-156 28-45.1 28-157 28-47 28-176 28-49-28-52 28-177-28-180 28-53 28-196 28-55 28-198 28-55.1 28-199 28-56 28-200 28-57-28-60 28-218-28-221 28-61, 28-62 28-216, 28-217 29-2-29-7 29-2-29-7 29-8-29-13 29-26-29-31 29-13.1 29-32 29-14 29-33 29-14.1 29-34 29-15-29-17 29-51-29-53 29-18-29-25 29-71-29-78 29-25.1-29-25.8 29-96-29-103 29-26 29-121 29-28, 29-29 29-123, 29-124 29-30 28-107 29-30-29-33 29-125-29-128 29-34-29-41 29-146-29-153 29-41.1-29-41.8 29-171-29-178 29-42-29-49 29-196-29-203 29-50-29-53 29-221-29-224 29-54 28-197 29-54-29-70 29-225-29-241 29-71-29-77 29-261-29-267 29-78-29-84 29-286-29-292 29-85-29-91 29-311-29-317 29-92-29-98 29-336-29-342 29-99-29-106 29-361-29-368 29-107-29-113 29-386-29-392 29-114-29-121 29-411-29-418 29-122-29-125 29-437-29-440 29-126-29-134 29-461-29-469 29-135 29-436 29-136, 29-137 29-441, 29-442 29-138-29-141 29-486-29-489 30-1-30-11 9-1-9-11 31-1-31-3 6-51-6-53 32-1-32-27 7-1-7-27 33-1-33-4 16-1-16-4 33-4-33-9 16-5-16-10  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
 This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1973 Code, as updated through April 11, 1990, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1973 Code, as supplemented. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
 Date Section  Section 
this Code1  4-12-90(2) 28-158  5-10-90(1) 29-122  5-10-90(2) 14-62  5-10-90(3) 28-59  5-10-90(4) 29-1  6-14-90 23-2  6-26-90(1) 25-103  6-26-90(2) 25-133  3-14-91 18-31.1  8- 8-91 Adopting Ordinance  
Ordinance 
Number Date Section Section 
this Code 2  8- 8-91 6-7 3  8- 8-91 17-2(8), 17-3 4  8- 8-91 22-31-22-34 5 10-10-91 9-2, 9-3 6 10-10-91 28-58 7 10-10-91 25-49 8 10-10-91 29-436-29-442, 29-461-29-470 9 10-10-91 28-159 10  2-12-92 14-62 11  4- 9-92 15-127 12  5-13-92 22-31 13  6-11-92 14-11, 25-101-25-103, 25-107-25-113 14  7- 9-92 2-22 15  8-12-92 28-55, 28-56 16  8-12-92 28-156, 28-157 17  2-10-93 14-11 18  2-10-93 25-132 25-136-25-139 19  2-10-93 28-235-28-287 20  2-10-93 25-109 21  4-14-93 28-55, 28-156 22  4-14-93 1-6 9-1-9-6 23  7-14-93 1-9 19-2 24 10-13-93 1-4 6-13 25 10-13-93 28-158(e), 28-159(e), 28-160 26 12- 8-93 1-6 9-1-9-6 27  2- 9-94 18-30(c) 28  6- 8-94       Added 25-85 29  1-11-95 18-11 30  1-11-95 15-158 31  1-11-95       Added 22-75 32  7-12-95 28-58 28-158, 28-159 33 11- 8-95 24-81(3) 34 12-13-95       Added 23-13 35 12-13-95 29-1 (Meeting of)  6-12-96       Rpld 12-5 36  6-12-96       Added 12-116-12-123 37  6-12-96       Dltd 10-1-10-11       Added 10-1-10-9 38  6-26-96 28-56 28-58 28-157-28-159 39 11- 6-96       Added 15-74 40 12-11-96 15-70 41 12-11-96 17-3       Rnbd 17-4       as 17-3       Rnbd 17-5       as 17-4       Dltd 17-6 42 12-11-96       Rpld 14-1-14-33 14-51-14-75       Added 14-1-14-22 14-51-14-60 43  5-14-97 29-312 44  6-11-97 2-67, 2-68 45  6-11-97 28-158 46 12-22-97       Added 25-145-25-156 47  7- 8-98       Rpld 22-21-22-34       Added 22-21-22-32 (Meeting of)  9- 9-98 29-197 49  1-13-99 29-1 50  3-10-99 22-3, 22-5 51  4-14-99       Added 25-160, 25-161 52  8- 4-99       Added 21-11-21-15 54 11-10-99 5-53 55  1-11-2000 8-11 56  4-12-2000       Added 28-55(1)d       Added 28-55(2)d 57  6-14-2000       Rpld 25-101-25-113       Added 25-101-25-110 58  9-29-2000 14-155-14-162 59 10-11-2000       Rpld 25-76-25-85       Added 25-76-25-80       Added 25-170-25-178 60 10-10-2001 1-6 9-1-9-6 61 12-12-2001 5-1-5-32 62  3-14-2002 29-197 63  6-12-2002 14-55 64  6-12-2002 28-158(b) 65 10-13-99 8-10 66  7-10-2002 18-50(note) 67  8- 1-2002 2-22 68 10- 9-2002 12-26-12-31 69 11-13-2002 16-1-16-11 70  1- 9-2003 28-55(a)(1)(2), 28-56(a)(1)(2) 28-57(a)(1)(2), 28-58 28-156(a)(1)(2), 28-157(a)(1)(2), 28-158(b) 71  4- 9-2003 17-5 72  5-14-2003 14-170 73  5-14-2003 28-55(a), 28-156(a) 74  6-11-2003 5-10 75  7- 9-2003 5-71 76 10- 8-2003 25-102 77 10- 8-2003 25-133 78 12-10-2003 17-1-17-21 79 12-10-2003 6-1-6-10, 6-21, 6-22, 6-31, 6-32, 6-41-6-43 80 12-10-2003 18-50 81  1-14-2004 29-262 29-287 82  5-12-2004 2-70 83  5-12-2004 4-1 84  5-12-2004 4-8 85  5-12-2004 5-6 86  8-11-2004 15-92 15-97 87 12- 8-2004 12-77 88 12- 8-2004 12-84 89 12- 8-2004 20-28(b) 90  2- 1-2005 29-287(39) 91  1-12-2005 2-70(a) 92  3- 9-2005 10-5(a) 93  3- 9-2005 29-261 94  3- 9-2005 29-196 95  7-20-2005 8-21 96  9-14-2005 24-1, 24-2 24-4, 24-7 24-26-24-28 24-30, 24-32(a) 24-33, 24-37, 24-38 24-59 24-80-24-83       Rescind 24-127 24-129 24-134(a) 24-151, 24-152       Dltd 24-153 24-171, 24-192, 24-193 97  2- 8-2006 21-16 98  3- 8-2006 18-10 99  6-15-2006 22-29(b)(c) 100  6-15-2006 29-35 101  6-15-2006 18-31.1 102  6-15-2006 27-1-27-16 103  7-18-2006 24-1(5) 104  7-18-2006 24-37(1) 105  7-18-2006 7-21 106  9-13-2006 28-55(a)(1)(2) 28-56(note) 28-58(a) 28-156(a)(1)(2) 28-157(note) 107  9-13-2006 18-7 108 11-11-2006 2-25(note) 109  8-4-99 12-116-12-123(note) 110 12-13-2006 10-3 111  1-10-2007 12-26 112  2-14-2007 21-16 113  6-13-2007       Added 29-312(28) 115  8- 8-2007 28-55(1)a-d 28-55(2)a-d 28-58(a)(1)-(3) 28-156(1)a-c 28-156(2)a-d 116  8-16-2007 16-1-16-3       Rescind 16-4-16-11 117 10-10-2007 29-1       Added 29-54 118  5-14-2008 8-8 119  6-11-2008 29-1 29-6(5) 29-31 29-122(4) 29-147(5) 29-172(5) 29-197(6)       Added 29-197(17) 29-337 120  1-14-2009 29-1 29-53 29-97 29-147(4) 29-172(4)  2- 4-2009(Minutes)       Rpld 18-16       Rpld 15-156-15-167 121  2- 4-2009       Added 15-156, 15-157 122  7-11-2009       Rpld 5-10 123  8-12-2009 15-122       Added 15-137 124  8-12-2009       Rpld 29-436-29-442 29-461-29-470       Added 29-435-29-441 29-461-29-465 29-470-29-476 29-481 29-484 125 12- 9-2009 20-28 126 12- 9-2009 29-411 127 12- 9-2009       Rpld 16-1-16-3       Added 16-1-16-4 128  3-10-2010 14-52(1)a. 129  7-14-2010 18-8(a) 18-9 130  9-29-2010       Dltd 14-54, 14-55 131 11-10-2010 28-57(a) 28-58(a) 28-59 28-158 132 10-13-2010 29-53(a)(8) 133 12- 8-2010 23-1(c), (d) 135  3-11-2011 18-10 136  4-22-2011       Added 28-36 137  6- 8-2011       Added 15-100.1 138  6-16-2011       Added 2-5 139  6-16-2011 25-102 140  6-11-2008 29-338 29-340 141  6-16-2011 25-133 142  7-13-2011 6-5 143  7-13-2011 2-67       Dltd 2-68 2-69, 2-70 144  9-14-2011       Added 2-6 145  9-14-2011 29-312(28) 146  9-14-2011 6-5(3) 147 10-12-2011 2-67(b) 148 11- 9-2011       Added 21-10.1 149 11- 9-2011       Added 29-312(29) 150 11- 9-2011       Dltd 29-316 151 11- 9-2011 28-55(a)       Added 28-55(f), (g) 28-58 28-59(a) 28-156(a) 28-158(b) 152  4-11-12       Rpld 18-48 153  4-11-12 8-10 155  6-25-12 28-26 28-57(a)(2)a. 28-58 28-59(a)       Rpld 28-59(c)       Rpld 28-60 28-82 28-158(b) 156  6-25-12 22-4 22-23       Added 22-31.1 22-32(a)(1)       Rpld 22-49       Rpld 22-66-22-68       Rpld 22-70-22-75 157  6-25-2012 22-23 154  1- 9-2013       Added 29-198(c) 29-199 29-200       Added 29-202(6) 29-203(c)       Added 29-203(d)       Rpld 29-337(29)       Added 24-80(4), (5) 24-82 158 10-10-2012 12-26 159 10-10-2012 9-1-9-11 160 12-12-2012       Added 25-47.1-25-47.3 161  3-13-2013 17-2(1) 17-6       Rpld 17-10-17-14       Added 17-10-17-14       Added 17-22-17-28       Rpld 15-70       Added 15-70 162  6-12-2013 28-55 163  6-12-2013 28-156 164  6-12-2013 8-10 165  6-12-2013       Added 25-185-25-196 166  6-12-2013       Rpld 18-27       Rpld 18-44, 18-45 18-47 167  3-12-2014 15-127 15-130(b)       Added 15-130(c) 15-135 168  5-14-2014 2-67(b) 2-71 169  2-11-2015 6-94 170  3-11-2015 29-337       Rpld 29-341 2-2015  4- 8-2015       Added 2-73 3-2015  4- 8-2015 29-387 4-2015  4- 8-2015 29-337 Ord. of  8- 4-2004 15-98 172  7- 9-2014 15-3 171 11-12-2015       Added 29-337(29) 173  1-13-2016       Added 30-1-30-5 174  4-13-2016 15-93 175  6- 8-2016 20-28 176  7-13-2016       Rescind 18-2       Rescind 18-28 18-47 21-3 21-8 177  9-14-2016 20-28 179  1-11-2017 28-58 180  1-11-2017 29-1       Added 29-312(30) 181  3- 8-2017       Rescind 29-361-29-368 183  5-10-2017 20-28(a) 184  7-12-2017 12-26 185  8- 9-2017 8-10 186 12- 6-2017 29-147 188  6-13-2018 28-58 28-157(b) 190 10-10-2018 27-11       Added 27-17, 27-18  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Code of Virginia. 
Code of 
Virginia 
Section Section  
this Code 1-13.1 1-2 1-13.3 1-2 1-13.5-1-13.7 1-2 1-13.9 1-5 1-13.13 1-2 1-13.15, 1-13.16 1-2 1-13.19 1-2 1-13.23 1-2 1-13.26 1-2 1-13.28, 1-13.29 1-2 1-13.32, 1-13.33 1-2 1-16, 1-17 1-9, 1-10 1-17.1 1-4 2.1-21 2-70 2.1-340 et seq. Ch. 2 2.1-344 2-22 2.1-639.14 2-72 2.2-3711 2-22 3.1-73.6 5-2 3.1-796.66 et seq. 5-3, 5-8 3.1-796.93 5-4 3.1-796.105 5-3, 5-9, 5-46 3.1-796-116 5-5 3.1-796.118 5-6 3.1-796.119 5-40 3.1-796.122 5-172 3.1-796.128 5-4 3.1-1011 et seq. Ch. 17 tit. 4, ch. 2 14-51 4-1 et seq. 14-51, 14-52 4-1-4-118 18-4 4-2 14-51 18-3 4-25 18-3 4-39 14-51 4-97 18-4 4-98.19 14-52 4-99 18-3 5.1 4-8 5.1-31 Ch. 4 5.1-41 4-2 6-7 6-8 8.01-386 1-12 9-179 et seq. Ch. 21 9.1-101 21-10.1 tit. 10.1, ch. 5, art. 3 10-3 10.1-506 et seq. 10-3 tit. 10.1, ch. 5, art. 4 10-2 10.1-560 et seq. Ch. 10 10-2 10.1-561 10-5(a) 10.1-561.1 10-4(c) 10.1-562 10-4(a) 10.1-564 10-5 10.1-1100 et seq. Ch. 12 10.1-1142 12-119(e) 10.1-1400 et seq. Ch. 22 Ch. 22, Art. IV 13.1-501 et seq. 14-3 14.1-7 2-48 15-765 1-7 15.1-7 Ch. 2, Art. II 15.1-11 Ch. 22 Ch. 22, Art. III 15.1-11.1 15-70 15.1-11.2 Ch. 6 Ch. 12 15.1-11.4 Ch. 6 Ch. 6, Arts. II, III 19-2 15.1-14 Ch. 8 Ch. 15 15.1-14(1) Ch. 23 15.1-14(5) Ch. 17 15.1-14(5), (6) Ch. 12 15.1-14(9) Ch. 23 15.1-15(1) Ch. 6 Ch. 12 15.1-15(4), (5) Ch. 12 15.1-16 Ch. 15 Ch. 23 15.1-28 1-11 Ch. 13 15.1-28.1- 
15.1-28.03 Ch. 22 15.1-29.15 4-4 8-19 15.1-33.1 Ch. 20 Ch. 29 15.1-37 et seq. Ch. 28 15.1-37.2:1 Ch. 28 15.1-37.3 1-1 Ch. 24 15.1-37.3:1, 
15.1-37.3:2 Ch. 19 15.1-37.3:4 Ch. 28 15.1-37.4-15.1-37.8 9-1 15.1-44 4-8 15.1-50(A)(1) Ch. 2, Art. III 15.1-51 Ch. 2, Art. II 15.1-131 et seq. Ch. 21 15.1-136.1 et seq.       Ch. 21 15.1-137 Ch. 19 15.1-137 et seq. Ch. 21 15.1-138 21-5 15.1-159.2 et seq.       Ch. 21 15.1-239 et seq. Ch. 23 15.1-292 Ch. 28, Art. III 15.1-292 et seq. Ch. 28 15.1-317 et seq. Ch. 28, Art. III 15.1-332.1 et seq.       Ch. 28 15.1-363 et seq. Ch. 23 15.1-427 et seq. Ch. 20 15.1-427.1 20-26 15.1-431 29-414 15.1-437 20-28 15.1-439 20-30 15.1-446.1 Ch. 20, Art. III 15.1-448, 15.1-449 20-53 15.1-456 20-54 15.1-465 et seq. Ch. 24 24-4 15.1-486 29-1, 29-2 29-5 15.1-486 et seq. Ch. 29 15.1-489 29-2 15.1-491 29-6 15.1-492 29-386 15.1-494 29-411 15.1-495 29-414 15.1-496.1 29-415 15.1-499 et seq. Ch. 29 15.1-792 et seq. Ch. 2 15.1-797 2-2 15.1-800 Ch. 2, Art. II 15.1-826 Ch. 25 15.1-826 et seq. Ch. 2 15.1-829 Ch. 2, Art. II 15.1-830 2-24 15.1-832 2-22 15.1-840 1-6 15.1-841 Ch. 25 Ch. 25, Art. III 15.1-846 Ch. 6 15.1-857 Ch. 22 15.1-867 Ch. 6 Ch. 17 Ch. 22, Art. III 15.1-869 Ch. 6 15.1-872 Ch. 12 15.1-875 Ch. 28 28-51 28-58, 28-59 15.1-876 Ch. 28, Art. III, Div. 2 28-127 15.1-888 et seq. Ch. 23 15.1-893 23-1 15.1-894 Ch. 23 15.1-901 12-123 15.1-901, 15.1-902 1-6 15.1-905 1-6 15.1-1239 et seq. Ch. 28 15.2-106 2-6 15.2-926 18-10 15.2-928 22-31.1 15.2-1503.1 2-5 15.2-1731 21-10.1 15.2-1734 21-10.1 15.2-2253 24-7 15.2-2258 24-26 15.2-2262 24-27 15.2-2264 24-28 16.1-278.4 18-10 16.1-278.5 18-10 17-69.1 Ch. 23 tit. 18.2, ch. 7, art. 2       15-3 18.2-1 et seq. Ch. 18 18.2-9 1-6 18.2-11-18.2-13 1-6 18.2-51.1 Ch. 21 18.2-51.4 21-16 18.2-125 8-18 18.2-127 8-17 18.2-130 18-32 18.2-137 8-17 18-18 18.2-138, 18.2-139 18-17 18.2-139 18-39 18.2-146, 18.2-147 15-5, 15-6 18.2-152 15-129 18.2-163 18-42 18.2-174 Ch. 21 21-9 18.2-175 Ch. 21 18.2-212 Ch. 12 18.2-223, 18.2-224 14-141 18.2-266 21-16 18.2-266.1 21-16 18.2-308 18-46 18.2-309 18-49 18.2-324 15-16 18.2-325 et seq. 18-23 18.2-347 18-6 18.2-370 18-26 18.2-372-18.2-374 18-31 18.2-375 14-53 18.2-387 18-26 18.2-388 18-33 18.2-415 18-19-18-21 18.2-416 18-1 18.2-422 18-30 18.2-427 18-34 18.2-433 18-12 18.2-460 21-7 18.2-461 Ch. 21 19-309 Char., § 30 19.2-1 et seq. Ch. 21 19.2-8 Ch. 6 19.2-12 et seq. Ch. 21 19.2-71 et seq. Ch. 21 19.2-76.2 Ch. 22 19.2-250 21-5 24-2 24-4 19.2-389 2-5 24.1-90-24.1-93 9-1 24.1-168 9-11 25-233 Char., § 12 tit. 27, ch. 9 12-26 27-1 et seq. Ch. 12 27-6.1 12-79 27-6.1 et seq. Ch. 12, Art. IV 27-6.1-27-22 12-76 27-7 12-79 27-11 12-85 27-15.1 12-81 12-85 27-17 12-85 27-30 et seq. 12-84 27-94 et seq. Ch. 12 27-97 12-26 tit. 29.1 5-172 29.1-738 21-16 29.1-738.02 21-16 32.1-34 Ch. 17 32.1-163 et seq. Ch. 28, Art. III 32.1-167 et seq. Ch. 28 33-57-33-75 Char., § 55 33.1-25 et seq. Ch. 23 33.1-89-33.1-132 Char., § 55 33.1-346 Ch. 22 33.1-346.1 Ch. 22 33.1-347 Ch. 22 33.1-348 29-1 33.1-348(b)(2) 29-1 36-70 et seq. Ch. 6 36-97 et seq. Ch. 6 36-98 Ch. 6 36-99 19-2 36-99.1 Ch. 6 36-105 Ch. 6 37.1-67.1 21-5 40.1-117 et seq. Ch. 6 42.1-76 et seq. Ch. 24 tit. 46.2 15-3, 15-4 tit. 46.2, ch. 6 15-61 46.2-100 1-2 15-1 15-70 23-13 46.2-100 et seq. Ch. 15 46.2-113 15-23 46.2-300 et seq. 21-16 46.2-310 Ch. 26 46.2-600 et seq. 15-134 46.2-617 15-704 46.2-711 14-55 Ch. 26 46.2-731 15-73 46.2-739 15-73 46.2-739B 15-137 46.2-801 15-2 46.2-821 15-43, 15-44 46.2-852 et seq. 21-16 46.2-894 21-16 46.2-922 12-6 46.2-1052 14-55 46.2-1200 et seq. 15-71 46.2-1213 15-71 46.2-1220 Ch. 15, Art. III, Div. 3 15-4 15-61 46.2-1220 et seq. Ch. 15 46.2-1238 15-73 46.2-1239 15-62 46.2-1245 15-137 46.2-1300 15-4 46.2-1300 et seq. Ch. 15 46.2-1301 15-4 15-43 46.2-1304 15-9 46.2-1313 15-3 49-1 Char. § 6 tit. 54.1 Ch. 14 tit. 54.1, ch. 4, art. 1 10-3 54.1-400 et seq. 10-2 54.1-400 10-5 54.1-1100 et seq. Ch. 6 54.1-2900 14-65 54.1-4108 14-112, 14-113 56-257 Ch. 23 56-291.1 et seq. Ch. 26 56-291.3:1 et seq. Ch. 26 56-291.3:3 14-58 56-291.3:5 26-2 56-412.1 15-15 56-468.1 25-160 25-161 56-594 25-76 57-22 et seq. Ch. 8 57-48 et seq. Ch. 19 57-63 Ch. 19 tit. 58.1 14-3 tit. 58.1, ch. 12 25-27, 25-28 tit. 58.1, ch. 30 et seq. Ch. 25 tit. 58.1, ch. 32, art. 2 25-47.1 tit. 58.1, ch. 37 14-3 58.1-15 25-29 58.1-1201 25-26 58.1-1204 25-27 58.1-1205 25-26 58.1-1207 25-28 58.1-1211 25-27, 25-28 58.1-1212 25-28 58.1-1821 14-7 58.1-2901 25-77 58.1-3200 Ch. 25, Art. III 58.1-3650 et seq. 25-77 58.1-3700 et seq. Ch. 14 58.1-3701 14-3 58.1-3709 14-5 58.1-3712 14-10 58.1-3712.1 14-10 58.1-3713 14-10 58.1-3714.B 14-3 58.1-3715 14-3 14-4, 14-5 58.1-3717 et seq. Ch. 19 58.1-3717 14-4 14-10 58.1-3718 14-4 14-10 58.1-3720 14-91 58.1-3720 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. III 58.1-3721 14-91 58.1-3728 14-4 14-53 58.1-3731 14-4 58.1-3812 et seq. Ch. 25, Art. IV 58.1-3813 25-77 58.1-3814 25-77 58.1-3814F., G. 25-77 58.1-3840 Ch. 25, Arts. V, VI 58.1-3900 et seq. Ch. 14 58.1-3901 et seq. Ch. 25 58.1-3903 14-6 58.1-3906 25-109 58.1-3916 14-4 25-112 25-138 58.1-3940 14-6 58.1-3984 14-6 14-7 59.1-137 et seq. Ch. 12 59.1-142 12-51 12-53 59.1-142 et seq. Ch. 12 Ch. 12, Art. III 59.1-144 12-54 59.1-146, 
59.1-147 12-55, 12-56 tit. 62.1, ch. 4, 
§ 62.1-45a 28-216 tit. 62.1, ch. 8.1 10-3 62.1-115.1 et seq. 10-3 63.1-164 25-104  
