CODE OF THE CITY OF FALLS CHURCH, VIRGINIA 
____________ 
Adopted: September 30, 2009 
____________ 
Published in 2009 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
FALLS CHURCH, VIRGINIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Robin S. Gardner 
Mayor 
____________ 
Harold Lippman 
Vice Mayor 
____________ 
Nader Baroukh 
Daniel K. Maller 
David F. Snyder 
Daniel X. Sze 
Lawrence Webb 
City Council 
____________ 
F. Wyatt Shields 
City Manager 
____________ 
John E. Foster 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Kathleen C. Buschow 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Falls Church, Virginia. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1982 Code, as supplemented through October 2, 2007, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the City Council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1982 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Alyce A. Whitson, Senior Code Attorney, and K. Barrington, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Kathleen C. Buschow, City Clerk; Roy B. Thorpe, former City Attorney; John E. Foster, City Attorney; and the other members of the city staff for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Falls Church, Virginia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Falls Church, Virginia. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Falls Church, Virginia. 2009. 
ORDINANCE 1835 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF FALLS CHURCH, VIRGINIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
THE CITY OF FALLS CHURCH, VIRGINIA HEREBY ORDAINS: 
    Section 1.  The Code entitled "Code of the City of Falls Church, Virginia" published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 48, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2.  All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before May 26, 2009, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3.  The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4.  Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished as follows: 
(a) Whenever in this Code or any other ordinance of the city, it is provided that a violation of any provision thereof shall constitute a class 1, 2, 3 or 4 misdemeanor, such violation shall be punishable as provided in Code of Virginia, § 18.2-11. 
(b) Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance or resolution of the city, or rule or regulation or order promulgated by any officer or agency of the city under authority duly vested in him or it, any act is prohibited or is declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor, or the doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor and no specific penalty is provided for the violation thereof, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order shall be punished by a fine not exceeding twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) or by imprisonment in jail for a period of not exceeding twelve (12) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(c) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section or any other section of this Code, no penalty shall be imposed for a violation of this Code or other ordinance of the city which is greater than the penalty prescribed by the general law of the Commonwealth for a like offense. 
(d) Each day any violation of this Code or any such ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order shall continue shall constitute, except where otherwise provided, a separate offense. 
    In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, administrative adjudication and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5.  Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6.  Ordinances adopted after May 26, 2009 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7.  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this ordinance and the Code hereby adopted are severable, and if any phrases, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this ordinance or the Code hereby adopted shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by a Court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this ordinance or the Code hereby adopted. 
    Section 8. This ordinance shall become effective immediately upon adoption. 
1 st Reading: 9-14-09 
2 nd Reading: 9-30-09 
(TO9-09) 
    IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the foregoing was adopted by the City Council of the City of Falls Church, Virginia on September 30, 2009 as Ordinance 1835. 
  
/s/ Kathleen Clarken Buschow 
      Kathleen Clarken Buschow   City Clerk 
Supplement History Table 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date
Adopted Include/
Omit Supp. No. 1846  6-28-2010 Include 2 1847  7-26-2010 Include 2 1849  9-27-2010 Include 2 1850 11- 8-2010 Include 2 1853  2-28-2011 Include 3 1855  3-14-2011 Include 3 1856  4-11-2011 Include 3 1858  4-25-2011 Include 3 1859  4-25-2011 Include 3 1863  5- 9-2011 Include 3 1865  8- 8-2011 Include 3 1870 12-12-2011 Include 3 1871  3-12-2012 Include 4 1872  3-12-2012 Include 4 Amend. of  3-13-2012 Include 4 Res. 2011-39  3-13-2012 Include 4 1873  4- 9-2012 Include 4 1879  8-13-2012 Include 4 1880  8-13-2012 Include 4 1881  8-13-2012 Include 4 1883  9-24-2012 Include 4 Res. 2012-35 12-10-2012 Include 5 1887  1-28-2013 Include 5 1889  2-11-2013 Include 5 1890  2-25-2013 Include 5 1892  4-22-2013 Include 5 1895  4-22-2013 Include 5 1896  4-22-2013 Include 5 1901  7-22-2013 Include 5 1902  7-22-2013 Include 5 1903  8-12-2013 Include 5 1906 10-15-2013 Include 5 1908 10-28-2013 Include 5 1909 10-28-2013 Include 5 1911 11-25-2013 Include 5 1912 12- 9-2013 Include 5 1913 12- 9-2013 Include 5 Res. 2013-37 11-25-2013 Include 6 1914  1-13-2014 Include 6 1915  3-24-2014 Include 6 1920  4-28-2014 Include 6 1922  4-28-2014 Include 6 1923  4-28-2014 Include 6 1924  5-27-2014 Omit 6 1928  9- 8-2014 Include 6 Res. 2015-02  1-12-2015 Include 7 1932  2-23-2015 Include 7 1937  4-27-2015 Include 7 1939  7-27-2015 Include 7 1941 10-13-2015 Include 7 1943 12-14-2015 Include 7 1945  1-11-2016 Include 8 1946  2- 8-2016 Include 8 1947  2- 8-2016 Include 8 1948  2- 8-2016 Include 8 1949  3-28-2016 Include 8 1954  4-25-2016 Include 8 1955  4-25-2016 Include 8 1958  6-13-2016 Include 8 1959  6-27-2016 Include 8 1961  8- 8-2016 Include 8 1962  8- 8-2016 Include 8 1964 11-28-2016 Include 8 1965 11-28-2016 Include 8 1966  2-13-2017 Include 9 1973  4-24-2017 Include 9 1981  1- 8-2018 Include 10 1988  6-11-2018 Include 10 1989  8-13-2018 Include 10 1991 12-18-2018 Include 10 1993  1-28-2019 Include 11  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Charter of the City of Falls Church, Acts of 1950, ch. 323, as amended. Acts amending the Charter are cited following the section affected. Unless so indicated, the section derives unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings and typographical errors have been corrected without notation. Catchlines have been edited in order to more accurately reflect the content of the section. A uniform system of capitalization has been used, and a frontal analysis has been added for the convenience of the user. Otherwise the Charter remains unchanged from the original acts from which it is derived. 
State Law reference- Charter powers, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-100; procedure to amend Charter, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-200 et seq. 

CHAPTER 1. - INCORPORATION AND BOUNDARIES 

Sec. 1.01. - Incorporation. 
    The inhabitants of the territory comprised within the limits of the City of Falls Church, as the same now are or may hereafter be established by law, shall continue to be a body politic and corporate under the name of the City of Falls Church and as shall have perpetual succession, may sue and be sued, contract and be contracted with and may have a corporate seal which it may alter, renew or amend at its pleasure. 
Sec. 1.02. - Boundaries. 
    The corporate limits of Falls Church, as heretofore established, are hereby reestablished as follows: So much of the territories in the county of Fairfax, together with all the improvements and appurtenances thereunto belonging, as is contained in the following boundaries, to wit: "Beginning at a large planted stone on the estate of the late J. C. DePutron, at the original western corner of the District of Columbia, which is also at the corner of Fairfax and Arlington Counties and at the corner of the Town of Falls Church; thence north 73;deg; 50' west 4850 feet to a point; thence south 25;deg; 45' west 4014 feet to a point in the center of West Street; thence south 21;deg; east 3185 feet to a point in the center line of Fairfax Street; thence with said center line north 67;deg; 15' east 4181/2 feet; north 89;deg; 00' east 911 feet; north 87;deg; 50' east 1650 feet to a point; thence north 56;deg; 45' east 146 feet to a point in the middle of said street; thence south 77;deg; east 1539 feet to a point near the Methodist Episcopal Church; thence south 62;deg; east 5604 feet to a point in the north line of Georgetown Road; thence with said north line north 41;deg; 20' east 2141/2 feet; thence north 87;deg; 30' east 567 feet; north 62;deg; east 372 feet; north 88;deg; east 371 feet; south 82;deg; 30' east 3381/2 feet to a point; thence north 4;deg; 15' east to the boundary between Fairfax and Arlington Counties; thence with said boundary in the northwesterly direction to the point of beginning" containing all that portion of the Town of Falls Church remaining after the separation of that portion lying in Arlington County, and also including that property added to the City of Falls Church by a Final Agreed Order of the Special Court of the Circuit Court of Fairfax County, in Case No. 2013-16489, recorded among the land records of the Fairfax County Circuit Court, Deed Book 23555, Page 2115. 
(Acts 1973, ch. 292; Res. No. 2015-02, § 1), 1-12-2015) 
State Law reference- Boundaries of municipal corporations, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-207. 
CHAPTER 2. - POWERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Uniform Charter powers, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-204, 15.2-1100 et seq. 

Sec. 2.01. - General grant of powers. 
    The city shall have and may exercise all powers which are now or may hereafter be conferred upon or delegated to cities under the constitution and laws of the commonwealth and all other powers pertinent to the conduct of a city government, the exercise of which is not expressly prohibited by the said constitution and laws and which in the opinion of the council are necessary or desirable to promote the general welfare of the city and the safety, health, peace, good order, comfort, convenience and morals of its inhabitants, as fully and completely as though such powers were specifically enumerated in this Charter, and no enumeration of particular powers in this Charter shall be held to be exclusive but shall be held to be in addition to this general grant of powers. 
State Law reference- Powers of municipality, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1100 et seq. 
Sec. 2.02. - Financial powers. 
    In addition to the powers granted by other sections of this Charter, the city shall have the power: 
(a)  To raise annually by taxes and assessments in the city such sums of money as the council shall deem necessary to pay the debts and defray the expenses of the city, in such manner as the council shall deem expedient provided that such taxes and assessments are not prohibited by the laws of the commonwealth. In addition to, but not as a limitation upon, this general grant of power the city shall have power to levy and collect ad valorem taxes on real estate and tangible personal property and machinery and tools; to levy and collect taxes for admission to or other charge for any public amusements, entertainment, performance, exhibition, sport or athletic event in the city, which taxes may be added to and collected with the price of such admission or other charge; unless prohibited by general law to require licenses, prohibit the conduct of any business, profession, vocation or calling without such a license, require taxes to be paid on such license in respect of all businesses, professions, vocations and callings which cannot, in the opinion of the council, be reached by the ad valorem system; and to require licenses of owners of vehicles of all kinds for the privilege of using the streets, alleys and other public places in the city, require taxes to be paid on such licenses and prohibit the use of streets, alleys and other public places in the city without such license. 
(b)  To borrow money for the purposes and in the manner provided by Chapter 7 of this Charter. 
(c)  To make appropriations, subject to the limitations imposed by this Charter, for the support of the city government and any other purposes authorized by this Charter and not prohibited by the laws of the commonwealth. 
(d)  To appropriate, without being bound by other provisions of this Charter, in an amount of not more than five (5) percent of the receipts of the preceding fiscal year for the purpose of meeting a public emergency threatening the lives, health or property of the inhabitants of the city, provided that any such appropriation shall require the affirmative votes of a majority of the entire council and that the ordinance making such appropriation shall contain a clear statement of the nature and extent of the emergency. 
(e)  To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests or grants from any source for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the city government, and to act as trustee for any appropriate purpose. 
(f)  To provide, or aid in the support of, public libraries and public schools. 
(g)  To grant financial aid to military units organized in the city in accordance with the laws of the commonwealth, and to charitable or benevolent institutions and corporations, including those established for scientific, literary or musical purposes or the encouragement of agriculture and the mechanical arts, whose functions further the public purposes of the city. 
(h)  To establish a system of pensions for injured, retired or superannuated city officers and employees, members of the police and fire departments, teachers and other employees of the school board, judges, clerks, deputy clerks, bailiffs and other employees of the municipal courts, and to establish a fund or funds for the payment of such pensions by making appropriations out of the treasury of the city, by levying a special tax for the benefit of such fund or funds, by requiring contributions payable from time to time from such officers or employees, or by any combination of these methods or by any other method not prohibited by law, provided that the total annual payments into such fund or funds shall be sufficient on sound actuarial principles to provide for the pensions to be paid therefrom, and provided further that the benefits accrued or accruing to any person under such system shall not be subject to execution, levy, attachment, garnishment or any other process whatsoever nor shall any assignment of such benefits be enforceable in any court. 
(i)  To provide for the control and management of the fiscal affairs of the city, and prescribe and require the adoption and keeping of such books, records, accounts and systems of accounting by the departments, boards, commissions, courts or other agencies of the city government provided for by this Charter or otherwise by law as may be necessary to give full and true accounts of the affairs, resources and revenues of the city and the handling, use and disposal thereof. 
State Law reference- Power regarding taxes and assessments, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1104; borrowing money, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1105; control and management of fiscal affairs, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1106; aid to military units, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1112. 
Sec. 2.03. - Powers relating to public works, utilities and properties. 
    In addition to the powers granted by other sections of this Charter the city shall have power: 
(a)  To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean and light, streets, including limited access or express highways, alleys, bridges, viaducts, subways and underpasses, and make and improve walkways upon streets and improve and pave alleys within the city; and the city shall have the same power and authority over any street, alley or other public place ceded or conveyed to the city or dedicated or devoted to public use as over other streets, alleys and other public places. 
(b)  To acquire, construct, own, maintain and operate, within and without the city, public parks, parkways, playfields and playgrounds, and to lay out, equip and improve them with all suitable devices, buildings and other structures. 
(c)  To collect and dispose of garbage and other refuse and to acquire, construct, maintain and operate, within and without the city, incinerators, dumps or other facilities for such purposes. 
(d)  To acquire, construct, maintain and operate, within and without the city, sewers, drains, culverts and sewage disposal works. 
(e)  To assess to the extent permitted by law the cost of making and improving walkways on then existing streets, improving or paving existing alleys, or constructing sewers, culverts and drains, upon the owners of land abutting thereon or on the street or alley in which such sewer, culvert or drain is laid, provided that the amount of such assessment shall not exceed the peculiar benefit resulting to the landowner from the improvement, provided further, that in lieu of any such assessment for the construction of a sewer, culvert or drain, the city may assess and collect an annual sewer tax as compensation for the use thereof, and may provide for the commutation thereof upon such terms and condition as the council may provide by ordinance, but such assessment shall not be in excess of the peculiar benefit resulting therefrom to such abutting landowners; and provided further, that the city may acquire by condemnation or otherwise any interest or right of any owner of abutting property in the use of any sewer, culvert or drain, and thereafter charge such landowner for the use of such sewer, culvert or drain. The city may order such improvements to be made and the cost thereof apportioned in pursuance of an agreement between the city and the abutting landowners. 
(f)  To acquire, construct, maintain and equip all buildings and other structures necessary or useful in carrying out the powers and duties of the city. 
(g)  To sell, lease or dispose of, except as otherwise provided in this Charter and in the Constitution and laws of the commonwealth, land, buildings and other property of the city, real and personal. 
(h)  To control and regulate the use and management of all property of the city, real and personal, and specifically to rent or lease under such regulations as the school board shall deem expedient, school buildings, lands, grounds and equipment to persons or organizations for such health, educational, civic or recreational purposes as the school board shall deem prudent and beneficial to the community. 
(i)  To acquire, construct and maintain or authorize the construction and maintenance of bridges, viaducts or underpasses over or under any stream, creek or ravine when any portion of such bridge, viaduct or underpass is within the city limits, and to require compensation for their use by public utility, transmission or transportation companies, except as the right to require such compensation is affected by any contract heretofore or hereafter made with the company concerned. 
(j)  To authorize by ordinance, in accordance with the Constitution and laws of the commonwealth, the use of the streets for the operation of public transportation systems under such conditions and regulations as may be prescribed by such ordinance or by any future ordinance, or to acquire by agreement or condemnation any such transportation system and operate the same. 
(k)  To acquire, construct, own, maintain and operate, places for the parking or storage of vehicles by the public, which shall include but shall not be limited to parking lots, garages, buildings and other land, structures, equipment and facilities, when in the opinion of the council they are necessary to relieve congestion in the use of streets and to reduce hazards incident to such use; provide for their management and control by a department of the city government or by a board, commission or agency specially established by ordinance for the purpose; authorize or permit others to use, operate or maintain such places or any portions thereof, pursuant to lease or agreement, upon such terms and conditions as the council may determine by ordinance; and charge or authorize the charging of compensation for the parking or storage of vehicles or other services at or in such places. 
(l)  To acquire, construct, own, maintain and operate, airports and all the appurtenances thereof; provide for their management and control by a department of the city government or by a board, commission or agency specially established by ordinance for the purpose; charge or authorize the charging of compensation for the use of any such airport or any of its appurtenances; lease any appurtenance of any such airport or any concession incidental thereto or, in the discretion of the council, lease any such airport and its appurtenance with the right to all concessions thereon to, or enter into a contract for the management and operation of the same with any person, firm or corporation on such terms and conditions as the council may determine by ordinance. 
(m)  To acquire, construct, own, maintain and operate, stadia, arenas, swimming pools and other sport or recreation facilities; provide for their management and control by a department of the city government or by a board, commission or agency specially established by ordinance for the purpose; charge or authorize the charging of compensation for the use of or admission to such stadia, arenas, swimming pools and other sport facilities, including charges for any services incidental thereto; lease, subject to such regulations as may be established by ordinance, any such stadium, arena, swimming pool or other sport or recreation facility or any concession incidental thereto, or enter into a contract with any person, firm or corporation for the management and operation of any such stadium, arena, swimming pool or other sport or recreation facility, including the right to all concessions incident to the subject of such contract, on such terms and conditions as the council may determine by ordinance. 
(n)  To acquire, construct, own, maintain and operate, within and without the city, water works, sanitary sewers and sewage disposal plants, gas plants and electric plants, with the pipe and transmission lines incident thereto, to be managed and controlled as provided in Chapter 13 of this Charter, for the purpose of supplying water, sanitary sewers, gas and electricity within and without the city, and to charge and collect compensation therefor, and to provide penalties for the unauthorized use thereof. The council may require the charges made for any and all of such facilities to be paid at such time, in such manner, and subject to such penalties as it may prescribe. The charges for the use of the sanitary sewers may be based upon the amount of water used, or the number of water taps or outlets serving any premises, or the connections, if any, with such sanitary sewers, or such other basis as the council of the city may deem just, or any combination thereof. 
State Law reference- Authority to provide airports, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1123; ownership of public facilities, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1129. 
Sec. 2.04. - Power to make regulations for the preservation of the safety, health, peace, good order, comfort, convenience, morals and welfare of the city and its inhabitants. 
    In addition to the powers granted by other sections of this Charter, the city shall have power to adopt ordinances, not in conflict with this Charter or prohibited by the general laws of the commonwealth, for the preservation of the safety, health, peace, good order, comfort, convenience, morals and welfare of its inhabitants, and among such powers, but not in limitation thereof, the city shall have power: 
(a)  To provide for the prevention of vice, immorality, vagrancy and drunkenness; prevention and quelling of riots, disturbances and disorderly assemblages; suppression of houses of ill-fame and gambling places; prevention of lewd and disorderly conduct or exhibitions; and prevention of conduct in the streets dangerous to the public. 
(b)  To regulate the construction, maintenance and repair of buildings and other structures and the plumbing, electrical, heating, elevator, escalator, boiler, unfired pressure vessel, and air conditioning installations therein, for the purpose of preventing fire and other dangers to life and health. 
(c)  To provide for the protection of the city's property, real and personal, the prevention of the pollution of the city's water supply, and the regulation of the use of parks, playgrounds, playfields, recreational facilities, airports and other public property, whether located within or without the city. For the purpose of enforcing such regulations all city property, wherever located, shall be under the police jurisdiction of the city. Any member of the police force of the city or employee thereof appointed as a special policeman shall have power to make arrests for violation of any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this section and the civil and police court shall have jurisdiction in all cases arising thereunder. 
(d)  To grant or authorize the issuance of permits under such terms and conditions as the council may impose for the use of streets, alleys and other public places of the city by railroads, street railways, buses, taxicabs and other vehicles for hire, prescribe the location in, under or over, and grant permits for the use of, streets, alleys and other public places for the maintenance and operation of tracks, poles, wires, cables, pipes, conduits and bridges to be altered, removed or relocated either permanently or temporarily; charge and collect compensation for the privileges so granted, and prohibit such use of the streets, alleys and other public places in the city, and no such use shall be made of the streets, alleys or other public places of the city without the consent of the council. 
(e)  To prevent any obstruction of or encroachment over, under or in any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place; provide penalties for maintaining any such obstruction or encroachment, remove the same and charge the cost thereof to the owner or owners, occupant or occupants of the property so obstructing or encroaching, and collect the sum charged in any manner provided by law for the collection of taxes; require the owner or owners or the occupant or occupants of the property so obstructing or encroaching to remove the same; pending such removal charge the owner or owners of the property so obstructing or encroaching compensation for the use of such portion of the street, alley, sidewalk, or other public place obstructed or encroached upon the equivalent of what would be the tax upon the land so occupied if it were owned by the owner or owners of the property so obstructing or encroaching and, if such removal shall not be made within the time ordered, impose penalties for each and every day that such obstruction or encroachment is allowed to continue thereafter; authorize encroachments upon streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public places, subject to such terms and conditions as the council may prescribe, but such authorization shall not relieve the owner or owners, occupant or occupants of the property encroaching of any liability for negligency on account of such encroachment, and recover possession of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place or any other property of the city by suit or action in ejectment. 
(f)  To prescribe the route and grade of any railroad laid in the city, regulate the operation of locomotives and cars, and exclude such locomotives and cars from the city, provided no contract between the city and the corporation operating such locomotives or cars is violated by such action. 
(g)  To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over traffic in the streets of the city and provide penalties for the violation of such regulations, provided that ordinances or administrative regulations adopted by virtue of this subsection shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of the Motor Vehicle Code of Virginia. All fines imposed for the violation of such ordinances and regulations shall be paid into the city treasury. 
(h)  To regulate in the interest of public health, the production, preparation, distribution, sale and possession of milk, other beverages and foods for human consumption, and the places in which they are produced, prepared, distributed, sold, served or stored; regulate the construction, installation, maintenance and condition of all water and sewer pipes, connections, toilets, water closets and plumbing fixtures of all kinds; regulate the construction and use of septic tanks and dry closets, where sewers are not available, and the sanitation of swimming pools and lakes, provide for the removal of night soil, and charge and collect compensation for the removal thereof; compel the use of sewers, the connection of abutting premises therewith, and the installation in such premises of suitable sanitary facilities; regulate or prohibit connections to and use of sewers; provide for the quarantine of any person afflicted with a contagious or infectious disease, and for the removal of such person to a hospital or ward specially designated for contagious or infectious diseases; inspect and prescribe reasonable rules and regulations, in the interest of public health, with respect to private hospitals, sanatoria, convalescent homes, clinics and other private institutions, homes and facilities for the care of the sick, of children, the aged and the destitute, and make and enforce all regulations necessary to preserve and promote public health and sanitation and protect the inhabitants of the city from contagious, infectious or other diseases. 
(i)  To regulate cemeteries and burials therein, prescribe the records to be kept by the owners of such cemeteries, and prohibit all burials except in a public burying ground. 
(j)  To regulate or prohibit the exercise of any dangerous, offensive or unhealthful business, trade or employment, and the transportation of any offensive or dangerous substance. 
(k)  To regulate the light, ventilation, sanitation and use and occupancy of buildings heretofore or hereafter constructed, altered, remodeled or improved, and the sanitation of the premises surrounding the same. 
(l)  To regulate the emission of smoke, dust and other atmospheric pollution, the construction, installation and maintenance of fuel-burning equipment, and the methods of firing and stoking furnaces and boilers. 
(m)  To compel the removal of weeds from private property, the covering or removal of offensive, unwholesome, unsanitary or unhealthy substances allowed to accumulate in or on any place or premises; the filling in to the street level of the portion of any lot adjacent to a street where the difference in level between the lot and the street constitutes a danger to life and limb; the raising or draining or grounds subject to be covered by stagnant water; the razing or repair of all unsafe, dangerous or unsanitary public or private buildings, walls or structures which constitute a menace to the health and safety of the occupants thereof or the public, to prevent controllable noises, and to compel the abatement or removal of any and all other nuisances whatsoever. If after such reasonable notice as the council may prescribe by ordinance the owner or owners, occupant or occupants of the property or premises affected by the provisions of this subsection shall fail to abate or obviate the condition or nuisance, the city may do so and charge and collect the cost thereof from the owner or owners, occupant or occupants of the property affected in any manner provided by law for the collection of taxes. 
(n)  To regulate or prohibit the maintenance, storage, transportation, possession and use of explosives or inflammable substances and the use and exhibition of fireworks and discharge of firearms, and other weapons. 
(o)  To regulate or prohibit the making of fires in the streets, alleys and other public places in the city and to regulate the making of fires on private property. 
(p)  To regulate or prohibit the running at large and the keeping of animals and fowl and provide for the impounding and confiscation of any such animal or fowl found at large or kept in violation of such regulations. 
(q)  To prevent cruelty to and the abuse of animals. 
(r)  To regulate the sale of goods, wares or merchandise at auction; regulate the conduct of and prescribe the number of pawnshops and dealers in secondhand goods, wares and merchandise; regulate or prohibit the peddling or hawking of any article for sale on the streets of the city; prevent fraud or deceit in the sale of goods, wares and merchandise; require the weighing, measuring, gauging and inspection of goods, wares and merchandise offered for sale; require weights and measures to be sealed and subject to inspection; and provide for the appointment of a sealer and one or more weighmasters who shall perform such duties and functions as may be prescribed by ordinance. 
(s)  Upon an affirmative finding of the need to protect the public health, welfare, and safety of its citizens, the City of Falls Church may provide by ordinance for the issuance of certificates of compliance with current building code regulations for existing residential rental buildings located in areas of the city subject to neighborhood blight as defined below, designated by the city council, after inspections of such buildings upon a termination of the tenancies or when such rental property is sold. "Neighborhood blight" means a legislative finding by the city council of unhealthful, dangerous, or harmful conditions in a residential site or residential area of the city caused by neglect or lack of maintenance, residential overcrowding of land, or illegal activity, of owners or occupants of the residential structures. 
(t)  To prohibit the operation of a motor vehicle at a speed of fifteen (15) miles an hour or more in excess of the applicable maximum speed limit in residential districts and provide that any person who violates the prohibition shall be subject to a mandatory fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00), not subject to suspension. 
(Acts 1995, ch. 655; Res. No. 2000-01, 1-10-2000) 
Sec. 2.05. - Miscellaneous powers. 
    The city shall also have power: 
(a)  To establish, maintain and operate public employment bureaus and public markets. 
(b)  To establish, maintain and operate, within and without the city, public hospitals, sanatoria, convalescent homes, clinics and other public institutions, homes and facilities for the care of the sick, of children, the aged and the destitute and is authorized to engage in or assist in development or operation of housing for the elderly, handicapped, and for low or moderate income families and individuals. 
(c)  To provide care for the poor and have all the powers and duties conferred and imposed on cities by the laws of the commonwealth relating to public assistance. 
(d)  To establish, own, maintain and operate, within and without the city, cemeteries for the interment of the dead, fix the price at which graves and lots therein shall be sold, make contracts for their perpetual care and establish the rates to be charged for the digging of graves, construction of vaults and other services. 
(e)  To establish, maintain and operate, within or without the city, a jail for the confinement of prisoners, ordered or sentenced to be confined therein, and a jail farm; and compel able-bodied prisoners confined in the jail to work on such farm, with the approval of the official trying such cases. 
(f)  To establish, impose and enforce the collection of water, light, gas, and sewage rates, and rates and charges for other services, products, or conveniences operated or furnished by the city; and the council may prescribe a different rate to be paid for such services and conveniences rendered to users or customers without the corporate limits of the city. 
(Acts 1976, ch. 13) 
Sec. 2.06. - Enforcement of regulations. 
    When by the provisions of this charter or the constitution and general laws of the commonwealth, the city is authorized to pass ordinances on any subject, the council may provide suitable penalties for the violation of any such ordinances, including ordinances effective outside the city as provided in this Charter. No such penalty shall exceed the maximum limits set by general law for Class 1 misdemeanors or substantially similar offenses. Upon conviction for violation of any ordinance, the court trying the case may require bond of the person so convicted with proper security in the penalty of not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), conditioned to keep the peace and be of good behavior and especially for the period of not more than one year not to violate the ordinance for the breach of which he has been convicted. From any fine or imprisonment imposed an appeal shall lie as in cases of misdemeanor. Whenever any fine or penalty shall be imposed but not paid the court trying the case may, unless an appeal be forthwith taken, proceed in accordance with general law and may issue a writ of fieri facias directed to the sheriff having jurisdiction in the city for the collection of the amount due, returnable within sixty (60) days from its issuance. The city is hereby expressly authorized and empowered to institute and maintain a suit or suits to restrain by injunction the violation of any ordinance legally adopted by it, notwithstanding such ordinance may provide penalties for its violation. The city is authorized to fix a fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) for violation of the city's motor vehicle license tax. 
(Acts 1979, ch. 421; Acts 1991, ch. 40) 
State Law reference- Penalty for violation of ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1429; punishment for conviction of misdemeanor, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-11. 
Sec. 2.07. - Licenses and permits. 
    Whenever in the judgment of the council it is advisable in the exercise of any of the powers of the city or in the enforcement of any ordinance or regulation, it may provide for the issuance of licenses or permits in connection therewith, establish the amount of the fee to be charged the licensee or permittee and require from the licensee or permittee a bond and an insurance policy of such character and in such amount and upon such terms as it may determine. 
State Law reference- Authority to issue licenses and permits, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1125. 
CHAPTER 3. - ELECTIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Elections, Code of Virginia, § 24.2-100 et seq. 

Sec. 3.01. - Election of councilmembers. 
    In the regular municipal election to be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November, 2013, and every four (4) years thereafter, four (4) councilmembers shall be elected for terms of four (4) years each, such terms of office to begin on the first day of January, 2014, and end on the last day of December, 2017; succeeding terms shall begin on the first day of January following the year of election and end on the last day of December, four (4) years thereafter. In the regular municipal election to be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November, 2015, and every four (4) years thereafter, three (3) councilmembers shall be elected for terms of four (4) years each, such terms of office to begin on the first day of January, 2016, and end on the last day of December, 2019; succeeding terms shall begin on the first day of January following the year of election and end on the last day of December, four (4) years thereafter. Councilmembers serving on council who were elected in May, 2010, and those members elected in May, 2012, shall have their term of office shortened by six (6) months but shall continue in office until their successors have been elected at the November General Election and have been qualified to serve. 
(Acts 1956, ch. 190; Acts 1973, ch. 292; Amend. of 3-13-2012/ref. 11-2011) 
State Law reference- Election and terms of mayor and council, Code of Virginia, § 24.2-222. 
Sec. 3.02. - Nomination of candidates for council. 
    Candidates for the office of city council shall be qualified voters of the city and shall file their notice of candidacy and be nominated only by petition in the manner prescribed by law for nonparty candidates and not by caucus, primary, convention or other party-affiliated proceeding There shall be printed on the ballots used in the election of councilmen the names of all candidates who have been so nominated as provided herein and no others. The requirements for nomination by petition shall be: 
(a)  Any qualified voter of the city actually residing within the corporate limits may be nominated by filing a petition, together with the notice of candidacy required by the general laws of the commonwealth relating to elections. 
(b)  The petition shall state the name and address of the residence of the person whose name is presented thereby as a candidate. 
    This section of the City Charter is intended to ensure non-partisan elections for City Council. 
(Acts 1952, ch. 301, Acts 1958, ch. 136; Acts 1960, ch. 429; Acts 1976, ch. 13; Acts 1991, ch. 40; Res. No. 2011-39, 3-13-2012/ref. 11-2011) 
State Law reference- Nomination by petition, Code of Virginia, § 24.1-521. 
Sec. 3.03. - Conduct of general municipal election. 
    The ballots used in the election of councilmen shall be without any distinguishing mark or symbol. Each qualified voter shall be entitled to cast one vote for each of as many councilmen as are to be elected in that election and those candidates receiving the highest number of votes shall be declared elected. In counting the votes, any ballot found to have been voted for more than the number of persons to be elected shall be void but no ballot shall be void for having been voted for a less number. The general laws of the commonwealth relating to the conduct of elections, so far as pertinent, shall apply to the conduct of the general municipal election. 
(Acts 1956, ch. 190; Acts 1999, ch. 168) 
Sec. 3.04. - Vacancies in office of member of city council. 
    When a vacancy occurs in the office of member of the council, whatever the cause, the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term by special election at the next November general election date, as provided in Code of Virginia, § 24.2-226. The remaining members of the council shall make an interim appointment to fill the vacancy, as provided in Code of Virginia, § 24.2-228. 
(Acts 1956, ch. 190; Acts 1979, ch. 421; Acts 1996, ch. 310; Res. No. 2013-37, 11-25-2013) 
Sec. 3.05. - Election of other city officers. 
    All other city officers required by the laws of the commonwealth to be elected by the qualified voters of the city shall be elected on the first Tuesday following the first Monday in November preceding the expiration of the terms of office of their respective predecessors, for such terms as are prescribed by law. All such elective officers shall be nominated and elected as provided in the general laws of the commonwealth. A vacancy in the office of commissioner of revenue or city treasurer shall be filled by the council by majority vote of all its members for the interim period until a successor is elected at the next general election and takes office, as is provided in the Code of Virginia. The officers so elected or appointed shall qualify in the mode prescribed by law and shall continue in office until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(Acts 1952, ch. 301; Acts 1954, ch. 561; Acts 1956, ch. 190; Acts 1958, ch. 136; Acts 1979, ch. 421) 
State Law reference- General election date, Code of Virginia, §§ 24.2-101, 24.1-222.1. 
Sec. 3.06. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- The provisions of former § 3.06 were repealed by Acts 1976, ch. 13. 
Sec. 3.07. - Vacancies in office of member of school board. 
    When a vacancy occurs in the office of member of the school board, the vacancy shall be filled in the same manner in which vacancies are filled on the city council, as provided in section 3.04. The remaining members of the school board shall make an interim appointment to fill the vacancy. 
(Acts 1996, ch. 310) 
CHAPTER 4. - COUNCIL 

Sec. 4.01. - Composition. 
    The council shall consist of seven (7) members, who shall be qualified voters of the city actually residing within the corporate limits, and they shall be elected as provided in Chapter 3. They shall each receive in full compensation for their services such salary as the city council may fix in accordance with state law. No member of the council shall during the term for which he was elected and one year thereafter be appointed to any office of profit under the government of the city. 
(Acts 1952, ch. 301; Acts 1956, ch. 190; Acts 1960, ch. 429; Acts 1966, ch. 146; Acts 1979, ch. 421; Acts 1999, ch. 168) 
Sec. 4.02. - Powers. 
    All powers vested in the city shall be exercised by the council except as otherwise provided in this Charter. In addition to the foregoing, the council shall have the following powers: 
(a)  To establish goals and objectives and provide for the organization, conduct and operation of all departments, bureaus, divisions, boards, commissions, offices and agencies of the city. 
(b)  To create, alter or abolish departments, bureaus, divisions, boards, commissions, offices and agencies other than those specifically established by Chapters 10, 11 and 17 and sections 16.06 and 20.02 of this Charter. 
(c)  Upon recommendation of the city manager to assign and reassign to departments, all bureaus, division, offices, agencies, departments and functions thereof except the city school board. 
(d)  To provide for the number, titles, qualifications, powers, duties and compensation of all officers and employees of the city, subject in the case of members of the classified service to the provisions of Chapter 9 of this Charter. 
(e)  To provide for the form of oaths and the amount and condition of surety bonds to be required of certain officers and employees of the city. 
(Acts 1979, ch. 421; Acts 1996, ch. 310) 
Sec. 4.03. - Mayor. 
    At the first meeting of the newly elected council as provided in section 4.05, the newly elected council, having taken the oath of office as hereinafter provided, shall proceed to choose by majority vote of all the members thereof one of their number to be mayor and one to be vice-mayor for the ensuing two (2) years. The mayor shall preside over the meetings of the council and shall have the same right to vote and speak therein as other members. He shall be recognized as the head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes, and purposes of military law and the service of civil process. The vice-mayor shall in the absence or disability of the mayor, perform the duties of mayor, and if a vacancy shall occur in the office of mayor shall become mayor for the unexpired portion of the term. In the absence or disability of both the mayor and vice-mayor, the council shall, by majority vote of those present, choose one of their number to perform the duties of mayor. 
(Acts 1952, ch. 301) 
Sec. 4.04. - City clerk. 
    The council shall appoint a city clerk for an indefinite term. He shall be the clerk of the council, shall keep the journal of its proceedings and shall record all ordinances in a book kept for the purpose. He shall be the custodian of the corporate seal of the city and shall be the officer authorized to use and authenticate it. All records in his office shall be public records and open to inspection at any time during regular business hours. He shall receive compensation to be fixed by the council and all fees received by him shall be paid into the city treasury. He shall appoint and remove, subject to the provisions of Chapter 9 of this Charter, an assistant city clerk who shall be authorized to act as city clerk in the absence or disability of the city clerk, and all deputies and other employees in his office, and shall have such other powers and duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or ordinance. 
(Acts 1973, ch. 292; Acts 1981, ch. 361) 
Sec. 4.05. - Induction of members. 
    The first meeting of a newly elected council shall take place in the council chamber in the city hall at 7:30 p.m. on the first Monday after the first Friday in January. The oath of office for duly elected members shall be administered prior to January 1 by the City Clerk or any judicial officer having jurisdiction in the City. The council shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of its members. The first business of the council shall be the election of a mayor and vice-mayor and the adoption of rules of procedure. Until this business has been completed the council shall not adjourn for a period longer than forty-eight (48) hours. 
(Acts 1976, ch. 13; Res. No. 2013-37, 11-25-2013) 
Sec. 4.06. - Rules of procedure. 
    The council shall have power, subject to the provisions of this Charter, to adopt its own rules of procedure. Such rules shall provide for the time and place of holding regular meetings of the council which shall be not less frequently than once in each month. They shall also provide for the calling of special meetings by the mayor, the city manager or any two (2) members of the council, and shall prescribe the method of giving notice thereof, provided that the notice of each special meeting shall contain a statement of the specific item or items of business to be transacted and no other business shall be transacted at such meeting except by the unanimous consent of all the members of the council, unless otherwise provided for in this Charter. 
(Acts 1958, ch. 136) 
Sec. 4.07. - Voting. 
    No ordinance, resolution, motion or vote shall be adopted by the council except at a meeting open to the public. All voting except on procedural motions shall be by roll call and the ayes and noes shall be recorded in the journal. No member of the council shall participate in the vote on any ordinance, resolution, motion or vote in which he, or any person, firm or corporation for which he is attorney, officer, director, employee or agent, has a financial interest other than as a minority stockholder of a corporation or as a citizen of the city. 
Sec. 4.08. - Ordinances, when required. 
    In addition to such acts of the council which are required by the Constitution or general laws of the commonwealth or by this Charter to be by ordinance, every act of the council creating, altering or abolishing any department, or creating, altering, assigning or abolishing any bureau, division, office or agency or enacting a pay plan, making an appropriation, authorizing the borrowing of money, levying a tax, establishing any rule or regulation for the violation of which a fine or penalty is imposed, or placing any burden upon or limiting the use of private property, shall be by ordinance. 
(Acts 1999, ch. 168) 
Sec. 4.09. - Form of ordinances. 
    Every ordinance except the annual appropriation ordinances and an ordinance codifying ordinances shall be confined to a single subject. The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be: "The City of Falls Church hereby ordains." Unless another date is specified therein and except as otherwise provided in this Charter, an ordinance shall take effect on the tenth day following its passage. 
(Acts 1952, ch. 301) 
Sec. 4.10. - Procedure for passing ordinance. 
    An ordinance may be introduced by any member or committee of the council or by the city manager at any regular meeting of the council or at any special meeting when the subject thereof has been included in the notice for such special meeting or been approved by a majority vote of all the members of the council. Upon introduction it shall receive its first reading and a time, not less than seven days after such introduction, and place shall be set at which the council or a committee thereof will hold a public hearing on such ordinance, other than an emergency ordinance, provided that the council may reject any ordinance on first reading without a hearing thereon by vote of a majority of the members. The hearing may be held separately or in connection with a regular or special meeting of the council and may be adjourned from time to time. It shall be the duty of the city clerk to cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, not later than at least two (2) days prior to the hearing on the ordinance, a notice containing the time and place of the hearing and the title of the proposed ordinance. It shall also be his duty, within three (3) working days after the introduction of an ordinance, to cause its full text to be printed or otherwise reproduced, as the council may by resolution direct, in sufficient numbers to supply copies to those who individually request them, or, if the council shall so order, to cause the same to be published as a paid advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. It shall further be his duty to place a copy of the ordinance in a file provided each member of the council for this purpose. A proposed ordinance, unless it be an emergency ordinance, shall be read a second time and may be finally passed at the meeting of the council following the introduction of the ordinance and after the conclusion of the public hearing thereon. If on its second reading an ordinance, other than an emergency ordinance, be amended as to its substance it shall not be passed until it shall be reprinted, reproduced or published as amended and a hearing shall be set and advertised and all proceedings had as in the case of a newly introduced ordinance. The readings referred to above may be accomplished by reading the ordinance by title only, provided copies of the ordinance are available to the public in the council chambers at the beginning of any meeting at which said ordinance is introduced or considered. 
(Acts 1952, ch. 301; Acts 1976, ch. 13) 
Sec. 4.11. - Emergency ordinances. 
    An emergency ordinance may be read a second time and passed with or without amendment at any regular or special meeting at which the ordinance was introduced. An emergency ordinance must contain a specific statement of the emergency claimed and affirmative votes of a majority of the entire council shall be necessary for its adoption. Ordinances passed as an emergency ordinance shall expire sixty (60) days after the effective date of the emergency ordinance unless the ordinance is adopted again after a public hearing where the procedure followed for notice and hearing is the same as that required in section 4.10 for nonemergency ordinances. The effective date of emergency ordinances, unless otherwise provided, shall be the date of adoption. 
(Acts 1987, ch. 68) 
Sec. 4.12. - Submission of propositions to the qualified voters of the city. 
    The council shall have authority, by resolution, to submit to the qualified voters of the city for an advisory referendum thereon any proposed ordinance or amendment to the city charter, not less than thirty (30) nor more than sixty (60) days after the passage of such resolution. The election shall be conducted and the result thereof ascertained and determined in the manner provided by section 24-141 of the Code of Virginia. If a petition requesting the submission of an amendment to this Charter, set forth in such petition, signed by qualified voters equal in number to ten (10) percent of the largest number of votes cast in any general or primary election held in the city during the five (5) years immediately preceding and verified as hereinafter provided, is filed with the city clerk he shall forthwith certify that fact to the council. The signatures to such petition shall be witnessed by a person whose affidavit to that effect is attached thereto. Upon the certification of such petition the council shall order an election to be held not less than thirty nor more than sixty (60) days after such certification, in which such proposed amendment shall be submitted to the qualified voters of the city for their approval or disapproval. Such election shall be conducted and the results thereof ascertained and determined in the manner provided by law for the conduct of general elections and by the regular election officials of the city. If a majority of those voting thereon at such election approve the proposed amendment, such results shall be communicated by the city clerk to the two houses of the General Assembly and to the representatives of the city therein with the same effect as if the council had adopted a resolution requesting the General Assembly to adopt the amendment. 
(Acts 1960, ch. 429) 
Editor's note- Code of Virginia, § 24-141 was repealed by Acts 1970, ch. 462. See now Code of Virginia, § 24-165. 
Sec. 4.13. - Record and publication of ordinances. 
    Every ordinance after passage shall be given a serial number and shall be recorded by the clerk in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose. Within one year after the first Tuesday in September 1951, there shall be prepared under the direction of the city attorney, who is hereby authorized to employ such assistance as he deems necessary for the purpose, a codification or revision of all ordinances in force. Such codification shall be passed by the council as a single ordinance and without prior publication. Upon its passage, it shall be published in bound or looseleaf form. This codification, to be known and cited officially as the city Code, shall be furnished to city officers and shall be sold to the public at a price to be fixed by the council. A similar codification shall be prepared, passed, published and distributed, as above provided, at least every five (5) years. It shall be the duty of the city clerk to cause all ordinances adopted to be printed or reproduced as promptly as possible after their adoption in substantially the same style and format as the codification or revision of ordinances and sold at such prices as the council may establish. 
Sec. 4.14. - Appointments. 
    The council in making appointments shall act only by the affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the council. All members of boards and commissions, appointed by the council, shall be qualified voters of the city, actually residing within the city limits. 
(Acts 1952, ch. 301; Acts 1954, ch. 514) 
Sec. 4.15. - Removal of councilmen and members of boards and commissions appointed by the council for specified terms. 
    Any member of the council or any member of a board or commission appointed by the council for a specified term may be removed in accordance with the general law. 
Sec. 4.16. - Power of investigation. 
    The council shall have power to investigate any or all of the departments, boards, commissions, offices and agencies of the city government, including the school board, and any officer or employee of the city. The council, or any of its committees, when authorized by the council, the city manager, the heads of all departments, all boards and commissions appointed by the council, collector of city taxes, license inspector, and auditor of municipal accounts, in any investigation or hearing held by them, within their respective powers and duties, may order the attendance of any person as a witness and the production by any person of all relevant books and papers. Any person refusing to obey such order may be summoned by the court of appropriate jurisdiction to appear before such court and upon failure to give a satisfactory excuse to the judge of such court may be fined not exceeding the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisoned not exceeding thirty (30) days or both. Witnesses may be sworn by the officer presiding at such investigation and shall be liable to prosecution for perjury for any false testimony given at such investigation. 
(Acts 1979, ch. 421) 
Sec. 4.17. - Amendments to Charter. 
    Requests to the General Assembly for amendments to this Charter shall be by one of the following procedures: 
(a)  By initiative of the qualified voters as set forth in section 4.12 hereof. At least ten (10) days prior to the holding of such election, the text, or an informative summary of the amendments proposed, shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(b)  By election of the qualified voters of the city. The council may provide for holding an election to determine if the qualified voters of the city desire that it request the General Assembly to amend its charter. Such election shall be held within thirty (30) days following the addition of the council with respect thereto. At least ten (10) days prior to the holding of such election, the text, or an informative summary of the amendments proposed shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. If a majority of the qualified voters voting in such election vote in favor of such amendments to the charter, the clerk shall transmit the necessary copies of the requested amendments to the General Assembly. 
(c)  By resolution of a majority of the entire council. At least ten (10) days notice of the time and place of a public hearing and the text or an informative summary of the proposed amendments shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The public hearing may be adjourned from time to time, and upon adoption of a resolution to request the proposed amendments, the clerk shall transmit the necessary copies to the General Assembly. 
(Acts 1954, ch. 514; Acts 1960, ch. 429; Acts 1973, ch. 292) 
CHAPTER 5. - CITY MANAGER 

Sec. 5.01. - Appointment and qualifications. 
    There shall be a city manager who shall be the executive officer of the city and shall be responsible to the council for the proper administration of the city government in furthering the council's goals and objectives. He shall be appointed by the council for an indefinite term. He shall be chosen on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications, with special reference to his actual experience in or knowledge of accepted practice in respect to the duties of his office. 
(Acts 1952, ch. 301; Acts 1979, ch. 421; Res. No. 2003-34, 9-22-2003) 
Sec. 5.02. - Powers with respect to city personnel. 
    Except for the city attorney, city clerk and their employees, the city manager may appoint or employ and may remove or discharge city officers, employees and assistants as may be necessary to carry on the work in those departments and offices of the city as deemed necessary by the city manager. The city manager shall have the authority to manage, organize and reorganize all city employees under the control of the city manager. Whenever the interests of the city require, irrespective of any other provisions of this Charter, the city manager shall have the power and authority to assign employees of any city department, bureau, office or agency under the control of the city manager, to the temporary performance of duties in another city department, bureau, office or agency. The city manager may not remove or discharge city council appointive officers. The salaries and conditions of employment of employees and assistants shall be recommended by the city manager subject to the approval of the city council and as provided by the general law. The city manager's action in all respects shall be subject to review by the city council and shall be accountable to city council. 
(Res. No. 2003-34, 9-22-2003) 
Sec. 5.03. - Council not to interfere in appointments or removals. 
    Neither the council nor any of its members shall direct the appointment of any person to or his removal from any office or employment by the city manager or by any of his subordinates except as specifically provided in this Charter. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the council and its members shall deal with the administrative services solely through the city manager, and neither the council nor any member thereof shall give orders either publicly or privately to any subordinate of the city manager. 
(Res. No. 2003-34, 9-22-2003) 
Sec. 5.04. - Duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the city manager to: (a) attend all meetings of the council with the right to speak but not to vote; (b) keep the council advised of the financial condition and the future needs of the city and of all matters pertaining to its proper administration, and to make such recommendations as may seem to him desirable; (c) prepare and submit the annual budget to the council as provided in Chapter 6 of this Charter and be responsible for its administration after its adoption; (d) prepare in suitable form for publication and submit to the council not later than its first meeting in September of each year a concise, comprehensive report of the financial transactions and administrative activities of the city government during the fiscal year ending on the preceding thirtieth day of June and cause to be printed such number of copies thereof as the council shall direct; (e) present adequate financial and activity reports at each regular meeting of the council; and (f) perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or required of him in accordance therewith by the council or which may be required of the chief executive officer of the city by the general laws of the commonwealth other than the duties conferred on the mayor by this Charter. 
(Res. No. 2003-34, 9-22-2003) 
Sec. 5.05. - Relations with boards, commissions and agencies. 
    The city manager shall have the right to attend and participate in the proceedings of, but not to vote in, the meetings of all boards, commissions or agencies created by this Charter or by ordinance. 
(Acts 1954, ch. 514; Res. No. 2003-34, 9-22-2003) 
Sec. 5.06. - Acting city manager. 
    The council shall designate by resolution an acting city manager to act as city manager in case of the absence, incapacity, death or resignation of the city manager, until his return to duty or the appointment of his successor. 
(Acts 1987, ch. 68; Acts 1999, ch. 168; Res. No. 2003-34, 9-22-2003) 
CHAPTER 6. - BUDGETS 

Sec. 6.01. - Fiscal and tax years. 
    The fiscal year of the city shall begin on the first day of July and shall end on the thirtieth day of June of the succeeding year. The tax year for taxes levied on real estate, tangible personal property, machinery and tools, and the tax year for all other taxes, shall be fixed by the council by ordinance. The rates of all taxes and levies, except on new sources of tax revenue, shall be fixed at the time of adoption of the general fund budget. 
(Res. No. 2012-35, 12-10-2012) 
Sec. 6.02. - Submission of budgets. 
    On a day to be fixed by the council and in furtherance of its goals and objectives the city manager shall submit to the council: (a) separate current expense budgets for the general operation of the city government, hereinafter referred to as the general fund budget, including the total budget for the support of public schools as filed with him by the school board, and for each utility as defined in Chapter 13 of this Charter; (b) a budget message and the budget message of the school board; (c) a capital budget, including the capital budget as defined in section 6.19 together with the capital budget for schools as submitted to the planning commission by the school board. 
(Acts 1954, ch. 560; Acts 1960, ch. 429; Acts 1979, ch. 421) 
Sec. 6.03. - Preparation of budgets. 
    It shall be the duty of the head of each department, each board or commission and each other office or agency supported in whole or in part by the city, including the commissioner of revenue, treasurer, sheriff, clerk of the general district court and clerk of the juvenile and domestic relations court, to file with the city manager or with the director of finance designated by him, at such time as the city manager may prescribe, estimates of revenue and expenditure for that department, board, commission, office or agency for the ensuing fiscal year. Such estimates shall be submitted on the forms furnished by the director of finance and it shall be the duty of the head of each such department, judge, board, commission, office or agency to supply all the information which the city manager may require to be submitted thereon. The director of finance shall assemble and compile these estimates and supply such additional information relating to the financial transactions of the city as may be necessary or valuable to the city manager in the preparation of the budget. The city manager shall hold such hearings as he may deem advisable and with the assistance of the director of finance shall review the estimates and other data pertinent to the preparation of the budgets and make such revisions in such estimates as he may deem proper, subject to the laws of the Commonwealth relating to obligatory expenditures for any purpose. The school board shall furnish a copy of its budget to the city manager. 
(Acts 1979, ch. 421; Acts 1987, ch. 68) 
Sec. 6.04. - Scope of the general fund budget. 
    In respect of each utility there shall be included in the general fund budget estimates only the net amounts estimated to be received from or to be appropriated to such utility in the general fund budget as provided in section 6.13. In respect to the public schools there shall be included only the total amount to be appropriated by the city for their support. The general fund budget shall be prepared in accordance with accepted principles of municipal accounting and budgetary procedures and techniques and shall contain: (a) an estimate of such portion of the general fund cash surplus, if any, at the end of the current fiscal year as it is proposed to use for meeting expenditures in the general fund budget; (b) an estimate of the receipts from current ad valorem taxes on real estate and tangible personal property during the ensuing fiscal year, assuming that the proportion of the levy collected be no greater than the average proportion of the levy collected in the last three (3) completed tax years; (c) an estimate of receipts from all other sources of revenue; (d) a statement to be furnished by the director of finance of the debt service requirements for the ensuing year; (e) an estimate of the general fund cash deficit, if any, at the end of the current fiscal year and of any other obligations required by this Charter to be budgeted for the ensuing fiscal year; (f) an estimate of expenditures for all other purposes to be met from the general fund in the ensuing fiscal year. All the estimates shall be in detail showing receipts by sources and expenditures by operating units, character and object, so arranged as to show receipts and expenditures as estimated for the current fiscal year and actual receipts and expenditures for the last preceding fiscal year in comparison with estimated receipts and recommended expenditures for the ensuing fiscal year. 
Sec. 6.05. - Balanced budget. 
    In no event shall the expenditures recommended by the city manager in the general fund budget exceed the receipts estimated, taking into account the estimated cash surplus or deficit at the end of the current fiscal year, as provided in the preceding section, unless the city manager shall recommend an increase in the rate of ad valorem taxes on real estate and tangible personal property or other new or increased taxes or licenses within the power of the city to levy and collect in the ensuing fiscal year the receipts from which, estimated on the basis of the average experience with the same or similar taxes during the three tax years last past, will make up the difference. If estimated receipts exceed estimated expenditures the city manager may recommend revisions in the tax and license ordinances of the city in order to bring the general fund budget into balance. 
Sec. 6.06. - Budget message. 
    The budget message shall contain the recommendations of the city manager concerning the fiscal policy of the city, a description of the important features of the budget plan, an explanation of all salient changes in each budget submitted, as to estimated receipts and recommended expenditures as compared with the current fiscal year and the last preceding fiscal year, and a summary of the proposed budgets showing comparisons similar to those required by section 6.04 above. The budget message of the school board shall contain similar provisions. 
Sec. 6.07. - Appropriations and additional tax ordinances. 
    At the same time that he submits the general fund budget, the city manager shall introduce in the council a general fund appropriation ordinance. The appropriation ordinance shall be based on the general fund budget but need not be itemized further than by departments and the major operating units thereof, and by bureaus, boards, commissions, offices and agencies submitting separate budget estimates, and by the principal objects of expenditures. At the same time the city manager shall also introduce any ordinance or ordinances altering the tax rate on real estate and tangible personal property or levying a new tax or altering the rate of any other tax necessary to balance the general fund budget as hereinbefore provided. The hearing on the budget plan as a whole, as provided in section 6.09, shall constitute the hearing on all ordinances referred to in this section, and the appropriation ordinances for each utility. 
Sec. 6.08. - Availability of budgets for inspection and publication of the budget message. 
    The city manager shall cause the budget message to be printed, mimeographed or otherwise reproduced for general distribution at the time of its submission to the council and sufficient copies of the general fund, school and utility budgets to be made to supply copies to each member of the council and a newspaper of general circulation in the city, and two (2) copies to be deposited in the office of the city clerk where they shall be open to public inspection during regular business hours. 
Sec. 6.09. - Public hearings. 
    A public hearing on the budget plan as a whole shall be held by the council within the time and after the notice provided for hearings on ordinances by section 4.10 of this Charter, except that the notice of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The second reading of the budget ordinances and the public hearing shall be not later than the first regular council meeting in May. 
(Acts 1960, ch. 429) 
Sec. 6.10. - Action by the council on the general fund budget. 
    After the conclusion of the public hearing the council may insert new items of expenditure or may increase, decrease or strike out items of expenditures in the general fund budget, except that no item of expenditure for debt service or required to be included by this Charter or other provision of law shall be reduced or stricken out. The council shall not alter the estimates of receipts contained in the said budget except to correct omissions or mathematical errors and it shall not cause the total of expenditures as recommended by the manager to be increased to an amount that would result in a higher tax rate without a public hearing on such increase, which shall be held not less than three (3) days after notice thereof by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The council shall in no event adopt a general fund budget in which the total of expenditures exceeds the receipts, estimated as provided in section 6.04, unless at the same time it adopts measures for providing additional revenue in the ensuing fiscal year, estimated as provided in section 6.05, sufficient to make up this difference. 
(Acts 1987, ch. 68) 
Sec. 6.11. - Continuation of general fund budget of prior year on failure to adopt new budget. 
    If, for any reason, the council fails to adopt the general fund budget, the general fund appropriation ordinance and such ordinances providing for additional revenue as may be necessary to put the budget in balance on or before the first day of July, the general fund budget in effect for the previous fiscal year shall be the general fund budget on a monthly basis beginning on the first day of July until the general fund budget shall be adopted by the council. 
Sec. 6.12. - Effective date of general fund budget; certification; copies made available. 
    Upon final adoption, the general fund budget shall be in effect for the ensuing fiscal year. A copy of such budget as finally adopted shall be certified by the city manager and city clerk and filed in the office of the director of finance. The general fund budget so certified shall be printed, mimeographed or otherwise reproduced and sufficient copies thereof shall be made available for the use of all departments, courts, boards, commissions, offices and agencies and for the use of interested persons and organizations. 
Sec. 6.13. - Utility budgets. 
    Separate budget estimates for each of the utilities as defined in Chapter 13 of this Charter shall be submitted to the director of finance at the same time as the budgets of other departments and in the form prescribed by the city manager, subject, however, to the provisions of Chapter 13 which shall also control the action of the city manager and council thereon. Estimated receipts shall take account of (a) any estimated balance of net income from the current fiscal year as determined in accordance with subsection (d) of section 13.06 of this Charter not anticipated to be transferred to the general fund or a renewal fund; (b) the effect of any change in rates made during the current fiscal year or contained in any rate ordinance submitted with such budget; and (c) any appropriation to make up an estimated deficit in utility operations for the ensuing fiscal year contained in the general fund budget. The city manager shall submit with the budget of each utility an ordinance making appropriations for the operation of such utility during the ensuing fiscal year, which need not be itemized further than by principal objects of expenditure. He shall also at the same time submit any ordinance changing the rates to be charged by the utility, used in estimating receipts. The council shall have the same powers and be subject to the same limitations with regard to the adoption of such utility budgets and accompanying appropriation and rate ordinances, subject to the provisions of the said Chapter 13 as are conferred or imposed on it by section 6.10 with regard to the general fund budget and its accompanying appropriation and revenue ordinances. If, for any reason, the council fails to adopt the utility budgets or any of them before the expiration of the time set for the adoption of the general fund budget, such budget or budgets in effect for the previous fiscal year shall be the utility budget or budgets on a monthly basis beginning on the first day of July until the utility budgets or budgets shall be adopted by the council. When such utility budgets and accompanying appropriation ordinances are adopted, they shall be certified to the director of finance with like effect as in the case of the general budget and its appropriation ordinance. 
Sec. 6.14. - School operating budget. 
    It shall be the duty of the school board to file its operating budget estimates with the city manager or with the director of finance. The action of the council on the school budget shall relate to its total only and the school board shall have authority to expend in its discretion the sum appropriated for its use, provided that if it receives an appropriation greater or less than its original request it shall forthwith revise its estimates of expenditure and adopt appropriations in accordance therewith. The school board shall have power to order during the course of the fiscal year transfers from one item of appropriation to another. 
(Acts 1954, ch. 560) 
Sec. 6.15. - Administration of the budget. 
    If at any time during the fiscal year, the city manager shall ascertain that the revenue cash receipts of the general fund or any utility fund for the year, plus any cash surplus available from the preceding year, will be less than the total appropriations to be met from such receipts, he shall have the power to restrict expenditures, subject to the laws of the Commonwealth relating to obligatory expenditures for any purpose, so as to forestall the incurring of a deficit, provided, however, that there shall be no reduction in salaries except by ordinance. 
(Acts 1987, ch. 68) 
Sec. 6.16. - Transfers of appropriations. 
    The city manager may at any time authorize, at the request of any department, board, commission, office or agency, the transfer of any unencumbered balance or portion thereof in any general fund or utility appropriation from one classification of expenditure to another within the same department, board, commission, office or agency, provided that for this purpose the water and sanitary sewer utilities shall be deemed separate departments. At the request of the city manager, the council may, by resolution, transfer any unencumbered balance or portion thereof in any general fund appropriation from one department, board, commission, office or agency to another. 
(Acts 1992, ch. 513) 
Sec. 6.17. - Additional appropriations. 
    An appropriation in addition to those contained in the general fund appropriation ordinance, except for the purpose of meeting a public emergency as provided in subsection (d) of section 2.02 of this Charter, may be made by the council, by an affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of the entire council, only on the recommendation of the city manager and only if the director of finance certifies in writing that there is available in the general fund a sum unencumbered and unappropriated sufficient to meet such appropriation. Additional appropriations may be made by the council, by an affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of the entire council, from the funds of any utility for the operation of that utility, and by the school board, for the affirmative votes of at least a majority of the total membership, from school funds for school purposes, but in the case of a utility, only if the director of finance certifies in writing that there is available in the funds of the utility a sum unencumbered and unappropriated sufficient to meet such appropriation. 
Sec. 6.18. - Appropriations to lapse. 
    Any portion of an annual appropriation remaining unexpended and unencumbered at the close of the fiscal year shall lapse, except that any balance remaining in the funds of the school board at the end of the fiscal year shall remain to the credit of that board and an estimate of any such balance shall be included in the school budget of the ensuing year as an estimated receipt. 
Sec. 6.19. - Capital budget. 
    At the same time that he submits the current expense budgets, the city manager shall submit to the council a program previously acted upon by the city planning commission, as provided in Chapter 17 of this Charter, of proposed capital improvement projects, including schools, as defined in section 7.02 of this Charter, for the ensuing fiscal year and for the four (4) fiscal years thereafter, with his recommendations as to the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. This program shall be termed the "capital budget" and may be adopted by resolution. Whenever the revenue for financing any capital improvement project or projects is to be derived from the sale of bonds, the bond ordinance need not be introduced at the time of submission of the capital budget, but any appropriations for any project or projects, to be so financed shall be contingent upon the issuance of such bonds being authorized in accordance with section 7.06 of this Charter. The council shall have power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject, the proposed program and proposed means of financing for the ensuing fiscal year but, except in the case of emergency as provided in subsection (d) of section 2.02 of this Charter, and except to meet needs for capital improvements arising out of annexation of additional territory taking effect during the current or preceding fiscal year and except to meet needs for capital improvements which could not reasonably have been foreseen at the time of adoption of the capital budget, the council shall not authorize any capital improvement project or make any appropriation therefor unless the appropriation for such project is included in the capital budget as adopted by it. The council shall take final action on the capital budget and on any revenue or appropriation ordinance submitted therewith, not later than the twenty-eighth day after the adoption of the general fund budget. The council shall in no event adopt a capital budget in which the total of expenditures for the ensuing fiscal year exceeds the estimated receipts unless at the same time it adopts measures for providing additional revenue in the ensuing fiscal year sufficient to make up the difference. No appropriation for a capital improvement project contained in the capital budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned, provided that any project shall be deemed to have been abandoned if three (3) fiscal years elapse without any expenditure from or encumbrance of the appropriation therefor. Any such lapsed appropriation shall be applied to the payment of any indebtedness incurred in financing the project concerned, and if there be no such indebtedness shall be available for appropriation in the next capital budget. 
(Acts 1960, ch. 429; Acts 1992, ch. 513) 
Sec. 6.20. - Certification of funds; penalties for violation. 
    No payment shall be made and no obligation incurred by or on behalf of the city except in accordance with an appropriation duly made; provided that the council shall have the power to authorize and direct the making of contracts for the expenditure of funds not appropriated in any budget for the then current fiscal year, in which event the council shall appropriate the funds in the budget or budgets for the next fiscal year or years for the performance of the contracts. No payment shall be made from or obligation incurred against any allotment or appropriation unless the director of finance shall first certify that there is a sufficient unexpended and unencumbered balance in such allotment or appropriation to meet the same; provided, that nothing herein shall be taken to prevent the advance authorization of expenditures for small purchases as provided in subsection (f) of section 8.03 of this Charter. Every expenditure or obligation authorized or incurred in violation of the provisions of this Charter shall be void. Every payment made in violation of the provisions of this Charter shall be deemed illegal and every official who shall knowingly authorize or make such payment or knowingly take part therein and every person who shall knowingly receive payment or any part thereof shall be jointly and severally liable to the city for the full amount so paid or received. If any officer, member of a board or commission, or employee of the city shall knowingly incur any obligation or shall authorize to make any expenditure in violation of the provisions of this Charter or knowingly take part therein, such action shall be cause for his removal. 
Sec. 6.21. - Reserve for permanent public improvements. 
    The council may, by ordinance, establish a reserve fund for permanent public improvements and may appropriate thereto any portion of the general fund cash surplus not otherwise appropriated at the close of any fiscal year. It may likewise assign to the said fund a specified portion of the ad valorem tax on real estate and tangible property not to exceed ten cents ($0.10) on the hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed valuation thereof or the whole or part of the proceeds of any other tax. Appropriations from the said fund shall be made only to finance improvements included in the capital budget. The proceeds of the sale of public property, including any utility, may be placed in this fund. The interest accruing on the principal may be appropriated to the operating expenses of the city. 
(Acts 1987, ch. 68) 
CHAPTER 7. - BORROWING 

Sec. 7.01. - Borrowing power. 
    The council may, in the name and for the use of the city, incur indebtedness by issuing its negotiable bonds or notes for the purposes, in the manner provided in this chapter, and to the extent provided in this chapter and under the general law. The council may choose to issue bonds using the process set out in this chapter which includes use of a referendum on the bond authorizing ordinance or may use the procedure established by the Public Finance Act of 1991 in the state's general law, which does not include the use of a referendum. This Charter provision shall prevail over any general law. The council may, by ordinance, borrow money from a surplus in any city account provided a competitive rate of interest for short term tax-free municipal bonds is assigned. 
(Acts 1987, ch. 68; Acts 1992, ch. 513) 
Sec. 7.02. - Purposes for which bonds or notes may be issued. 
(a)  To finance capital projects. Bonds, and notes in anticipation of bonds when the issue of bonds has been authorized as hereinafter provided, may be issued for the purpose of financing the whole or any part of the cost of any capital improvement project which is hereby defined to include any public improvement project or utility which the city is authorized to undertake, including the acquisition of any property, real or personal, incident thereto, the construction or reconstruction in whole or in part of any building, plant, structure or facility necessary or useful in carrying out the powers of the city, and the equipment or reequipment of the same. 
(b)  To anticipate the collection of revenue. Notes may be issued, when authorized by the council, at any time during the fiscal year in anticipation of the collection of any or all revenue not to exceed seventy-five (75) percent of such estimated revenue for the fiscal year. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  Temporary debt for capital outlay. The council may issue notes and may issue revenue bonds to capitalize water and sewer and may issue notes to finance the acquisition and improvement of land for municipal parking areas, park lands, open spaces and other municipal purposes when, by an affirmative vote of not less than five (5) members of the council, the council has adopted an ordinance declaring it expedient to do so, and when the creating of the debt thereby provided for is for the purpose of installing, or extending, one or more of such public utilities, or for the acquisition and improvement of parking areas, park lands, open spaces and other municipal purposes which constitute an asset, or assets, at least equal in value to the amount expended thereon, which utility, or utilities, shall materially add to the service rendered by the city to its taxpayers and other citizens. The total indebtedness authorized by this subsection shall not exceed one percent of the total fair market value of the real property within the city. Such authorized temporary indebtedness shall be deemed a part of the total debt limit of the city, as specified by the Constitution of Virginia. The dollar amount of temporary indebtedness authorized by this subsection shall be redetermined after each reassessment. Indebtedness which was within this authorized limit at the time it was incurred shall not be interpreted as exceeding the limit in the event of a later decrease in the total fair market value of real property within the city. 
(e)  To provide for emergency expenditures. Notes may be issued to finance an appropriation for the purpose of meeting a public emergency, as provided in subsection (d) of section 2.02 of this Charter, when authorized by the ordinance making such appropriation. Notes so issued shall be authenticated by the signature of the director of finance and shall mature not later than twelve (12) months after the date of issue. Bonds may be issued, when authorized as hereinafter provided, for the purpose of funding such notes or other obligations incurred in accordance with such appropriation. 
(f)  To refund outstanding bonds. Bonds may be issued, when authorized as hereinafter provided, for the purpose of refunding bonds, provided that the director of finance shall certify in writing that such refunding is necessary to prevent default on the interest or principal of the city's or the school board's outstanding bonds or to secure a lower rate of interest. 
(Acts 1952, ch. 301; Acts 1954, ch. 560; Acts 1968, ch. 364; Acts 1973, ch. 292; Acts 1976, ch. 13) 
Sec. 7.03. - Limitation on indebtedness. 
    In the issuance of bonds and notes, the city shall be subject to the limitations as to amount contained in Article VII, Section 10 of the Constitution of the Commonwealth. 
(Acts 1973, ch. 292) 
Sec. 7.04. - Notes in anticipation of bonds and revenue. 
    Whenever an issue of bonds for any capital improvement project has been authorized as hereinafter provided, the director of finance, when authorized by ordinance, shall have power to issue notes of the city in anticipation of such bonds, for the purpose of defraying the whole or any part of the cost of such project. Such notes in anticipation of bonds shall be authenticated by the signature of the director of finance and shall mature not later than twelve (12) months after the date of issue. They shall be paid at maturity from the proceeds of the sale of the bonds in anticipation of which they have been issued. Notes in anticipation of revenue shall be authorized by the council by ordinance. They shall be authenticated by the signature of the director of finance and shall mature not later than twelve (12) months after the date of issue. If not paid at maturity, the amount of such unpaid notes shall be included as an appropriation in the general fund budget for the ensuing fiscal year. 
Sec. 7.05. - Form and term of bonds. 
    Bonds shall be authenticated by the seal of the city and by the signatures of the city manager and director of finance or by the city manager and city treasurer, if the city manager and the director of finance are the same person. All bonds shall be made payable within the probable life of the improvement or undertaking on account of which they are to be issued or, if the bonds are to be issued for several improvements or undertakings, within the average probable life of such improvements or undertakings. If the case of a bond issue for several improvements, or undertakings having different probable periods of usefulness, the council shall determine the average of said periods, taking into consideration the amount of bonds to be issued on account of each purpose, and the period so determined shall be the average period of usefulness. The determination of the council as to the probable life of any such improvement or undertaking shall be conclusive. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, no bonds shall be payable more than thirty (30) years after their date of issuance. 
(Acts 1992, ch. 513) 
Sec. 7.06. - Issuance of bonds; how authorized. 
    The procedure for the passage of an ordinance authorizing the issuance of bonds shall be the same as for the passage of any other ordinance, except that no such ordinance shall be passed as an emergency ordinance and that the affirmative votes of two-thirds of the entire council shall be necessary for its adoption. Upon adoption by the council of a bond ordinance, when required, the city clerk shall forthwith certify a copy of said ordinance to the circuit court having jurisdiction or to the judge thereof, in vacation, who shall thereupon order a special election of the qualified voters of the city to be held by general law in such cases provided. If a majority of those voting therein at such election shall approve the ordinance, it shall take effect immediately, and if not, it shall be void. 
(Acts 1973, ch. 292; Acts 1992, ch. 513) 
Sec. 7.07. - Procedure for sale of bonds and notes. 
    All bonds issued under this Charter shall be sold at public sale upon sealed proposals after at least ten days' notice published at least once in a publication carrying municipal bond notices and devoted primarily to financial news or to the subject of state and municipal bonds, published in the City of New York, New York, and at least ten days' notice published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Falls Church. Notes in anticipation of bonds, in anticipation of revenue, or to provide for emergency expenditures, when authorized by the council, may be sold by the director of finance, with the approval of the city manager, at private sale without prior public offering. The terms of the sale of all bonds and notes shall be approved by the council by resolution. 
Sec. 7.08. - Contents of bond ordinance. 
    An ordinance authorizing the issuance of bonds shall include a statement of the purpose or purposes of the issue, and if the purpose is to finance one or more capital improvement projects, it shall describe each of them sufficiently for purposes of identification, and shall estimate the cost of the project or projects and the portion thereof to be defrayed from sources, specifying them, other than the proposed bond issue. The bond ordinance shall also include the amount of the proposed issue, a statement showing the proposed issue to be within the limitation of indebtedness as provided in section 7.03, the probable life of the purpose or the average probable life of the purposes to be financed, as determined by the council, a declaration that principal of and interest on the proposed issue are to be paid from ad valorem taxes on real estate and tangible personal property and that the full faith and credit of the city are pledged to such payment, and the procedure for the sale of the proposed issue. All such matters relating to the authorization, issuance or sale of the bonds or notes may be provided by resolution. 
(Acts 1954, ch. 440) 
Sec. 7.09. - Short period of limitation. 
    When thirty (30) days shall have elapsed from the date of approval of a bond ordinance by the voters, as provided in this chapter, (a) any recitals or statements of fact contained in such bond ordinance or in the preambles or recitals thereof shall be deemed to be true for the purpose of determining the validity of the bonds thereby authorized, and the city and all other parties interested shall forever thereafter be estopped from denying the same; (b) such bond ordinance shall be conclusively presumed to have been duly and regularly passed by the city and to comply with the provisions of this Charter and all laws; and (c) the validity of such bond ordinance shall not thereafter be questioned by either a party plaintiff or a party defendant, except in a suit, action or proceeding commenced prior to the expiration of such thirty (30) days. 
Sec. 7.10. - Payment of bonds and notes. 
    The power and obligation of the city to pay any and all bonds and notes hereafter issued by it pursuant to this Charter, except revenue bonds, as provided in section 7.12, shall be unlimited, and the city shall levy ad valorem taxes upon all taxable property within the city for the payment of such bonds or notes and interest thereon, without limitation of rate or amount. The faith and credit of the city are hereby pledged for the payment of the principal of and the interest on all bonds and notes of the city hereafter issued pursuant to this chapter, except revenue bonds, as provided in section 7.12, whether or not such pledge be stated in the bonds or notes or in the bond ordinance authorizing their issuance. 
Sec. 7.11. - Sinking fund. 
    There shall be a sinking fund for the amortization of the outstanding term bonds of the city. It shall consist of the cash and securities in the sinking fund at the effective date of this Charter, the sums hereinafter required to be paid into such fund and the interest earned or investments. There shall be paid into the sinking fund annually the sum determined by the director of finance, and by him certified to the city manager for inclusion in the budget, to be necessary on actuarial principles to amortize such term bonds at maturity. The sinking fund shall be invested only in bonds or other direct obligations of the city, the commonwealth, or the United States. The management of the sinking fund shall be entrusted to the director of finance. 
(Acts 1952, ch. 301) 
Sec. 7.12. - Revenue bonds. 
    In addition to the authority to issue bonds otherwise provided in this chapter, and in addition to the authority of Article VII, Section 10 of the Constitution of Virginia, the council may, in the manner provided for the issuance of other bonds and subject to the limitations of this chapter, except that the faith and credit of the city need not be pledged to their payment and except as hereinafter provided, authorize the issuance of revenue bonds to be secured by mortgage upon the property of the city devoted to the use of a revenue-producing utility, project or enterprise and the interest and principal of which may be paid exclusively from the revenues of such utility, project or enterprise; provided that such issue need not be limited to a term of thirty (30) years. 
(Acts 1973, ch. 292) 
CHAPTER 8. - FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Res. No. 2003-34, adopted Sept. 22, 2003, amended chapter 8 in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former chapter 8 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Acts 1950, ch. 323, as amended; Acts 1958, ch. 136; Acts 1987, ch. 68 and Acts 1992, ch. 513. 

Sec. 8.01. - Department of finance. 
    There shall be a department of finance which shall include the functions of accounting and control, budgeting, purchasing, the collection of taxes, special assessments and other revenues, and such other functions as may be provided by ordinance or by orders of the director of finance consistent therewith. 
(Res. No. 2003-34, 9-22-2003) 
Sec. 8.02. - City treasurer. 
    The city treasurer shall, collect and receive all moneys due the city from any source whether current or delinquent, except that the council may, by ordinance, assign to some other officer or agency the collection of such moneys. In so doing, he shall have the power to employ any procedure that is now or may hereafter be prescribed by law for the collection of state taxes or local taxes. There shall be a lien, which shall have precedence over any other lien or encumbrance thereon, on all real estate and on each and every interest therein, for the city taxes assessed thereon, from the commencement of the year for which they are assessed, including penalties and interest on such taxes, which may be enforced by the city treasurer on behalf of the city in any manner provided by law. All goods and chattels wheresoever found may be distrained and sold for taxes, interest and penalties assessed and due thereon and for taxes, interest and penalties assessed against the owner thereof, and no deed of trust or mortgage upon goods or chattels shall prevent the same from being distrained and sold for taxes or levies assessed against the grantor in such deed while such goods and chattels remain in the grantor's possession; nor shall any such deed prevent the goods and chattels conveyed from being distrained and sold for taxes or levies assessed thereon, no matter in whose possession they may be found. He shall have power to enforce the provisions of this Charter and the ordinances of the city with regard to licenses and license taxes, to check any and all of records of the commissioner of revenue and to examine and audit the books of all persons, firms and corporations whom he has reasonable cause to believe to be liable to pay a license. He shall have custody of all funds belonging to the city and the school board and deposit all funds coming into his hands to the account of the city or the school board, as the case may be, in such banks or shares or certificate of deposits in any building or savings and loan association lawfully authorized to do business in this Commonwealth whose accounts are insured by the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation; provided, however, the investment in such shares or certificates of deposit in any one such association shall not exceed the amount as shall be fully insured by the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation or as fully collateralized by eligible collateral as defined in Section 2.1-360(e) [2.2-4401] of the Code of Virginia as amended, and provided that such banks or associations be designated for the purpose by the council and the school board, respectively, subject to the laws of the Commonwealth applicable to the city and school board relative to the deposit of public funds. He shall perform such other duties, including validating of school board warrants or checks, have such powers and be liable to such penalties as are now or may hereafter be prescribed by law or ordinance. He shall have custody of all investments and invested funds of the city or in its possession in a fiduciary capacity, unless otherwise provided by this charter or by law, ordinance or the terms of any trust, and the safekeeping of all bonds and notes of the city and the receipt and delivery of city bonds and notes for transfer, registration and exchange. For such services, the city treasurer shall receive such compensation as the council may from time to time prescribe by ordinance. 
(Acts 1958, ch. 136; Acts 1973, ch. 292; Acts 1981, ch. 361; Acts 1987, ch. 68; Res. No. 2003-34, 9-22-2003) 
Sec. 8.03. - Commissioner of revenue. 
    The commissioner of revenue shall perform such duties not inconsistent with the laws of the commonwealth in relation to the assessment of property and licenses as may be required by the council for the purpose of levying city taxes and licenses. 
(Acts 1958, ch. 136; Acts 1999, ch. 168; Res. No. 2003-34, 9-22-2003) 
Sec. 8.04. - Sale of property for taxes. 
    Real estate delinquent for the nonpayment of taxes shall be sold for said taxes. The procedure for selling real estate for city taxes and for the redemption of real estate sold for city taxes shall be the same as provided in the general law of this state to the same extent as if all the provisions of said general law relating thereto were herein set out at length. 
(Acts 1952, ch. 204; Res. No. 2003-34, 9-22-2003) 
Sec. 8.05. - Annual assessment and equalization of assessments. 
    The council shall have the power to provide for the annual assessment and equalization of real estate for local taxation as provided in the general law, and the council may provide for an assessor to be supervised by the director of finance, and provided further, that application for relief from assessments may be made to the circuit court or corporation court of appropriate jurisdiction. 
(Acts 1973, ch. 292; Acts 1976, ch. 13; Acts 1987, ch. 68; Res. No. 2003-34, 9-22-2003) 
CHAPTER 9. - RESERVED 

Secs. 9.01-9.11. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Res. No. 2003-34, adopted Sept. 22, 2003, repealed chapter 9, §§ 9.01-9.11, in its entirety. Former chapter 9, §§ 9.01-9.11, pertained to personnel and derived from Acts 1950, ch. 323, as amended. 
CHAPTER 10. - DEPARTMENT OF LAW 

Sec. 10.01. - Composition. 
    There shall be a department of law which shall consist of the city attorney and such assistant city attorneys and other employees as may be provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 10.02. - City attorney-Qualifications and appointment. 
    The head of the department of law shall be the city attorney who shall be an attorney at law licensed to practice under the laws of the Commonwealth. The city attorney shall be appointed by the city council and serve at the pleasure of the city council. Compensation and responsibilities of the office, except as provided herein, shall be determined by the city council. 
(Acts 1973, ch. 292; Acts 1976, ch. 13; Acts 1979, ch. 421; Res. No. 2007-25, 10-22-2007) 
Sec. 10.03. - Same-Powers and duties. 
    The city attorney shall (a) be the legal advisor of (1) the council, (2) the city manager and (3) of all departments, boards, commissions and agencies of the city, in all matters affecting the interests of the city, and shall, upon request, furnish a written opinion on any question of law involving their respective official powers and duties; (b) at the request of the city manager or any member of council, prepare ordinances for introduction and at the request of the council or any member thereof shall examine any ordinance after introduction and at the request of the council or any member thereof shall examine any ordinance after introduction and render his opinion as to the form and legality thereof; (c) draw or approve as to legal form all bonds, deeds, leases, contracts or other instruments to which the city is a party or in which it has an interest; (d) have the management and control of all the law business of the city and the departments, boards, commissions, and agencies thereof, or in which the city has an interest, and represent the city as counsel in any civil case in which it is interested and in criminal cases in which the presence of the city attorney or prosecuting attorney is required by general law or in such classifications of cases as the council may direct; (e) with the approval of the council, institute and prosecute all legal proceedings he shall deem necessary or proper to protect the interests of the city; (f) attend in person or assign one of his assistants to attend all meetings of the council; (g) appoint and remove such assistant city attorneys and other employees as shall be authorized by the council, subject to the provisions of Chapter 9 of this Charter as to employees in the classified service, and authorize the assistant city attorneys or any of them or special counsel to perform any of the duties imposed upon him in this Charter; and (h) have such other powers and duties as may be assigned to him by ordinance. The approval or withholding of approval by the city attorney in the matters provided for in sections 8.07 (c) and 8.07 (d) shall relate only to the legality of the proposed action. The school board shall have authority to employ legal counsel. 
(Acts 1952, ch. 301) 
Sec. 10.04. - Restrictions on actions for damages against city. 
    No action shall be maintained against the city for injury to any person or property or for wrongful death alleged to have been sustained by reason of the negligence of the city or of any officer, employee or agent thereof, unless a written statement by the claimant, his agent, attorney or representative, of the nature of the claim and of the time and place at which the injury is alleged to have occurred or been received shall have been filed with the city attorney within sixty (60) days after such cause of action shall have accrued, except that when the claimant is an infant or non compos mentis, or the injured person dies within such sixty (60) days, such statement may be filed within one hundred and twenty (20) days. Neither the city attorney nor any other officer, employee or agent of the city shall have authority to waive the foregoing conditions precedent or any of them. 
CHAPTER 11. - RESERVED 

Secs. 11.01-11.05. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Res. No. 2003-34, adopted Sept. 22, 2003, repealed chapter 11, §§ 11.01-11.05, in its entirety. Former chapter 11, §§ 11.01-11.05, pertained to public safety and derived from Acts 1950, ch. 323, as amended; Acts 1973, ch. 292; and Acts 1979, ch. 421. 
CHAPTER 12. - RESERVED 

Secs. 12.01-12.09. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Res. No. 2003-34, adopted Sept. 22, 2003, repealed chapter 12, §§ 12.01-12.09, in its entirety. Former chapter 12, §§ 12.01-12.09, pertained to department of public works and derived from Acts 1950, ch. 323, as amended; Acts 1954, ch. 440; and Acts 1992, ch. 513. 
CHAPTER 13. - PUBLIC UTILITIES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Res. No. 2003-34, adopted Sept. 22, 2003, amended chapter 13 in its entirety to read as set out herein. 

Sec. 13.01. - Each utility a separate enterprise. 
    The water and sanitary sewer utilities shall each be conducted as a separate enterprise, provided that nothing herein shall prevent the transfer of employees from one utility to another or the division of the time of any officer or employee between the two utilities. 
(a)  The bureau of billing and collection or other agencies or officers of the city designated by the council shall bill for and collect on behalf of each utility not only the charges due from domestic, commercial and industrial users of its services but similar charges against the city and each department, board, commission, office and agency thereof, including the school board and each other utility. The rates to be charged the city and its departments, boards, commissions, offices and agencies, as above provided, for water and sanitary sewers shall be the same as those charged to other customers, except that the charges to be made for the use of water for fire protection shall be in the form of an annual rental to be paid from appropriations by the council for fire protection within the city, for each fire hydrant based on the proportion of the valuation of the water utility properly allocable to fire protection as determined by the valuation hereinafter provided. 
(b)  The director of finance shall keep separate accounts, in accordance with accepted principles of public utility accounting, for each utility. 
(Acts 1952, ch. 301; Acts 1992, ch. 513; Res. No. 2003-34, 9-22-2003) 
Sec. 13.02. - Disposition of utility surplus. 
    A sum of money equal to taxes not actually accruing but which would have accrued during such year had the utility not been municipally owned, shall be paid annually by the utility into the general fund. A return on equity, that is calculated using generally accepted accounting principles for utility enterprises, when authorized by the council by the affirmative votes of a majority of council be transferred to the general fund or to the improvement fund of each utility respectively. 
(Acts 1993, ch. 969; Res. No. 2003-34, 9-22-2003) 
Sec. 13.03. - Valuation. 
    As soon as practicable after the effective date of this Charter and at such other times as it shall determine the council shall cause to be made a valuation of each of the two (2) utilities, in accordance with accepted valuation principles, by a competent firm of engineers to be selected by the council on the recommendation of the city manager, showing in the case of the water utility the proportion of its valuation properly allocable to fire protection, provided that the council may accept any such valuation of any or both of the utilities completed within three years before said date or cause to be completed any such valuation then in progress. 
(Res. No. 2003-34, 9-22-2003) 
Sec. 13.04. - Changes in rates. 
    The rates to be charged for the respective services of the water and sanitary sewage utilities shall be fixed from time to time by the council on the recommendation of the director of public utilities and the city manager. If for any three (3) consecutive fiscal years the average annual receipts of any utility shall be less than its average annual expense it shall be the duty of the director of public utilities and the city manager to recommend and the council to adopt for that utility a schedule of rates which in its judgment will produce receipts equal to expense. 
(Acts 1995, ch. 655; Res. No. 2003-34, 9-22-2003) 
Sec. 13.05. - No sale or lease of utilities except when approved by referendum. 
    There shall be no sale or lease of the water or sanitary sewerage utilities unless the proposal for such sale or lease shall first be submitted to the qualified voters of the city at a general election and be approved by a majority of all votes cast at such election. 
(Res. No. 2003-34, 9-22-2003) 
CHAPTER 14. - RESERVED 

Secs. 14.01-14.06. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Res. No. 2003-34, adopted Sept. 22, 2003, repealed chapter 14, §§ 14.01-14.06, in its entirety. Former chapter 14, §§ 14.01-14.06, pertained to department of public health and derived from Acts 1950, ch. 323, as amended; and Acts 1952, ch. 301. 
CHAPTER 15. - RESERVED 

Secs. 15.01-15.05. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Res. No. 2003-34, adopted Sept. 22, 2003, repealed chapter 15, §§ 15.01-15.05, in its entirety. Former chapter 15, §§ 15.01-15.05, pertained to department of public health and derived from Acts 1950, ch. 323, as amended. 
CHAPTER 16. - RECREATION AND PARKS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Res. No. 2003-34, adopted Sept. 22, 2003, amended ch. 16 in its entirety to read as set out herein. 

Sec. 16.01. - Rules and regulations. 
    The council shall have power to adopt by ordinance all needful rules and regulations relating to the use of public grounds, parks, playfields, playgrounds and cemeteries, whether within or without the city, and for the preservation of order, safety and decency therein. For the purpose of enforcing such rules and regulations, all such public grounds, parks, playfields, playgrounds and cemeteries shall be under the police jurisdiction of the city. Any member of the police force of the city, or park employee appointed as a special policeman shall have power to make arrests for violations of any such rule or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 2003-34, 9-22-2003) 
Sec. 16.02. - Advisory board of recreation and parks. 
    There shall be an advisory board of recreation and parks consisting of no less than five (5) members, which number shall be determined by the city council by ordinance, of whom one shall be a member of the school board, appointed by the school board, and one a member of the city planning commission, appointed by the city planning commission, for terms of two (2) years from the first Tuesday in September 1951 and every two (2) years thereafter, but in no case shall a member so appointed continue to be a member of the advisory board of recreation and parks after the expiration of his term as a member of the school board or the city planning commission, as the case may be; and of whom the remaining members shall be appointed by the council for terms of three (3) years, provided that the members in office at the effective date of this Charter are hereby continued in office for the terms they were appointed, and new appointments shall be made annually from the first Tuesday in September in such a manner that one or more, but less than three (3) of the appointments expire annually. Vacancies shall be filled by the authority making the appointment, for the unexpired portion of the term. The advisory board of recreation and parks shall choose annually one of its own number to be chairman for a term of one year and until his successor is chosen and qualified. An employee of the department of recreation and parks shall be assigned by the director of recreation and parks to act as secretary of the board. It shall hold such regular meetings as it may determine. Special meetings may be held at any time on the call of the director of recreation and parks or of the chairman of the advisory board of recreation and parks. The advisory board of recreation and parks shall advise with the director of recreation and parks, and with the city council, and shall perform such related functions as the council may direct. 
(Acts 1956, ch. 190; Acts 1966, ch. 146; Acts 1968, ch. 364; Acts 1981, ch. 361; Ord. No. 2003-34, 9-22-2003) 
CHAPTER 17. - PLANNING, ZONING AND SUBDIVISION CONTROL 

Sec. 17.01. - Planning powers. 
    In addition to the powers granted under prevailing state laws and elsewhere in this Charter, the council is authorized and empowered to make and adopt planning ordinances and approve a comprehensive master plan for the orderly development of the city to promote health, safety, morals, comfort, prosperity, and general welfare. 
(Acts 1954, ch. 440) 
Sec. 17.02. - City planning commission-Composition; appointment, qualifications and removal of members. 
    There shall be a city planning commission which shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the council who shall be qualified voters of the city, actually residing within the city limits, who hold no office of profit under the city government, appointed for terms of four (4) years; provided, that the five (5) citizen members in office on June 30, 1966, shall continue for the length of their appointed terms. A sixth citizen member shall be appointed to serve from July 1, 1966 for a term expiring on December 31, 1968. Effective January 1, 1967, and every four (4) years thereafter, four (4) citizen members shall be appointed, and effective January 1, 1969, and every four (4) years thereafter, three (3) citizen members shall be appointed. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term. A member may be removed by the council for neglect of duty or malfeasance in office, upon written charges and after public hearing. 
(Acts 1954, ch. 440; Acts 1960, ch. 429; Acts 1966, ch. 146; Acts 1996, ch. 310) 
Sec. 17.03. - Same-Officers; meetings; records; employees; expenditures. 
    The commission shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman from among the citizen members appointed by the council for a term of one year, who shall be eligible for reelection, and appoint a secretary. The commission shall hold at least one regular meeting each month, and shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business. The commission shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations showing the vote of each member on each question or, if absent, or failing to vote, indicating such fact which record shall be filed in the office of the commission and shall be a public record. 
(Acts 1954, ch. 440; Res. No. 2001-4, 1-22-2001) 
Sec. 17.04. - Same-Master plan generally. 
    It shall be the duty of the commission to make and adopt a master plan, consisting of maps, plats, charts and descriptive matter, which shall show the commission's recommendations for the development of the territory covered by the plan. Such plan may include but shall not be limited to the following: 
(a)  The general location, character and extent of streets, highways, superhighways, freeways, avenues, boulevards, roads, lanes, alleys, walks, walkways, viaducts, subways, bridges, parks, parkways, squares, playfields, playgrounds, recreational facilities, stadia, arenas, swimming pools, terminals, airports and other public places or ways, and the removal, relocation, widening, narrowing, vacating, abandonment, change of use or extension thereof. 
(b)  The general location, character and extent of all public buildings, schools and other public property and of utilities whether publicly or privately owned, off-street parking facilities, and the removal, relocation, vacating, abandonment, change of use, alteration or extension thereof. 
(c)  The general location, character, extent and design of slum clearance, development, redevelopment, housing and neighborhood rehabilitation projects, including the demolition, repair or vacation of substandard, unsafe or unsanitary buildings. 
(d)  A general plan for the control and routing of railways, streetcar lines, bus lines and all other vehicular traffic. 
(e)  The general location, character and extent of areas of land to be used for different purposes, whether public or private, and the development standards to be applied to each. 
(f)  The general location, character and extent of use and development of land in areas beyond the corporate limits of the city which may be considered for annexation. Such plan and its respective components shall be given review at least every five (5) years by the commission. 
    In the preparation of such plan, the commission shall make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of existing conditions and future growth. The plan shall be made with the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the city and its environs which will, in accordance with existing and future needs, best promote health, safety, morals, comfort, prosperity and general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development. 
(Acts 1954, ch. 440; Acts 1973, ch. 292) 
Sec. 17.05. - Same-Monuments and other works of art. 
    It shall be the further duty and function of the commission to make recommendations to the city council to provide for the preservation of historical landmarks, the design and location of statuary and other works of art which are or may become the property of the city and the removal, relocation and alteration of any such works and to consider and suggest the design of bridges, viaducts, airports, stadia, arenas, swimming pools, street fixtures and other public structures and appurtenances. 
(Res. No. 2001-4, 1-22-2001) 
Sec. 17.06. - Same-Adoption of master plan; amending of master plan. 
    The commission may adopt the plan as a whole by a single resolution, or may, by successive resolutions, adopt successive parts of the plan, said parts corresponding to major geographical sections or geographical or topographical divisions of the area to be covered by the master plan or with functional subdivisions of the subject matter of the plan, and may adopt any amendment or extension thereof or addition thereto. Before the adoption of the plan or any such part, amendment, extension or addition, the commission shall hold at least one public hearing thereon, at least fifteen days' notice of the time and place of which shall be given by one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The adoption of the plan or of any such part, amendment, extension or addition shall be by resolution of the commission carried by the affirmative vote of not less than four (4) members of the commission. The resolution shall refer expressly to the maps and descriptive matter and other matter intended by the commission to form the whole or part of the plan adopted, which resolution shall be signed by the chairman of the commission and attested by its secretary. An attested copy of the resolution, accompanied by a copy of so much of the plan in whole or in part as was adopted thereby and each amendment, alteration, extension or addition thereto adopted thereby, shall be certified to the council and upon approval by it to the clerk of the circuit court of the county who shall file the same. Approval by the council shall be by resolution. 
    Amendment of the master plan may be initiated by a majority vote of the city council to submit a proposed amendment to the planning commission. If the planning commission disapproves the proposed amendment, the council shall have power to overrule such action by the affirmative vote of not less than five (5) members. Failure of the planning commission to act within sixty (60) days from the date of the official submission to it shall be deemed approval; provided, however, that the sixty (60) days limitation may be extended by resolution of the city council for a period not to exceed a total of one hundred twenty (120) days. 
(Acts 1954, ch. 440; Acts 1960, ch. 429) 
Sec. 17.07. - Same-Effect of adoption of master plan. 
    Whenever a master plan for the city or one or more parts thereof, geographical, topographical or functional, shall have been adopted and filed, as provided in the preceding section, then and thereafter no street, square, park or other public way, ground, open space, school, public building or structure, shall be constructed or authorized in the city or in the planned section or division thereof until and unless the general location, character and extent thereof has been submitted to the planning commission and until the commission determines that the general location, character and extent are included in the master plan. 
    Except for local distribution or service operations, no public utility, whether publicly or privately owned, shall be constructed or authorized in the city or in the planned section or division thereof unless and until its general location, character and extent, have been submitted to the commission, and until the commission determines that the master plan includes the general location, character and extent of the proposed utility. 
    However, such submission and determination shall not be necessary in the case of pipes or conduits in any existing street or proposed street, square, park or other public way, ground or open space, the location of which has been approved by the commission. 
    The failure of the commission to act within sixty (60) days from the date of the official submission to it shall be deemed approval. The widening, extension, narrowing, enlargement, vacation or change in the use of streets and other public ways, grounds and places within the city, as well as the acquisition by the city of any land within or without the city for public purposes, or the sale of any land then held by the city, shall be submitted to the planning commission for its approval. If the commission disapproves of any such proposal, it shall communicate its reasons to the city council which shall have the power to overrule such action by a recorded affirmative vote of not less than five (5) members, except, however, that in the matter of acquisition of land, only four (4) votes of the council shall be required to overrule the planning commission's recommendations. The failure of the commission to act within sixty (60) days from the date of the official submission to it shall be deemed approval. 
    The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to apply to the pavement, repavement, reconstruction, improvement, drainage or other work in or upon any existing street or other existing public way. 
(Acts 1952, ch. 310; Acts 1954, ch. 440; Acts 1960, ch. 429; Acts 1973, ch. 292) 
Sec. 17.08. - Same-Capital improvements program. 
    It shall be the duty of the commission to review annually a program of capital improvement projects for the ensuing five (5) years. At a day to be fixed by resolution of the city council, each department, commission and board, including the school board, shall submit to the city manager a detailed listing of all immediate and long range capital improvement needs falling within the jurisdiction of the submitting department, commission or board, together with its estimates of cost of each of the various projects, and its recommendations as to priority and timing of the projects listed. The city manager shall subsequently submit to the commission a proposed capital improvements program together with a report on the financial condition of the city, insofar as it may relate to any contemplated capital fund projects. In the preparation of its capital improvement recommendations, the commission shall consult with the city manager, the school board, the heads of departments and interested citizens and organizations, and shall hold such public hearings as it shall deem necessary. It shall submit its recommendations to the city council, at such time as the council shall direct, together with estimates of cost of such projects and the means of financing them, to be undertaken in the ensuing fiscal year and in the next four (4) years. 
(Acts 1954, ch. 440; Acts 1960, ch. 429; Acts 1987, ch. 68) 
Sec. 17.09. - Same-Further planning powers and duties. 
    The commission shall have power to promote public interest in and understanding of the plan, and to that end may publish and distribute copies of the plan or any report relating thereto, and may employ such other means of publicity and education as it may determine. The commission shall consult and advise with public officials and agencies, public utility companies, civic, educational, professional or other organizations, and with citizens, with relation to the protection or carrying out of the plan. All public officials shall, upon request, furnish to the commission within a reasonable time, such available information as it may require for its work. The commission, its members, or officers, may enter upon land for which a development plan under its purview has been tendered to make such examinations as are necessary in aid of the commission's review authority and its planning duties and functions. The commission shall make an annual report to the council concerning its activities. 
(Res. No. 2001-4, 1-22-2001) 
Sec. 17.10. - Zoning powers of city council. 
    In addition to the powers granted elsewhere in this Charter, the council shall have the power to adopt in the manner provided in section 17.13, a comprehensive zoning plan designed to lessen congestion in streets; secure safety from fire, panic and other danger; promote health, sanitation and general welfare; provide adequate light and air; prevent the overcrowding of land; avoid undue concentration of population; provide affordable shelter that addresses housing needs, promotes a full range of housing choices, and encourages the construction and continued existence of moderately priced housing by providing incentives for the creation or preservation of moderately priced housing for elderly, handicapped, low-moderate income, and above-moderate-income households; and facilitate public and private transportation and the supplying of public utility services and sewage disposal, and facilitate provision for schools, parks, playgrounds and other public improvements and requirements. The comprehensive zoning plan shall include the division of the city into districts with such boundaries as the council deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter, and shall provide for the regulation and restriction of the use of land, buildings, and structures in the respective districts and may include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(a)  It may permit specified uses of land, buildings and structures in the districts and prohibit all other uses. 
(b)  It may regulate the height, area, bulk, size, design and appearance of buildings and structures and the appropriateness of their use in the districts. 
(c)  It may establish setback building lines and prescribe the area of land that may be used as front, rear and side yards and courts and open spaces. 
(d)  It may restrict the portion of the area of lots that may be occupied by buildings and structures. 
(e)  It may prescribe the area of lots and the space in buildings that may be occupied by families. 
(f)  It may require that spaces and facilities deemed adequate by the council shall be provided on lots for parking of vehicles in conjunction with permitted uses of land and that spaces and facilities deemed adequate by the council shall be provided on lots for off-street loading or unloading of vehicles. 
(g)  It may permit the designed use and development of land in a manner varying in certain respects from the regulations and restrictions prescribed for the district or districts in which such land is situated, provided that it establishes a minimum area of not less than five (5) acres subject to such designed use and provided further that such designed use shall be approved by the city planning commission and the council, and adopted as a part of the master plan of the city. 
(h)  It may provide that land, buildings and structures and the uses thereof which do not conform to the regulations and restrictions prescribed for the district in which they are situated may be continued so long as the then existing or more restricted use continues and so long as the buildings or structures are maintained in their then structural condition; and may require that such buildings or structures and the use thereof shall conform to the regulations and restrictions prescribed for the district or districts in which they are situated whenever they are enlarged, extended, reconstructed or structurally altered; and may require that such buildings or structures and the use thereof shall conform to the regulations and restrictions prescribed for the district or districts in which they are situated, in any event, within a reasonable period of time to be specified in the ordinance. 
    From and after the adoption of a master plan or any amendment or extensions thereof as required by this chapter, or the land use portion thereof, such zoning plan shall be made to conform substantially with the master plan, and any amendments to the zoning plan shall be based upon and in substantial accordance with the master plan. 
(Acts 1954, ch. 440; Acts 1956, ch. 190; Res. No. 2007-25, 10-22-2007) 
Sec. 17.11. - Considerations to be observed in adoption and alteration of regulations. 
    The regulations and restrictions shall be enacted with reasonable consideration, among other things, of the character of each district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, and with a view of conserving the value of land, buildings and structures and encouraging the more appropriate use thereof throughout the city. Upon the enactment of the ordinance dividing the city into districts and regulating and restricting the use of land, buildings and structures therein in accordance with a comprehensive zoning plan; no land, building or structure shall be changed from one district to another district unless the change is in accord with the interest and purposes of this section and will not be contrary to the comprehensive zoning plan and the enumerated factors upon which it is based. Aside from extensions from an existing zone into immediately adjoining or adjacent properties, no change in district boundaries shall be made so as to create an area of such size and shape, in relation to its neighboring areas, as to comprise less than a district as intended by this chapter. 
(Acts 1954, ch. 440) 
Sec. 17.12. - Duties of the city planning commission with relation to zoning. 
    It shall be the duty of the city planning commission to prepare and submit to the council a comprehensive zoning plan as referred to in section 17.10 and from time to time prepare and submit such changes in or revisions of the said plan as changing conditions may make necessary. 
Sec. 17.13. - Adoption and amendment of regulations, restrictions and district boundaries. 
    Subject to the other provisions of this chapter, the council shall have power by ordinance to adopt the regulations and restrictions hereinbefore described and determine the boundaries of the districts in which they shall apply, provide for their enforcement, and from time to time amend, supplement or repeal the same. The council shall also have authority to provide for the collection of fees to cover at least the costs involved in the consideration of any request for amendment, supplement or repeal of any such regulation, restriction or boundaries, to be paid to the city clerk by the applicant upon filing such request. No ordinance adopting, amending, supplementing or repealing, any such regulation, restriction or boundaries shall be adopted until: (a) the ordinance adopting, amending, supplementing or repealing, any such regulation, restriction or boundaries has been referred to the city planning commission and approved by it, and in case of disapproval by the commission subject to overrule by the council by the affirmative vote of not less than five (5) members of the council; and (b) after a public hearing in relation thereto shall be held by the council at which the parties in interest and other persons shall have an opportunity to be heard. At least fifteen days' notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be given by publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. Whenever such ordinance involves the amendment, supplement, or repeal of any district boundaries, fifteen days notice of such public hearing shall also be given by conspicuous notices posted along the boundary lines of any land involved. 
(Acts 1954, ch. 440; Acts 1960, ch. 429) 
Sec. 17.14. - Effect of protest by property owners. 
    If a protest is filed with the city clerk against such amendment, supplement or repeal, signed by the owners of twenty (20) percent or more of the total area of the lots included in such proposed change or of the total area of the lots outside of the proposed change, any part of which is within one hundred and fifty (150) feet of the boundary of such area, the council shall not adopt the ordinance making such amendment, supplement or repeal, except by an affirmative vote of not less than five (5) members of the council. Each signature to such protest shall be witnessed by a person whose affidavit to that effect is attached thereto. 
(Acts 1954, ch. 440) 
Sec. 17.15. - Board of zoning appeals-Composition; terms; vacancies; removal. 
    There shall be a board of zoning appeals which shall consist of five (5) regular members and one alternate. They shall be qualified voters of the city, shall reside within the city limits, shall hold no office of profit under the city government and shall be appointed by the council for terms of four (4) years; provided that the members of the board of zoning appeals in office at the effective date of this Charter shall continue to hold office until the first day of January following the expiration of the terms for which they were appointed, and the first alternate member shall be appointed to serve until the said date; and provided, further, that the council shall appoint two regular and one alternate member to serve for two (2) years, and three (3) regular members to serve for four (4) years from said date. Thereafter, their successors shall be appointed for full terms of four (4) years. Vacancies shall be filled by the council for the unexpired portion of the term. A regular or alternate member may be removed by the council for neglect of duty or malfeasance in office, upon written charges and after public hearing. 
(Acts 1954, ch. 440; Acts 1966, ch. 146) 
Sec. 17.16. - Same-Organization. 
    The board shall elect a chairman and a vice-chairman from among its regular members for a term of one year who shall be eligible for reelection. The chairman shall preside at all meetings of the board and, in his absence, the vice-chairman or other member designated by the board shall act as chairman and shall preside. The board shall appoint a secretary and such other employees as may be needed for the conduct of the work of the board. The alternate member may take the place of any regular member who is absent or disqualified, in hearing and determining any matter before the board. 
Sec. 17.17. - Same-Procedure; minutes; records. 
    The meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may determine. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member on each question or, if absent, or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. 
Sec. 17.18. - Same-Appeals to board. 
    Appeals to the board may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any officer, department, board, commission or agency of the city affected, by any decision of the administrative officer designated by the council to administer and enforce the ordinance dividing the city districts and regulating and restricting the use of land, buildings and structures therein. Appeals shall be taken within such reasonable time as shall be prescribed by the board by general rule, by filing with the said administrative officer and with the board a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The administrative officer shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the administrative officer from whose decision the appeal is taken certifies to the board that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board or by court of record on application and on notice to the administrative officer and on due cause shown. 
    The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest and decide the issue within a reasonable time. At the hearing, any party may appeal in person, by agent, or by attorney, and shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The board may prescribe a fee to be paid whenever an appeal is taken which shall be paid into the city treasury. 
Sec. 17.19. - Same-Powers. 
    The board shall have the following powers and it shall be its duty: 
(a)  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination by the administrative officer in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance. 
(b)  To grant variations in the regulations when a property owner can show that his property was acquired in good faith and where by reason of the exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific piece of property at the time of the effective date of the ordinance or where by reason of the exceptional topographical conditions or other extraordinary or exceptional situation, the strict application of the terms of the ordinance actually prohibit or unreasonably restrict the use of the property, or where the board is satisfied, upon the evidence heard by it, the granting of such variation will alleviate a clearly demonstrable hardship approaching confiscation, as distinguished from a special privilege or convenience sought by the owner; provided, however, that all variations granted shall be in harmony with the intended spirit and purpose of this chapter and the ordinance. 
(c)  To permit, when reasonably necessary in the public interest, the use of land, or the construction or use of buildings or structures, in any district in which they are prohibited by the ordinance, by any agency of the city, county or state or the United States, provided such construction or use shall adequately safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the occupants of the adjoining and surrounding property, shall not unreasonably impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, shall not increase congestion in streets and shall not increase public danger from fire or otherwise affect public safety. 
    To permit such other exceptions or grant variances from the strict application of the terms of the zoning regulations under the principles, standards, rules, conditions, and safeguards set forth in the zoning ordinance, provided they are determined to be consistent with the general purpose and intent of such ordinance. 
Sec. 17.20. - Same-Form and scope of decisions. 
    In exercising the powers conferred upon it, the board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as should be made and to that end shall have all the powers of the administrative officer charged by the ordinance with enforcement. The concurring affirmative vote of three (3) members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the administrative officer or to decide in favor of the applicant in any matter of which it has jurisdiction. The board shall act by formal resolution which shall set forth the reason for its decision and the vote of each member participating therein, all of which shall be spread upon its records and shall be open to public inspection. The board may, upon the affirmative vote of three (3) members, reconsider any decision made and, upon such reconsideration, render a decision by formal resolution. Every decision of the board shall be based upon a finding of fact based on sworn testimony, which finding of fact shall be reduced to writing and preserved among its records. 
Sec. 17.21. - Appeals from board of zoning appeals-Petitions. 
    Any person, firm or corporation, jointly or severally aggrieved, or in fact affected by any decision of the board of zoning appeals, or any officer, department, board or agency of the city government charged with the enforcement of any order, requirement or decision of said board, may appeal from such decision by filing a petition in the court of appropriate jurisdiction, verified by affidavit, setting forth the alleged illegality of the action of the board and the grounds thereof. The petition shall be filed within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision of the board. No appeal from the decision of the board shall be allowed in any case involving the same petitioner, principles, property and conditions previously passed upon by such court. 
Sec. 17.22. - Same-Procedure on appeal. 
    Upon filing of the petition, the court may cause a writ of certiorari to issue directed to the board, ordering it to produce within the time prescribed by the court, not less than ten (10) days, the record of its action and documents considered by it in making the decision appealed from, which writ shall be served upon any member of the board. The issuance of the writ shall not stay proceedings upon the decision appealed from, but the court may, on application, notice to the board and due cause shown, issue a restraining order. The board shall not be required to produce the original record and documents, but it shall be sufficient to produce certified or sworn copies thereof or of such portions thereof as may be required by the writ. With the record and documents, the board may concisely set forth in writing such other facts as may be pertinent and material to show the grounds of the decision appealed from, verified by affidavit. 
Sec. 17.23. - Same-Powers and duties of the court. 
    The court shall review the record, documents and other matters produced by the board pursuant to the issuance of the writ and may reverse or modify the decision reviewed, in whole or in part, when it is satisfied that the decision of the board is contrary to law or that its decision is arbitrary and constitutes an abuse of discretion. 
Sec. 17.24. - Proceedings against violators of zoning ordinance. 
    Whenever any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired or converted, or whenever any land, building or structure is used in violation of any ordinance adopted in accordance with section 17.13, the city may institute and prosecute appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful act and to restrain, correct or abate such violation or to prevent any unlawful act, conduct or use of such property. 
Sec. 17.25. - Penalties for violation of zoning ordinance. 
    The council may, in such ordinance, provide that fines and jail sentences, either or both, shall be imposed for violations of the ordinance by owners of land, buildings or structures, their agents having possession or control of such property, lessees, tenants, architects, builders, contractors or any other persons, firms or corporations who take part in or assist in any such violations or who maintain any land, building or structure in which such violations exist, which penalties shall not exceed those prescribed in section 2.06 of this Charter. 
Sec. 17.26. - Land subdivision-Powers of city. 
    In order to provide for the orderly subdivision of land within the city, there is hereby conferred upon the city the power to adopt regulations and restrictions relative to the subdivision of land in the manner hereinafter provided. Such regulations and restrictions may prescribe standards and requirements for the subdivision of land which may include, but shall not be limited to, the following: the location, size and layout of lots so as to prevent congestion of population, to provide for light and air, and to prevent the hazard of inundation, the width, grade, location, alignment and arrangement of streets and sidewalks with relation to other existing streets, planned streets and the master plan; access for firefighting apparatus; adequate open spaces; adequate and convenient facilities for vehicular parking; easements for public utilities; reservation or dedication of suitable sites for schools, parks and playgrounds; planting of shade trees and shrubs; naming and designation of streets and other public places; laying out, constructing and improving streets, alleys and sidewalks, the installation of public utilities and other physical improvements therein and the conditions under which the cost thereof shall be borne by the developer; and provisions for the guarantee of payment by the developer for the required improvements; procedure for making variations in such regulations and restrictions; requirements for preparing and recording plats of subdivisions including their size, scale, contents and other matters; and for the erection of monuments of specified types for making and establishing property and street, alley, sidewalk and other lines. 
Sec. 17.27. - Same-Hearings on subdivision ordinance. 
    The council shall not adopt or amend any ordinance establishing such regulations and restrictions until notice of intention so to do has been published once a week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The notice shall specify the time, not less than ten (10) days after final publication, and the place at which persons affected may appear before the council and present their views. 
Sec. 17.28. - Same-Adoption of regulations and restrictions. 
    After hearing, as above provided, the council may adopt by ordinance any such regulations and restrictions applicable within the limits of the city which, when recorded in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of the county, shall be in full force and effect. 
Sec. 17.29. - Same-Approval of plats. 
    The planning commission shall be the platting commission of the city, and, as such, shall have control of the platting or subdivision of land within the city subject to restrictions as provided in section 17.07. From and after the date on which such regulations and restrictions become effective in the city, the owners of tracts of land to which such regulations and restrictions are applicable, who subdivide them into two (2) or more lots, shall cause plats of such subdivisions, in the form prescribed by the applicable regulations and restrictions, to be made and submitted to the city planning commission. It shall be the duty of such commission to consider such plat in the light of the regulations and restrictions applicable to the same and approve or disapprove the plat in accordance therewith. Before taking any action thereon, the city planning commission shall afford the owner and other interested parties an opportunity to be heard after such reasonable notice as may be provided in such regulations and restrictions. Failure to act on any plat for a period of forty-five (45) days shall be deemed to constitute approval unless such plat involves amendment or extension of or addition to the master plan. Approval shall be attested on that plat by the signature of the chairman or vice-chairman of the city planning commission. 
(Acts 1954, ch. 440) 
Sec. 17.30. - Same-Recording of plats. 
    From and after the date on which such regulations and restrictions become effective in the city, no plat of any subdivision to which such regulations and restrictions are applicable shall be received or recorded by the clerk of any court unless the plat has been approved as provided in the preceding section. No owner of land in the city in which such regulations and restrictions are applicable, who has subdivided the same into two (2) or more lots, shall sell or offer for sale any such lot by reference to or exhibition of or by the use of a plat of such subdivision or otherwise before the plat of such subdivision has been approved as provided in the preceding section and has been recorded in the office of the clerk of the court or courts in which a deed conveying such lot would be required to be recorded. 
Sec. 17.31. - Same-Penalty for transfer of lots in unapproved subdivisions. 
    Whoever being the owner or agent of the owner of any land in a subdivision subject to such regulations and restrictions, the plat of which has not been approved and recorded as above provided, shall transfer, sell or offer for sale or agree to sell any lot in such subdivision by reference to or exhibition of an unapproved and unrecorded plat or otherwise, shall forfeit and pay a penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each lot or similar parcel of land transferred or agreed or negotiated to be sold; and the description of such lot or parcel by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from such penalty or from the remedies herein provided. The city may enjoin such transfer or sale or agreement by proceedings for injunction brought in a court having jurisdiction of the land to which the injunction applies. The city in which any lot transferred, sold or offered for sale in violation of this chapter is situated, may recover the penalty provided therefor in a civil action brought in a court in whose jurisdiction such lot is situated, for the benefit of the city. In the absence of intent to evade the provisions of this section, the penalty may be waived in the case of an attempted transfer by will. 
Sec. 17.32. - Same-Transfer of portion for public use. 
    The recordation and acceptance of the plat shall operate to transfer in fee simple to the city such portion thereof as is on the plat set apart for streets, alleys, easements or other public use or purpose and to create a public right of passage over or use of the same. The owner or owners of the land subdivided may construct, reconstruct, operate and maintain with the consent of the city where the land lies, sewers, gas and water pipes or electric lines along or under the streets, alleys, easements or other land devoted to public use, provided that it shall not obstruct or hinder the passage over the streets, alleys or other property devoted to public use further than is reasonably necessary to construct, reconstruct, repair, operate and maintain such works. 
(Acts 1979, ch. 421) 
Sec. 17.33. - Same-Vacation of plats. 
    Any plat or part thereof recorded may be vacated, with the consent of the council by the owners thereof at any time before the sale of any lot therein; by a written instrument declaring the plat to be vacated, which shall be duly executed, acknowledged and recorded in the clerk's office wherein the plat to be vacated is recorded. The execution and recordation of the instrument shall operate to destroy the force and effect of the recording of the plat and to divest all public rights in and to reinvest the owners with the title to the streets, alleys, easements and other land devoted to public use laid out or described in the plat. In cases where lots have been sold, the plat or part thereof or any unaccepted or abandoned street, or street recommended by the planning commission for vacation, may be vacated according to the procedure provided in Section 15.1-364 [15.2-2006] of the Code of Virginia as amended, for the alteration and vacation of streets and alleys. The clerk in whose office any plat so vacated has been recorded shall write in plain, legible letters across the plat or part thereof vacated the word "vacated," and also make a reference on the plat to the volume and page thereof in which the instrument of vacation is recorded. 
(Acts 1994, ch. 92) 
Sec. 17.34. - Dedication of street by use for twenty years. 
    Whenever any piece, parcel or strip of land shall have been opened to and used by the public as a street, alley, lane or other public place or part thereof for the period of twenty (20) years, the same shall thereby become a street, alley, lane, public place or part thereof for all purposes, and the city shall have the same authority and jurisdiction over and right and interest therein that it has by law over the streets, alleys, lanes and public places laid out by it, and thereafter no action shall be brought to recover such piece, parcel or strip of land so opened to and used by the public as aforesaid. Any street, alley, lane or other public place reserved in the division or subdivision into lots within the corporate limits of the city by a plat or plan of record shall be deemed and held to be dedicated to the public use and the council shall have authority, upon the petition of any person or corporation interested therein, to open such street, alley, lane or other public place or any portion of the same. No agreement between, or release of interest by, persons or corporations owning the lands immediately contiguous to any such street, alley, lane or other public place, whether the same has been opened or used by the public or not, shall avail or operate to abolish such street, alley, lane or other public place or to divest the interest of the public therein or the authority of the council over the same. 
Sec. 17.35. - Present master plan, comprehensive zoning plan and subdivision ordinance. 
    The master plan, the comprehensive zoning plan and subdivision ordinance as heretofore adopted, approved and filed, with all amendments, additions and extensions thereto, in force and effect at the effective date of this Charter are hereby validated and confirmed as if the same had been prepared, adopted, approved and filed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Every amendment or addition thereto or extension thereof and every other master plan, comprehensive zoning ordinance, or subdivision ordinance henceforth adopted shall be in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Where existing ordinances are at variance with the provisions of this chapter, they shall be deemed to be amended in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
CHAPTER 18. - ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY FOR PUBLIC PURPOSES 

Sec. 18.01. - Acquisition, ownership and use of property. 
    The city shall have, for the purpose of carrying out any of its powers and duties, power to acquire by gift, bequest, purchase or lease, and to own and make use of, within and without the city, lands, buildings, other structures and personal property, including any interest, right, easement or estate therein, and in acquiring such property to exercise, within and without the city, the right of eminent domain as hereinafter provided in this chapter. This power shall be in addition to the powers granted to the school board in section 20.02. 
Sec. 18.02. - Eminent domain. 
    The city is hereby authorized to acquire by condemnation proceedings lands, buildings, structures and personal property or any interest, right, easement or estate therein, of any person or corporation, whenever in the opinion of the council a public necessity exists therefor, which shall be expressed in the resolution or ordinance directing such acquisition, and whenever the city cannot agree on terms of purchase or settlement with the owners of the subject of such acquisition because of the incapacity of such owner, or because of the inability to agree on the compensation to be paid or other terms of settlement or purchase, or because the owner or some one of the owners is a nonresident of the state or cannot with reasonable diligence be found in the state, or is unknown. 
    Such proceedings shall be instituted in the court of appropriate jurisdiction. 
(Acts 1954, ch. 514) 
Sec. 18.03. - Procedure in condemnation. 
    The city may, in exercising the right of eminent domain conferred by the preceding section, make use of the procedure prescribed by the general law, as modified by said section or may elect to proceed as hereinafter provided. In the latter event the resolution or ordinance directing the acquisition of any property, as set forth in the preceding section, shall provide therein in a lump sum the total funds necessary to compensate the owners thereof for such property to be acquired or damaged. Upon the adoption of such resolution or ordinance the city may file a petition in the clerk's office of the court having jurisdiction of the subject, which shall be signed by the city manager and set forth the interest or estate to be taken in the property and the uses and proposes for which the property or the interest or estate therein is wanted, or when property is not to be taken but is likely to be damaged, the necessity for the work or improvement which will cause or is likely to cause such damage. There shall also be filed with the petition a plat of a survey of the property with a profile showing cuts and fills, trestles and bridges, or other contemplated structures if any, and a description of the property which, or an interest or estate in which is sought to be taken or likely to be damaged and a memorandum showing names and residences of the owners of the property, if known, and showing also the quantity or property which, or an interest or estate in which, is sought to be taken or which will be or is likely to be damaged. There shall be filed also with said petition a notice directed to the owners of the property, if known, copies of which shall be served on such owners or tenants of the freehold of such property, if known. If the owner or tenant of the freehold be unknown or a nonresident of the state or cannot with reasonable diligence be found in the state, or if the residence of the owner or tenant be unknown, he may be proceeded against by order of publication which order, however, need not be published more than once a week for two successive weeks and shall be posted at the main entrance to the city hall. The publication shall in all other respects conform to Sections 8-71, 8-72, and 8-76 of the Code of Virginia. 
    Upon the filing of said petition and the deposit of funds provided by the council for the purpose in a bank to the credit of the court in such proceedings and the filing of a certificate of deposit therefor the interest or estate of the owner of such property shall terminate and the title to such property or the interest or estate to be taken in such property shall be vested absolutely in the city and such owner shall have such interest or estate in the funds so deposited as he had in the property taken or damaged and all liens by deed of trust, judgment or otherwise upon said property or estate shall be transferred to such funds and the city shall have the right to enter upon and take possession of such property for its uses and purposes and to construct its works or improvements. The clerk of the court in which such proceeding is instituted shall record the orders entered therein in his deed book and index them in the name of the person or persons who had the property before and in the name of the city, for which he shall receive the same fees prescribed for recording a deed, which shall be paid by the city. 
    If the city and the owner of property so taken or damaged agree upon compensation therefor, upon filing such agreement in writing in the clerk's office of such court, the court or judge thereof in vacation shall make such distribution of such funds as to it may seem right, having due regard to the interest of all persons therein whether such interest be vested, contingent or otherwise, and to enable the court or judge to make a proper distribution of such money it may in its discretion direct inquiries to be taken by a special commissioner in order to ascertain what persons are entitled to such funds and in what proportions and may direct what notice shall be given of the making of such inquiries by such special commissioner. 
    If the city and the owner cannot agree upon the compensation for the property taken or damaged, if any, upon the filing of a memorandum in the clerk's office of said court to that effect, signed by either the city or the owner, the court shall appoint commissioners provided for in Sections 25-12 to 25-15, inclusive, of the Code of Virginia or as provided for in Section 18.02, and all proceedings thereafter shall be had as provided for in Sections 25-12 through 25-21 and Sections 25-21 and 25-23 through 25-38 of the Code of Virginia insofar as they are then applicable and are not inconsistent with the provisions of this and the preceding section, and the court shall order the deposit in the bank to the credit of the court of such additional funds as appear to be necessary to cover the award of the commissioners or shall order the return to the city of such funds deposited that are not necessary to compensate such owners for property taken or damaged. The commissioners so appointed shall not consider improvements placed upon the property by the city subsequent to its taking nor the value thereof nor the enhancement of the value of said property by said improvements in making their award. 
(Acts 1954, ch. 440) 
Editor's note- For state law relative to this section, see Code of Virginia, § 24-46.1 et seq. Code of Virginia, §§ 8-71, 8-72 and 8-76 were repealed by Acts 1977, ch. 617. See now Code of Virginia, §§ 8.01-316, 8.01-317, 8.01-319. Code of Virginia, §§ 25-12 to 25-21, and Code of Virginia, §§ 25-23 to 25-38 were repealed by Acts 1962, ch. 246. For state law as to condemnation generally, see Code of Virginia, §§ 15.1-899, 25-46.4, 25-232.01. 
Sec. 18.04. - When enhancement in value considered. 
    In all cases under the provisions of sections 18.02 and 18.03, the enhancement, if any, in value of the remaining property of the owner by reason of the construction or improvement contemplated or made by the city, shall be offset against the damage, if any, resulting to such remaining property of such owner by reason of such construction or improvement, provided such enhancement in value shall not be offset against the value of the property taken, and provided further, that if such enhancement in value shall exceed the damage, there shall be no recovery over against the owner for such excess. 
Editor's note- For state law relative to this section, see Code of Virginia, § 24-46.1 et seq. 
Sec. 18.05. - Unclaimed funds in condemnation cases. 
    Whenever any money shall have remained for five (5) years in the custody or under the control of any of the courts enumerated in section 18.02, such money shall be disposed of pursuant to sections 8-746 and 8-747 of the Code of Virginia. 
Editor's note- Code of Virginia, §§ 8-746 and 8-767 were repealed by Acts 1977, ch. 617. See now Code of Virginia, §§ 8.01-602, 8.01-603. 
CHAPTER 19. - RESERVED 

Secs. 19.01-19.13. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- The provisions of former ch. 19, §§ 19.01-19.13 were repealed by Acts 1976, ch. 13. 
CHAPTER 19A. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 19A.01. - Industrial Development Authority. 
    The Industrial Development Authority of the City of Falls Church, Virginia, shall be continued in full force and effect, and nothing in this charter shall in any way limit, change, or modify any existing obligations, agreements or contractual arrangements of such authority. 
(Acts 1997, ch. 776) 
Sec. 19A.02. - Economic Development Authority. 
    The City of Falls Church Economic Development Authority shall be continued in full force and effect, and nothing in this charter shall in any way limit, change, or modify any existing obligations, agreements or contractual arrangements of such authority. 
(Acts 1997, ch. 776) 
Sec. 19A.03. - Powers, etc. 
    The Industrial Development Authority of Falls Church, Virginia, and the Falls Church Economic Development Authority shall have all powers, authority and obligations as are provided by state law and such other duties assigned by the city council not inconsistent therewith. 
(Acts 1997, ch. 776) 
CHAPTER 20. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 20.01. - School district. 
    The City of Falls Church shall constitute a separate school district. 
Sec. 20.02. - School board. 
(a)  The school board shall consist of seven (7) trustees who shall be qualified voters of the city actually residing within the city limits. 
(b)  Except as provided in this Charter the school board shall have all the powers and duties relating to the management and control of the public schools of the city provided by the general laws of the commonwealth, including right of eminent domain within and without the city. None of the provisions of this Charter shall be interpreted to refer to or include the school board unless the intention so to do is expressly stated or is clearly apparent from the context. 
(c)  The power conferred on the city by sections 2.03(f) and 2.03(h) shall be exercised by the school board with respect to property and buildings devoted to public school purposes. The title to property and buildings devoted to public school purposes shall be in the school board. 
(d)  The school board shall meet annually in January at which time the board shall fix the time for holding regular meetings for the ensuing year, and may adjourn from day to day, or time to time, before the time fixed for the next regular meeting, until the business before it is completed. At such annual meeting, the school board shall elect one of its members chairman and on recommendation of the division superintendent, elect or appoint a competent person as clerk of the school board, and shall fix his compensation. The chairman and clerk shall be selected annually, but if a vacancy in either office occurs during any year, the school board may fill such vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
[(e)]  In addition to the authority conferred upon the city by Chapter 7, the school board may borrow from the Literary Fund of Virginia or from such other sources as may be available to it by general law. 
(Acts 1954, ch. 514; Acts 1956, ch. 190; Acts 1960, ch. 429; Acts 1968, ch. 364; Acts 1993, ch. 969; Acts 1994, ch. 92; Res. No. 2013-37, 11-25-2013) 
Sec. 20.03. - Transfer of books and papers. 
    If any person, having been an officer of the city, shall not, without good cause, within ten (10) days after he shall have vacated or been removed from office, deliver over to his successor in office all the property, books and papers belonging to the city or appertaining to such office, in his possession or under his control, he shall forfeit and pay to the city the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) to be sued for and recovered with costs. All books, records and documents used in any office, by virtue of any provision of this Charter or of any ordinance or order of the council or any superior officer of the city, shall be deemed the property of the city and appertain to said office, and the chief officer thereof shall be responsible therefor. 
Sec. 20.04. - Enforcement of surety bonds. 
    In all cases where a bond is required of any officer, such bond shall be with corporate surety and conditioned for the faithful discharge by himself, his deputies, assistants or other subordinates, of the duties imposed on him by this Charter and all ordinances passed in pursuance thereof. 
Sec. 20.05. - Rules and regulations to be filed. 
    All departments, boards, commissions, officers and agencies of the city, authorized to make rules and regulations by this or any previous Charter of the city or by the general laws of the commonwealth, shall immediately after the first Tuesday of September 1950, file with the city clerk copies of all such rules and regulations previously issued by them and in force on such day, and shall thereafter file with said city clerk copies of all rules and regulations and amendments thereof subsequently issued by them upon their issuance. It shall be the duty of the city clerk to keep in his office for public inspection a well indexed file of the rules and regulations so filed. 
Sec. 20.06. - Officers must not be interested in contracts. 
    No officer or employee of the city shall be interested in any contract entered into by the city with any person, firm or corporation, but this prohibition shall not apply to nonsalaried officers or nonsalaried members of boards and commissions in respect of contracts other than those in the making of which they have a part. 
Sec. 20.07. - Contractual relationships. 
    The City of Falls Church may, at the option of the council, enter into contractual relationships with the Commonwealth and/or its departments, bureaus, boards and agencies, neighboring political subdivisions, and private agencies for the performance of any part of, or all of the functions, or purposes of the city, on such terms and for such periods as the council may determine to be in the public interest, where such contractual relations are not specifically prohibited by the Constitution and general laws of the Commonwealth. 
Sec. 20.08. - Reprinting of Charter after amendment. 
    Within a reasonable time after the conclusion of any session of the general assembly and the effective date of any amendment or amendments to this Charter adopted at such session, the amendment or amendments shall be printed in such number of copies as the council shall order. 
Sec. 20.09. - Officers to hold over until their successors are appointed and qualified. 
    Whenever under the provisions of this Charter, any officer of the city, judge or member of any board or commission is elected or appointed for a fixed term, except the mayor and vice-mayor, such officer, judge or member shall continue to hold office until his successor is appointed and qualified. 
Sec. 20.10. - Courtroom for court and office space for constitutional officers. 
    It shall be the duty of the city to provide a suitable courtroom for the court of appropriate jurisdiction and suitable offices for the commissioner of revenue, city treasurer and registrar. 
(Acts 1973, ch. 292; Acts 1976, ch. 13; Acts 1979, ch. 421) 
Sec. 20.11. - Posting of bonds unnecessary. 
    Whenever the general law requires the posting of a bond, without surety, as a condition precedent to the exercise of any right, the city, without giving such bond, may exercise such right, provided all other conditions precedent be complied with, and no officer shall fail or refuse to act because the city has not filed or executed the bond that might otherwise be required, and the city shall be bound to the same extent that it would have been bound had the bond been given. 
Sec. 20.12. - Code references. 
    All references in this Charter to the Code of Virginia are to the Code of 1950. 
Sec. 20.13. - Definitions. 
(a)  As used in this Charter, the term "at the effective date of this Charter" shall be interpreted to refer to a period immediately preceding the taking effect thereof. 
(b)  As used in this Charter in reference to voting by the council the term "elected members of the council" shall include those members, if any, elected by the council. 
(c)  Wherever in this Charter any department, bureau, division, office, agency or officer is empowered or directed to take any action or perform any duty or function, such action may be taken or duty or function performed by the appropriate department, bureau, division, agency or officer to whom the duty of [or] function is transferred by or pursuant to action of the council under sections 4.02(a), 4.02(b) and 4.02(c) or upon whom it is conferred by section 21.05. 
(d)  The term "board" or "boards," as used in this Charter shall not include the school board unless the school board is specifically named. The term "member of the school board" shall have the same meaning as the term "school trustee," as used in the provisions of the Code of Virginia which refer to the school boards of cities and towns. 
(e)  As used in this Charter, the term "print" shall include any method of reproducing or making multiple copies. 
(f)  The words he, his, or him, man or men in this Charter shall include persons of either sex. 
(Acts 1976, ch. 13) 
Sec. 20.14. - United States Government employees. 
    No person, otherwise eligible, shall be disqualified, by reason of his accepting or holding an office, post, trust or emolument under the Government of the United States, from serving as an officer or employee of the city, or as a member, officer, or employee of any board or commission, including the school board. 
CHAPTER 21. - TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 21.01. - Present ordinances and rules and regulations continued in effect. 
    All ordinances of the city and all rules, regulations and orders legally made by any department, board, commission or officer of the city, in force at the effective date of this Charter, insofar as they or any portion thereof are not inconsistent therewith, shall remain in force until amended or repealed in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. 
Sec. 21.02. - Validation and ratification of bonds, taxes, and contracts. 
    All bonds issued and sold, all contracts and obligations heretofore made by the council and government of the town and city, not inconsistent with the constitution and the law of the Commonwealth, all taxes assessed and levied when the city was a town, and when the city was in transition from the status of a town to that of a city of the second class from August 16, 1948, to the effective date of this Charter, are hereby validated, ratified and confirmed; and all proceedings authorizing the issuance of bonds, notes or other obligations of the City of Falls Church heretofore had are hereby validated, ratified and confirmed and shall not lapse or terminate or be otherwise affected by reason of any of the provisions contained in this Charter, and such bonds, notes or other obligations may be authorized, sold or issued in accordance with the provisions of law in force prior to the effective date of this Charter, or in accordance with the provisions of this Charter. 
Sec. 21.03. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- The provisions of former section 21.03 were repealed by Acts 1952, ch. 301. 
Sec. 21.04. - Continuance of internal organization of departments. 
    Except where this Charter otherwise provides, the several bureaus, divisions and other administrative units of the departments of police, fire, public works, public health, public welfare and public utilities shall remain in the department in which they were located at the effective date of this Charter until otherwise provided by ordinance, and present incumbents of positions shall continue to serve until the council provides in accordance with this Charter. 
Sec. 21.05. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- The provisions of former section 21.05 were repealed by Acts 1954, ch. 560. 
Sec. 21.06. - Severance clause. 
    If any clause, sentence, paragraph or part of this act shall, for any reason, be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment, order or decree shall not affect, impair, or invalidate the remainder of said act, but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, paragraph or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which said judgment, order or decree shall have been rendered. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - ACTS 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Year of Act Chapter 
Number  Section 
this Charter 1950 ch. 323 Chs. 1-21 Ch. 8 8.05 10.04 13.05 1952 ch. 204 8.04 ch. 301 3.02 3.05 4.01 4.03 4.09 4.10 4.14 5.01 7.02 7.11 10.03 13.01 13.05 21.03 ch. 310 17.07 1954 ch. 440 7.08 10.04 17.01 17.02 17.03 17.04 17.06 17.07 17.08 17.10 17.11 17.13 17.14 17.15 17.29 18.03 ch. 514 4.14 4.17 5.05 18.02 20.02 ch. 560 6.02 6.14 7.02 21.05 ch. 561 3.05 1956 ch. 190 3.01 3.03 3.04 3.05 4.01 16.02 17.10 20.02 1958 ch. 136 Ch. 8 3.02 3.05 4.06 8.02 8.03 1960 ch. 429 3.02 4.01 4.12 4.17 6.02 6.09 6.19 17.02 17.06 17.07 17.08 17.13 20.02 1966 ch. 146 4.01 16.02 17.02 17.15 1968 ch. 364 7.02 16.02 20.02 1973 ch. 292 1.02 3.01 4.04 4.17 7.02 7.03 7.06 7.12 8.02 8.05 10.02 10.04 17.04 17.07 20.10 1976 ch. 13 2.05 3.02 3.05 4.05 4.10 7.02 8.05 10.02 18.05 20.10 20.13 1979 ch. 421 2.06 3.04 3.05 4.01 4.02 4.16 5.01 6.02 6.03 10.02 10.04 17.32 20.10 1981 ch. 361 4.04 8.02 16.02 1987 ch. 68 Ch. 8 4.11 5.06 6.03 6.10 6.15 6.21 7.01 8.02 8.05 17.08 1991 ch. 40 2.06 3.02 1992 ch. 513 Ch. 8 6.16 6.19 7.01 7.05 7.06 10.04 13.01 1993 ch. 969 13.02 20.02 1994 ch. 92 17.33 20.02 1995 ch. 655 2.04 13.04 1996 ch. 310 3.04 3.07 4.02 17.02 1997 ch. 776 19A.01-19A.03 1999 ch. 168 3.03 4.01 4.08 5.06 8.03  
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES/RESOLUTIONS 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Ordinance/ 
Resolution 
Number  Date  Section 
this Charter 2000-01(Res.)  1-10-2000 2.04 2001-4(Res.)  1-22-2001 17.03 17.05 17.09 2003-34(Ord.)  9-22-2003 16.01 16.02 Res. of  9-22-2003 5.01 5.02 5.03 5.04 5.05 5.06 8.01 8.02 8.03 8.04 8.05 13.01 13.02 13.03 13.04 13.05 2007-25(Res.) 10-22-2007 10.01 17.10 Amend. of  3-13-2012 3.01 2011-39(Res.)  3-13-2012 3.02 2012-35(Res.) 12-10-2012 6.01 2013-37(Res.) 11-25-2013 3.04 4.05 20.02(d) 2015-02(Res.)  1-12-2015 1.02  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of the City of Falls Church, Virginia," and may be so cited. Such ordinances may also be cited as the "Falls Church City Code." 
(Code 1973, § 1-1; Code 1982, § 1-1) 
Charter reference- Provisions requiring codification of ordinances, § 4.13. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to codify and recodify its ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1433. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the interpretation and construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the city, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless they are inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient. 
    Charter. The term "Charter" means the Charter of the city as enacted by the General Assembly and printed in part I of this volume as it now exists and as it may be amended by the General Assembly in the future. 
    City. The term "city" or "the city" or "this city" means the City of Falls Church, in the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    Code. The term "Code" means the Code of the City of Falls Church, Virginia, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Code of Virginia. The term "Code of Virginia" means the Code of Virginia of 1950, as amended from time to time. 
State Law reference- Official citation of the Code of Virginia, Code of Virginia, § 1-1. 
    Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day; and if the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, that day shall be excluded. 
State Law reference- Computation of time, Code of Virginia, § 1-210. 
    Council, city council. The term "council" or "city council" means the city council of the City of Falls Church, Virginia. 
    County. The term "county" or "the county" means the County of Arlington in the State of Virginia. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision or section appears requiring the city manager, the head of a department of the city or any city officer to do some act, it is to be construed to authorize such person to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act, unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. The city manager or any specific officer or department head of the city grants such authority by the power vested in him in this Code, and such references also refer to the designee of the city manager, officer or department head. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-21. 
    Establishment. The term "establishment" means a place of business or operation of any kind, and shall include any person who is an owner, or the agent of such owner. 
    Gender. Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 1-216. 
    Health officer. The term "health officer" means the health officer of the Fairfax County State Health District or the authorized agent or representative of the health officer. 
    In the city. The term "in the city" means any territory, jurisdiction of which, for the exercise of its regulatory power, has been conferred on the city by public or private law. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 1-223. 
    Number. A word importing the singular only shall extend and be applied to several persons and things, and a word importing the plural only may apply to one person or thing. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 1-227. 
    Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
State Law reference- Oath, Code of Virginia, § 1-228. 
    Occupant. The term "occupant," when applied to a building or land, means any person who holds a written or oral lease of or actually occupies the whole or part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Officer, department, employee, board, committee, commission. Whenever reference is made to an officer, department, employee, board, committee, commission, etc., it shall be deemed to refer to an officer, department, employee, board, committee, commission, etc., of the City of Falls Church, Virginia. 
    Official time standard. Whenever particular hours are specified in this Code relating to the time within which any act shall be performed by any person, the time applicable shall be official standard time or daylight saving time, whichever may be in current use in the city. 
    Owner. The term "owner," when applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or part of such building or land. 
    Person. The term "person" includes an individual, a firm, partnership, association of persons, corporation, organization, cooperative, limited liability company, trust, joint venture, government, political subdivision, or any other legal or commercial entity and any successor, representative, agent, agency, or instrumentality thereof or any other group acting as a unit. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 1-230. 
    Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property. The term "property" means real, personal or mixed property. 
    Public grounds. The term "public grounds" means the parks and all public lands owned or leased by the city, and those parts of public places which do not form traveled parts of streets as defined in this section. 
    Shall. The term "shall" is mandatory. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline, or the lateral lines of a roadway where there is no curb, and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature, subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when the person cannot write, the name of such person being written near it and being witnessed by a person who writes his own name as a witness. 
    State, commonwealth. The term "commonwealth," "state" or "the state" means the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    Street. The term "street" includes avenues, boulevards, highways, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, bridges and the approaches thereto and all other public thoroughfares in the city, and means the entire width thereof between abutting property lines; it shall be construed to include a sidewalk or footpath, unless the contrary is expressed or unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense may include the future, as well as the past and present. 
    Written and in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" include typewriting, printing on paper and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
    Year. The term "year" means a calendar year, unless a fiscal year is indicated. 
(Code 1973, § 1-2; Code 1982, § 1-2; Ord. No. 1315, 6-11-1990) 
State Law reference- Statutes, definitions and rules of construction, Code of Virginia, § 1-200 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of the 1982 Code and ordinances existing at the time of the adoption of this Code, shall be considered as a continuation thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1973, § 1-3; Code 1982, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    If any part, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is for any reason declared to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this Code. 
(Code 1973, § 1-4; Code 1982, § 1-4) 
State Law reference- Severability, Code of Virginia, § 1-243. 
Sec. 1-5. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of any section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any section, including its catchline, is amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1973, § 1-5; Code 1982, § 1-5) 
State Law reference- Headlines of sections of statutes, Code of Virginia, § 1-217. 
Sec. 1-6. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the adoption of this Code, nor shall it affect any prosecution, suit or proceeding pending or any judgment rendered prior to the adoption of this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by or for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(3)  Any ordinance granting any franchise or right; 
(4)  Any ordinance appropriating funds or relating to an annual budget and annual tax levy; 
(5)  Any ordinance authorizing, providing for or otherwise relating to any public improvement or any special assessment; 
(6)  Any ordinance which is temporary, although general in effect, or special, although permanent in effect; 
(7)  Any ordinance relating to the salaries of city officers or employees; 
(8)  Any ordinance annexing or excluding territory of the city; 
(9)  Any ordinance naming, renaming, opening, accepting or vacating streets or alleys in the city; 
(10)  Any ordinance relating to the zoning district map; 
(11)  Any ordinance adopted for purposes which have been consummated; 
(12)  Any ordinance pertaining to fees, rates, charges and deposits; 
(13)  Any ordinance rezoning property or amending the zoning map; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 998, § 3, 2-22-1982) 
Sec. 1-7. - History notes. 
    The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. 
Sec. 1-8. - References to chapters or sections. 
    All references to chapters or sections are to the chapters and sections of this Code unless otherwise specified. 
Sec. 1-9. - References and editor's notes. 
    The references and editor's notes appearing throughout the Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to assist the user of the Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code shall be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. For repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from affected reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code of Ordinances by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provision by specific reference to the section number of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section (number of section) of the Code of the City of Falls Church, Virginia, is hereby amended to read as follows: . . . ." 
(c)  If a new section not existing in this Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of the City of Falls Church, Virginia, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered (state new section number), which said section reads as follows: . . . ." The new section shall then be set out in full as adopted. 
(d)  All sections, divisions, articles, chapters or provisions to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Charter reference- Ordinances, §§ 4.08-4.11. 
Sec. 1-11. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code may be prepared and printed when needed and when funds therefor are available. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed or replaced shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate headlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such headlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _______ to _______" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; 
but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
State Law reference- Authority to supplement Code, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1433. 
Sec. 1-12. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or any other ordinance of the city, it is provided that a violation of any provision thereof shall constitute a class 1, 2, 3 or 4 misdemeanor, such violation shall be punishable as provided in Code of Virginia, § 18.2-11. 
(b)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance or resolution of the city, or rule or regulation or order promulgated by any officer or agency of the city under authority duly vested in him or it, any act is prohibited or is declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor, or the doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor and no specific penalty is provided for the violation thereof, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,500.00 or by imprisonment in jail for a period of not exceeding 12 months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section or any other section of this Code, no penalty shall be imposed for a violation of this Code or other ordinance of the city which is greater than the penalty prescribed by the general law of the commonwealth for a like offense. 
(d)  Each day any violation of this Code or any such ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order shall continue shall constitute, except where otherwise provided, a separate offense. 
(Code 1973, § 1-7; Code 1982, § 1-7; Ord. No. 1349, 4-9-1991) 
Charter reference- Authority of city to impose penalties for violation of ordinances, § 2.06. 
Cross reference- Authorized punishments for conviction of misdemeanors, § 28-1. 
State Law reference- General powers of council to provide penalties for violation of ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1401; enforcement of ordinances and regulations, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1429; authority of court trying case, upon conviction, to require bond conditioned that the person convicted will not violate the ordinance for the breach of which he was convicted for a period of not more than one year, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1430; injunctive relief for continuing violations of ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1432; classification of criminal offenses and punishment therefor, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-8 et seq. 
Sec. 1-13. - Incorporation of state code provisions by reference. 
    Any and all provisions in this Code or in any ordinance or resolution of the city that incorporate by reference or rely upon the Code of Virginia shall be deemed to include all subsequent amendments to the Code of Virginia, provided that such intent is specifically stated. 
(Code 1982, § 1-16; Ord. No. 1452, 9-13-1993) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 1-220. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Powers of the city, § 2.01 et seq.; elections, § 3.01 et seq.; council, § 4.01 et seq.; city manager, § 5.01 et seq.; department of law, § 10.01 et seq. 
Cross reference- Wards, §§ 2-21-2-27; powers of air pollution control department, § 14-24; office of animal control warden created, salary, § 4-38; duties of animal control warden, § 4-39; building standards, ch. 6, art. II; finance, ch. 16; fire prevention, ch. 18; housing, ch. 22; personnel, ch. 30; police, ch. 32; establishment of Northern Virginia Cigarette Tax Board, § 40-95; powers of Northern Virginia Cigarette Tax Board, § 40-96; board of zoning appeals, ch. 48, art. III. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - City seal. 
(a)  The official seal of the city shall consist of a circle two inches in diameter with a rim enclosing a 11/4-inch circle of beads, and in the space between the rim and the beaded circle there shall be engraved the words, "City of Falls Church" separated by a star at either end of such words, and the word, "Virginia." In the inner circle there shall be the imprint of Falls Church with trees and tombstones. Above the imprint of the church there shall be the word, "Incorporated," with numerals "1948." 
(b)  The seal shall be the official and corporate seal for the city. It shall be affixed to all appropriate documents and shall be reposed in the custody of the city clerk for such official uses. 
(Code 1973, § 1-8; Code 1982, § 1-8) 
Charter reference- Provisions as to authority of city to have corporate seal, § 1.01. 
Secs. 2-2-2-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ELECTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1870, adopted Dec. 12, 2011, amended art. II, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. II, §§ 2-21-2-27, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from: Code 1973, § 1-9-1-14; Code 1982, §§ 1-9-1-14; Ord. No. 808; Ord. No. 1532, adopted Dec. 11, 1995; Ord. No. 1761, adopted May 24, 2004; Ord. No. 1837, adopted Jan. 11, 2010; and Ord. No. 1850, adopted Nov. 8, 2010. 
Charter reference- Provisions as to elections, §§ 3.01-3.05, 307. 
State Law reference- Election districts, Code of Virginia, §§ 24.2-101, 24.2-306, 24.2-307; establishment of wards in cities, Code of Virginia, §§ 24.2-304.1-24.2-309. 

Sec. 2-21. - City divided into three wards. 
    The city shall be divided into three wards to serve as voting precincts and other purposes according to law. 
(Ord. No. 1870, 12-12-11) 
Sec. 2-22. - Central absentee voter precinct. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of law, there is hereby established in the city a central absentee voter precinct to be located at 300 Park Avenue in the City of Falls Church for the purpose of receiving, counting, and recording absentee ballots cast in the city. This precinct shall be used for all elections. 
(Ord. No. 1870, 12-12-11) 
Sec. 2-23. - Boundaries-First ward. 
    Beginning at a point on the city corporate line on South Washington St., then northwest along the common corporate line with Fairfax County to a point in the centerline of West Broad Street, then southeast along the centerline of West Broad Street to a point in the intersection with Chanel Terrace, then southwest along the centerline of Chanel Terrace continuing southwest along the under grounded Reagan Branch stream to a point in the intersection with Rollins Street, then southeast along the centerline of Rollins Street to a point in the intersection with South Virginia Avenue, then southwest along the centerline of South Virginia Avenue to a point in the intersection with Rollins Street, then southeast along the centerline of Rollins Street to a point intersecting of the boundary of 400 South Maple Street, then continuing along the boundary between 300 Rollins Street and 400 South Maple Street to a point on the boundary of 400 South Maple Street, then northeast along the property line of 400 South Maple Street, then southeast along said property line to a point in the intersection with South Maple Street, then northeast along the centerline of South Maple Street to a point in the intersection with Wallace Street, then south along the centerline of Wallace Street to a point in the intersection with South Washington Street, then southwest along the centerline of South Washington Street to a point in the city corporate line, then southwest along the common corporate line with Fairfax County to a point in the beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1870, 12-12-11) 
Sec. 2-24. - Boundaries-Second ward. 
    Beginning at a point on the city corporate line in the centerline of South Washington Street then northeast along the centerline of South Washington Street continuing northeast along the centerline of North Washington Street to a point on the city corporate line, then southeast along the common corporate line with Arlington and Fairfax Counties to a point in the beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1870, 12-12-11) 
Sec. 2-25. - Boundaries-Third ward. 
    Beginning at a point in the intersection of South Washington Street and Wallace Street, then north along the centerline of Wallace Street to a point in the intersection with South Maple Street, then southeast along the centerline of South Maple Street to a point adjacent to the easternmost property corner of 400 South Maple Street, then northwest along the property line of 400 South Maple Street, then southwest along the property line of 400 South Maple Street to a point in the intersection with the centerline of Rollins Street, then northwest along the centerline of Rollins Street to a point in the intersection with South Virginia Avenue, then northeast along the centerline of South Virginia Avenue to a point in the intersection with Rollins Street, then northwest along the centerline of Rollins Street to a point in the intersection with the under grounded portion of the Reagan Branch Stream, then northeast along the centerline of the under grounded Reagan Branch Stream and continuing northeast along the centerline of Chanel Terrace to a point in the intersection with West Broad Street, then northwest along the centerline of West Broad Street to a point in the city corporate line, then north along the common corporate line with Fairfax County, then southeast along said common corporate line to a point in the common corporate line with Arlington County, then southeast along the common corporate line with Arlington County to a point in the intersection with North Washington Street, then southwest along the centerline of North Washington Street continuing southwest along the centerline of South Washington Street to a point in the beginning. 
(Ord. No. 1870, 12-12-11) 
Secs. 2-26-2-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DEPARTMENTS, OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority regarding creation, etc., of departments, offices, boards, etc., Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1107. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-58. - Right of entry for purposes of inspection. 
    Whenever any officer or employee of the city is required or authorized by statute, the provisions of this Code or any ordinance or resolution, or rules and regulations or orders issued, in order to carry out the duties of such officer or employee, to enter any premises or vehicle for the purpose of making an inspection of or of anything therein contained, such officer or employee shall have the right to enter any such premises or vehicle at any reasonable time in pursuance of such duties. 
(Code 1973, § 1-6; Code 1982, § 1-6) 
Secs. 2-59-2-89. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLANNING DEPARTMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Subdivisions, ch. 38; zoning, ch. 48. 

Sec. 2-90. - Created. 
    There is hereby created a department of planning, which shall be headed by a director of planning. Such department shall consist of other officers and employees as may be duly provided. 
(Code 1973, § 2-1; Code 1982, § 2-2(a)) 
Charter reference- Planning, zoning and subdivision control, § 17.01 et seq. 
Sec. 2-91. - Annual budget. 
    The annual budget for the planning department shall be prepared pursuant to the Charter, § 6.03 and adopted by council as provided in Charter, § 6.10. 
(Code 1973, § 2-1; Code 1982, § 2-2(b)) 
Charter reference- Planning, zoning and subdivision control, § 17.01 et seq. 
Sec. 2-92. - Appointment of director. 
    The director of planning shall be appointed by the city manager, upon the advice of the planning commission and the city council. The director shall report to the city manager, who shall be in turn responsible for the performance of the director and the department, in support of the planning commission, the city council, other boards and commissions and other city departments, as well as in support of the city manager's full range of responsibilities. 
(Code 1973, § 2-1; Code 1982, § 2-2(c)) 
Charter reference- Planning, zoning and subdivision control, § 17.01 et seq. 
Sec. 2-93. - Responsibilities. 
    The planning department is responsible for: 
(1)  Supporting the planning commission through the coordination and administration of site plan and subdivision review, formulation or evaluation of master plan and zoning text and map revisions, and the conduct of such other activities as may be related to such support, including the official custody of commission records. 
(2)  Supporting the city council or any city board or commission on any matter, as referred to the department by the council through the city manager. 
(3)  Supporting the city manager and other city departments on matters of planning and forecasting as these may relate to any function of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 2-1; Code 1982, § 2-2(d)) 
Charter reference- Planning, zoning and subdivision control, § 17.01 et seq. 
Sec. 2-94. - Exercise of responsibilities. 
    In the exercise of its responsibilities, the planning department shall coordinate its work, conclusions and recommendations with all other affected city officials. In carrying out its responsibilities relative to master plan, zoning and capital improvement programming matters, including the review of related legislation, the department shall: 
(1)  Determine and describe the extent to which each proposal appears to be consistent with existing development regulations and planning practices, referring questions of law to the city attorney. 
(2)  Comment, professionally, on the merits and make recommendations based on identified and relevant facts, clearly distinguishing facts from judgment. 
(3)  Determine whether a proposal is in a form consistent with existing development regulations or if it could be recast in a more effective manner for achieving what is stated. If it is not in a consistent form or if it could be recast in a more effective manner, an alternative shall be either requested from the sponsor by the department or the department may prepare its own for consideration as an alternative or an amendment to the basic proposal. Each of the functions above shall be so carried out that the product of each is clearly distinguishable from the products of the exercise of the other responsibilities. 
(Code 1973, § 2-1; Code 1982, § 2-2(e)) 
Charter reference- Planning, zoning and subdivision control, § 17.01 et seq. 
Sec. 2-95. - Requests for information. 
    In the exercise of its responsibilities, the department may request such information and advice from other departments and officials as may be necessary to the discharge of its responsibilities. 
(Code 1973, § 2-1; Code 1982, § 2-2(f)) 
Charter reference- Planning, zoning and subdivision control, § 17.01 et seq. 
Secs. 2-96-2-118. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - AUTHORITIES, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Authority regarding creation, etc., of boards, committees, commissions, etc., Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1107. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-119. - General requirements for citizen bodies appointed by city council. 
    Unless otherwise provided by the council for any given body: 
(1)  Annual business meeting. Every citizen body shall hold an annual business meeting for the purpose of electing officers, adopting rules of procedure and adopting a basic schedule of regular meetings for the coming year. Such business meeting shall be held within two months following the annual appointment of new fullterm members or the anniversary of their appointment. 
(2)  Rules of procedure. Every citizen body shall adopt and conduct its activities pursuant to rules of procedure consistent with the requirements of the Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3700 et seq., the Virginia Freedom of Information Act, the city Charter, this section and the Charter of the body. Such rules and any subsequent changes shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and available for reference by all who wish to see them. 
(3)  Minimum procedural requirements. The following minimum procedural requirements shall be included in the rules of procedure adopted under subsection (2) of this section: 
a.  An oath of office is required of all new appointees. 
b.  Officers of citizen bodies shall be elected annually within two months following: 
1.  The annual appointment of new fullterm members; or 
2.  The anniversary of their appointment. 
c.  The basic schedule of regular meetings for the ensuing year shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. 
d.  A quorum for the taking of actions shall consist of at least a simple majority. Meetings may be conducted for the purpose of exchange of information without a quorum. 
e.  The terms and conditions under which the public may speak and be heard at meetings of any citizen body may be set forth in the rules of procedure for the body. 
f.  Summary minutes shall be kept of all meetings. Draft minutes shall be filed with the city clerk promptly and the city clerk will circulate them to city councilmembers. An annual report highlighting the previous year's activity shall be presented to the city council at a regularly scheduled council meeting according to the following schedule: reports should be presented during the month previous to the month in which terms for that particular board/commission expire (e.g., reports are presented in February for boards/commissions with terms expiring at the end of March). This also applies to appointees to regional boards and commissions. The nomination schedule listing the months when terms expire is printed in the boards', commissions' and committees' brochure. 
Subsections (3)c. and e. of this section do not apply to the city employee review board, the retirement board, the private school and day care facility board, the other post employment benefits finance board and the building board of appeals. 
(4)  Newly created citizen bodies. Every new citizen body established after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall hold an organizational meeting within 30 days of the appointment of its membership. Such meetings shall be convened by a temporary chair appointed from among the members by the mayor. A permanent chair and vice-chair shall be elected by the members from among themselves at the organizational meeting. 
(Code 1982, § 2-1; Ord. No. 732; Ord. No. 1493, 10-11-1994) 
Secs. 2-120-2-136. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ARCHITECTURAL ADVISORY BOARD[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings, ch. 6; condominiums, § 6-48 et seq.; housing, ch. 22; zoning, ch. 48. 

Sec. 2-137. - Purpose of division. 
    The purpose of this division is to: 
(1)  Conserve property values and to obtain a beneficial relationship between taxable values of real property and the cost of municipal services; 
(2)  Promote the general welfare by encouraging such design of buildings and other structures as will avoid both excessive uniformity and inappropriate dissimilarity; 
(3)  Encourage the most appropriate use of land with equal respect to sound economics and reasonable harmony with such existing buildings as are generally recognized to be in good taste or to have a lasting historical value. 
(Code 1973, § 2-7; Code 1982, § 2-3) 
Sec. 2-138. - Established; composition; appointment; terms of office of members; chair; consultants. 
(a)  There is hereby established an architectural advisory board consisting of five persons who shall be residents of the city. All members shall be appointed for staggered terms of three years. The city council shall designate the first chair of the board, and thereafter the board shall annually elect its chair and such other officers as it may deem necessary. 
(b)  The city council may appoint not more than two nonresidents as nonvoting consultants to the board if the purposes of this division would be better accomplished by appointment of such consultants who would be appointed for one-year terms. 
(c)  The board shall also and in addition consist of an alternate member, who shall be a resident of the city, and who shall exercise full voting rights in the absence of a regular member. The term of office shall be for three years. 
(Code 1973, § 2-8; Code 1982, § 2-4; Ord. No. 867; Ord. No. 1026, 9-27-1982) 
Sec. 2-139. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The architectural advisory board's powers are advisory, and its findings and recommendations shall not have the force and effect of enforceable regulations. The board's powers are applicable to all zoning districts under the zoning regulations except R-1A and R-1B. 
(b)  The board shall review the architectural features of buildings and structures, and alterations thereto, including sites and all auxiliary features such as signs and lights proposed in the designated zones. The board shall consider the general design, arrangement, texture, materials and color and the appropriateness of these matters in relationship to other structures and area characteristics. 
(Code 1973, § 2-9; Code 1982, § 2-5) 
Sec. 2-140. - Procedures. 
(a)  Findings and recommendations on matters of architectural design. 
(1)  Upon receipt of an application for a building permit or site plan approval or upon prior request from the owner or builder, the building inspector shall collaborate with the zoning administrator to give notice to the chair of the architectural advisory board of a proposed new structure or alteration to exterior of an existing structure, stating the location and type of work contemplated. Immediately upon receipt of design drawings from the builder, a copy of each pertinent part shall be transmitted to the chair of the board, together with descriptive data on material, texture, color and any other item related to appearance and design. The board shall review the data submitted and tender its written findings and recommendations to the zoning administrator, who shall make such findings and recommendations available to the applicant. 
(2)  The board shall reduce to writing its findings and recommendations, and, if the proposed structure is disapproved, the findings shall state that: 
a.  The objectionable features are of such nature as to be expected to provoke beyond reasonable doubt one or more departures from the purposes set forth in this article; and 
b.  The findings are not based on personal preference as to taste or architectural style. 
(3)  The zoning administrator in all cases shall confer with the chair of the board and at their mutual discretion shall arrange a conference between the zoning administrator, the builder or such builder's advisors and the board, to seek a consensus on any matter affecting design and architectural compatibility in the designated zone. 
(4)  If the board has not transmitted its recommendations to the zoning administrator within 15 days of receipt of the design drawings, the board shall be deemed to have waived its function. 
(b)  Findings and recommendations on matters of signs. 
(1)  When the proposed structure consists only of one or more signs, the board shall be provided with a copy of the application for a sign permit and any supporting material, shall initiate its review on the basis of the information contained therein and shall make findings and recommendations in the manner specified in subsection (a) of this section. 
(2)  The board shall have discretion whether to make separate findings and recommendations relating to proposed signs which are included in plans or designs submitted for review under subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1973, § 2-10; Code 1982, § 2-6) 
Secs. 2-141-2-163. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFICERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-164-2-184. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DIRECTOR OF FINANCE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Finance, ch. 16. 

Sec. 2-185. - Appointment. 
    The head of the department of finance shall be known as the director of finance, who shall be, or be appointed by, the city manager. In making such appointment, the city manager shall give consideration to the applicant's qualifications in municipal finance and financial control. 
Sec. 2-186. - Powers and duties. 
    The director of finance shall have general management and control of the functions of the department. He shall appoint and remove, subject to the provisions of chapter 9 of the city Charter, all officers and employees of the department, excepting constitutional officers, and shall have power to make rules and regulations consistent with this Charter and the ordinances of the city for the conduct of its business. He shall have charge, subject to the direction and control of the city manager, of the administration of the financial affairs of the city, except those of the school board, unless specified in this chapter, and to that end shall have authority and be required to: 
(1)  Compile the departmental estimates and other data necessary or useful to the city manager in the preparation of the current expense and capital budgets. 
(2)  Supervise and control all encumbrances, expenditures and disbursement to insure that budget appropriations are not exceeded. 
(3)  Maintain a general accounting system for the city government and each of its departments, boards, commissions, offices and agencies, in conformity with the best recognized practices in governmental accounting; and encumber each item of appropriation with the amount of each purchase order, payroll or contract which he has approved, including each advance authorization as provided in subsection (6) of this section. 
(4)  Prescribe the form of receipts, vouchers, bills or claims to be used, and of accounts to be kept by all departments, boards, commissions, offices and agencies of the city, provided that in so doing he shall consult with any officer appointed by the council for the purpose. 
(5)  Require daily, or at such other intervals as he may deem expedient, a report of receipt from each of such departments, boards, commissions, offices and agencies, and prescribe the times at and the manner in which moneys received by them shall be paid to the office of the director of finance or deposited in a city bank account under the control of the city treasurer. 
(6)  Examine all contracts, purchase orders and other documents, except bonds and notes authorized as provided in chapter 7 of the city Charter, which create financial obligations against the city and approve the same only upon ascertaining that money has been appropriated therefor and that an unexpended and unencumbered balance is available in such appropriation to meet the same, provided that the director of finance may give advance authorization for the expenditure from any appropriation for the purchase of supplies, materials or equipment of such sum, within such appropriation, as he may deem necessary during a period of not to exceed 12 months for the purchase of items not to exceed in cost $100.00 for any one item, and immediately encumber such appropriation with the amount of such advance authorization, and thereafter, within the period specified, purchase orders for such items, to an aggregate not exceeding such authorization, shall be valid without the prior approval of the director of finance endorsed thereon, but each such purchase order shall be charged against such authorization and no such purchase order, which, together with all such purchase orders previously charged within the period specified, shall exceed the amount of such authorization, shall be valid. 
(7)  Audit before payment, for legality and correctness, all accounts, claims and demands against the city, and no money shall be drawn from any bank account of the city or school board except by warrant or check, signed by the director of finance, based upon a voucher duly approved by him as above provided. 
(8)  Submit to the city manager for presentation to the council not later than the tenth day of the first month of each quarter, a statement concerning the financial transactions of the city and each utility respectively, prepared in accordance with accepted principles of municipal accounting and budgetary procedure, and showing: 
a.  The amount of each appropriation with transfers to and from the same; and 
b.  The revenue estimated to be received from each source, and actual receipts from each source for the preceding months, the total receipts from each source for the fiscal year to the end of the preceding month, and the balance remaining to be collected. 
(9)  Furnish to the head of each department, court, board, commission, office and agency of the city a copy of that portion of the statement relating to such department, court, board, commission, office and agency of the city. 
(10)  Prepare and submit to the city manager at the end of each fiscal year, for the preceding year, a complete financial statement and report of the financial transactions of the city. 
(11)  Protect the interests of the city by withholding the payment of any claim or demand by any person, firm or corporation against the city until any indebtedness or other liability due from such person shall first have been settled and adjusted. 
Secs. 2-187-2-209. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PUBLIC PROPERTY AND FACILITIES 

Sec. 2-210. - Naming of public property or facility. 
(a)  Criteria for naming city facilities. City facilities, including buildings and parks, ("facilities") shall generally be named according to the geographical, historical, or ecological relationships in which the site is located. Exceptions may be made in the following circumstances: 
(1)  To commemorate an individual's service: Facilities may be named after an individual who has made significant contributions to the City of Falls Church through participation in community, state, or national service. 
(2)  To help identify the facilities purpose/usage: A name may be assigned to a city facility if it helps to describe and identify the usage or purpose of the facility. 
(b)  Renaming city facilities. Renaming a city facility can occur if: 
(1)  The criteria of subsection (a) are met; 
(2)  A valid justification for renaming the facility is provided; 
(3)  Changing the name will not cause undue confusion within the community; and 
(4)  An appropriate level of community support exists. 
(c)  Process for naming city facilities. 
(1)  The naming of any city-owned building, park, or other city-owned facility shall be by resolution of the city council. 
(2)  Individuals and/or organizations may make recommendations to the city council regarding the naming or renaming of facilities, parks, public open space areas and other related components of facilities. 
(3)  Prior to adopting a resolution naming a city-owned facility, the city council shall hold a public hearing, and shall seek a recommendation from the following: The planning commission; the historical commission; the recreation and parks advisory board; and any other boards and/or commissions or community organization that the city council deems appropriate. 
(d)  The naming of school facilities shall be by action of the city school board, and is not subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1982, § 2-7; Ord. No. 1305, 5-14-1990; Ord. No. 1855, 3-14-2011) 
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of city to regulate animals and fowl, § 2.04. 
Cross reference- Noise, § 14-49 et seq.; health and sanitation, ch. 20. 
State Law reference- Comprehensive animal laws, Code of Virginia, § 3.2.6500 et seq.; authority of city to adopt ordinances paralleling animal laws, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6543. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Cruelty; trapping and poisoning prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall override, overdrive, overload, torture, ill-treat, abandon, willfully inflict inhumane injury or pain not connected with bona fide scientific or medical experimentation, or cruelly or unnecessarily beat, maim, mutilate or kill any animal, whether belonging to such person or another, or deprive any animal of necessary sustenance, food or drink, shelter or emergency veterinary treatment or sores any equine for any purpose or administer drugs or medications to alter or mask such soring for the purpose of sale, show, or exhibition of any kind, unless such administration of drugs or medications is within the context of a veterinary client-patient relationship and solely for therapeutic purposes; or, being the owner of such animal, permit such acts to be done by another; willfully set foot on, instigate, engage in or in any way further any act of cruelty to any animal; or carry or cause to be carried in or upon any vehicle or vessel or otherwise any animal in a cruel, brutal or inhumane manner, so as to produce torture or unnecessary suffering or cause any of the above things or, being the owner of such animal, permit such acts to be done by another. Such person shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the dehorning of cattle. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to set or bait any trap or other contrivance for the catching of game or tame animals, or to knowingly permit any such trap to be set or baited on such person's premises or property, or to set out any poisoned bait with the intent of poisoning any game or tame animal except by the consent of the city animal control officer or state game warden. 
(Code 1973, § 4-1; Code 1982, § 4-1; Ord. No. 1595, 1-12-1998; Ord. No. 1660, 11-8-1999) 
State Law reference- Specific authority to adopt (a) of above section, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6543; general authority of city to prevent cruelty to animals, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6569; cruelty to animals, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6570. 
Sec. 4-2. - Limitations on companion animals and pets allowed per dwelling unit. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep more than three dogs over four months of age or four cats over four months of age or a total of seven companion animals per dwelling unit in the city. 
(b)  Companion animals for which the animal control officer, prior to January 1, 2005, has issued a permit shall be exempt from the limitation of the number of companion animal pets stated in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Any person, on February 1, 1998, being the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, who is lawfully keeping more than the number of dogs and cats permitted by this section shall be entitled to continue to keep all such dogs and cats, so long as they are duly licensed and inoculated in accordance with this chapter. However, it shall be unlawful for any such person to replace such dog or cat unless the total number dogs and cats kept by the person does not exceed the number of dogs and cats permitted by subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  This limitation shall not apply to any person authorized to operate a kennel, being any establishment in which five or more canines, felines, or hybrids of either are kept for the purpose of breeding, hunting, training, renting, buying, boarding, selling or showing. 
(Code 1982, § 4-1.1; Ord. No. 1595, 1-12-1998; Ord. No. 1768, 9-27-2004) 
Sec. 4-3. - Keeping of wild or exotic animals. 
(a)  Prohibition; exception. No person shall keep or permit to be kept on the premises of such person any live wild or exotic animal. This section shall not be construed to apply to zoological parks, performing animal exhibitions, circuses or veterinary clinics which are properly licensed by the federal government or Commonwealth of Virginia. In no case, however, shall such wild or exotic animals be exhibited or displayed in such a manner that persons other than the handler of such animal can pet, fondle or otherwise come in direct physical contact with such animals. 
(b)  Applicability. The term "wild or exotic animals" means any animal except: 
(1)  Dogs, cats, hamsters, gerbils, guinea pigs, ferrets, and birds which are normally purchased through a pet store; 
(2)  Gold fish and aquarium fish; 
(3)  Nonpoisonous snakes, less than eight feet in length; and 
(4)  Domestic rabbits, mice and rats which have been bred in captivity and which never have known the wild. 
(Code 1982, § 4-1.2; Ord. No. 1595, 1-12-1998) 
Sec. 4-4. - At large animals or fowl. 
(a)  No person shall fasten, turn at large or permit to graze or roam about on any street within the city any animal except as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  No person residing within the city shall permit fowl of any kind, being on such person's property or being under such person's charge, to run at large upon any street or other public place or to trespass upon the land or property of another against such person's will or consent. 
(Code 1973, § 4-2; Code 1982, § 4-2; Ord. No. 1595, 1-12-1998) 
Charter reference- Authority of city to prohibit the running at large of animals, § 2.04. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate running at large and keeping of animals, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6543. 
Sec. 4-5. - Impounding of animals running at large; disposal. 
    Any animal found running at large in violation of section 4-4 shall be taken into custody by the animal control officer or other proper official and held until the owner shall have paid the penalty and costs imposed upon such owner, together with the cost of maintaining such animal while in the pound. Any animal held five days or longer under this provision shall be disposed of in the same manner as is provided in section 4-77. 
(Code 1973, § 4-3; Code 1982, § 4-3; Ord. No. 905; Ord. No. 1595, 1-12-1998; Ord. No. 1660, 11-8-1999) 
State Law reference- Seizure and impoundment of animals, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6546. 
Sec. 4-6. - Permitting animals to trespass. 
    The owner of any animal, after being requested by the owner or tenant of any premises not to permit the animal to trespass upon such premises, shall not allow any such animal to go upon such premises. In addition, it shall be the duty of the animal control officer to capture and confine any unrestricted animal found off the property of its owner or of undetermined ownership when such animal is causing a public nuisance or a threat to public safety or health, excluding dogs which are prohibited by section 4-73 from running unrestricted at all times. Any impoundment shall be in accordance with the provisions of section 4-7. 
(Code 1973, § 4-4; Code 1982, § 4-4; Ord. No. 905; Ord. No. 1595, 1-12-1998; Ord. No. 1660, 11-8-1999) 
Sec. 4-7. - Burial or cremation of dead animals and fowl. 
    The owner of any animal or fowl which has died, when said owner knows of such death, shall forthwith have its body cremated, buried or otherwise disposed of in a manner acceptable to the city animal control officer. Should the owner of any dead animal or dead fowl fail to comply with the provisions of this section within 48 hours following receipt of the written notice to such owner by the city animal control officer, said city animal control officer shall be authorized to cause any such dead animal or fowl to be cremated, buried or disposed of at the expense of said owner. 
(Code 1973, § 4-5; Code 1982, § 4-5; Ord. No. 1595, 1-12-1998; Ord. No. 1660, 11-8-1999) 
State Law reference- Disposal of dead companion animals, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6554. 
Secs. 4-8-4-36. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Dogs, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6500 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-37. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Confined to their premises means dogs shall be kept on the owner's premises, unless in the custody of a responsible person or, in the case of hunting, when dogs are under the control of a responsible person. 
    Dangerous dog means a canine or canine crossbreed that has bitten, attacked, or inflicted injury on a person or companion animal that is a dog or cat, or killed a companion animal that is a dog or cat. However, when a dog attacks or bites a companion animal that is a dog or cat, the attacking or biting dog shall not be deemed dangerous if: 
(1)  No serious physical injury, as determined by a licensed veterinarian, has occurred to the dog or cat as a result of the attack or bite; 
(2)  Both animals are owned by the same person; 
(3)  Such attack occurs on the property of the attacking or biting dog's owner or custodian; or 
(4)  For other good cause as determined by the court. 
No dog shall be found to be a dangerous dog as a result of biting, attacking, or inflicting injury on a dog or cat while engaged with an owner or custodian as part of lawful hunting or participating in an organized, lawful dog handling event. 
    Hearing dog means a dog trained to alert its owner by touch to sounds of danger and sounds to which the owner should respond. 
    Owner means any person having a right of property in a dog, and any person who keeps or harbors a dog, or has it in the care of such person, or who acts as its custodian and any person who permits a dog to remain on or about any premises occupied by that person. 
    Service dog means a dog trained to accompany its owner for the purpose of carrying items, retrieving objects, pulling a wheelchair or other such activities of service or support. 
    Vicious dog means a canine or canine crossbreed that has: 
(1)  Killed a person; 
(2)  Inflicted serious injury to person, including multiple bites, serious disfigurement, serious impairment of health, or serious impairment of a bodily function; or 
(3)  Continued to exhibit the behavior that resulted in a previous finding by a court or an animal control officer as authorized pursuant to section 4-101, that it is dangerous, provided that its owner has been given notice of that finding. 
(Code 1973, § 4-10; Code 1982, § 4-10; Ord. No. 1100, 2-25-1985; Ord. No. 1308, 5-14-1990; Ord. No. 1595, 1-12-1998; Ord. No. 1660, 11-8-1999; Ord. No. 1768, 9-27-2004) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Definition of dangerous and vicious dogs, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6540. 
Sec. 4-38. - Animal control officer-Office created; salary. 
    The city manager is hereby authorized to employ or appoint an animal control officer of the city at a salary to be fixed by the council. 
(Code 1973, § 4-11; Code 1982, § 4-11; Ord. No. 905; Ord. No. 1660, 11-8-1999) 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Animal control officer, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6557. 
Sec. 4-39. - Same-Duties. 
    The duties of the animal control officer shall be as follows: 
(1)  Enforcement of the provisions of this article governing the running at large of dogs. 
(2)  Enforcement of the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city and the laws of the state governing the licensing of dogs by the owners. 
(3)  Investigation of dog damage claims and the rendering of a report to the council. 
(4)  Patrolling the city as directed by the city manager. 
(5)  Collection and disposal of dead dogs. 
(Code 1973, § 4-12; Code 1982, § 4-12; Ord. No. 905; Ord. No. 1660, 11-8-1999) 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 4-40. - Dog control required. 
(a)  Responsibility of owner; waiver. All dogs shall be kept secured by a leash or lead, and under the immediate control of the owner or other responsible person, or shall be kept within the real property limits that are subject to the control of the dog's owner or the person having responsibility of the dog. A written waiver of this requirement for a specific time and place may be obtained from the animal control officer for such activities as off-lead training, obedience matches and trials, exhibitions, when the dog has a skin condition which would be exacerbated by the wearing of a collar, and other activities compatible with animal control. 
(b)  Exercising dogs; exception. Nothing in this section or in any other section shall be deemed to make unlawful the exercising of dogs not secured by a leash or lead in such areas of the city specifically designated by the city council with appropriate signs for such exercising. This section shall not apply to dogs used by government law enforcement agencies. 
(c)  Violation and penalty. Upon conviction of a violation of this section, owners or the responsible person, as the case may be, shall be subject to a fine of up to $100.00, plus the cost of impoundment. The chief judge of the General District Court shall have the authority to fix a prepayable fine, which shall be in addition to the impoundment cost. 
(Code 1973, § 4-15; Code 1982, § 4-15; Ord. No. 1090, 11-26-1984; Ord. No. 1100, 2-25-1985; Ord. No. 1308, 5-14-1990; Ord. No. 1660, 11-8-1999) 
Charter reference- Authority of city to prohibit dogs running at large, § 2.04. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to prohibit dogs from running at large, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6538. 
Sec. 4-41. - Failure to remove excrement. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner, keeper or walker of a dog to fail to immediately remove the dog's excrement from any property other than the dog owner's property. Any violation of this section shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a fine of not more than $50.00. 
(Code 1973, § 4-15; Code 1982, § 4-15; Ord. No. 1090, 11-26-1984; Ord. No. 1100, 2-25-1985; Ord. No. 1308, 5-14-1990; Ord. No. 1660, 11-8-1999) 
Charter reference- Authority of city to prohibit dogs running at large, § 2.04. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to prohibit dogs from running at large, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6538. 
Secs. 4-42-4-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Provision authorizing issuance of licenses, § 2.07. 
Cross reference- Business, professional, occupational licenses, § 40-456 et seq. 
State Law reference- Licensing of dogs, Code of Virginia, §§ 3.2-6524-3.2-6531. 

Sec. 4-56. - Required; tax on dogs and kennels. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own a dog four months old or older in the city unless such dog is licensed, as required by provisions of this Code. Any dog not wearing a collar bearing a current license tag shall prima facie be deemed to be an unlicensed dog and, in any proceeding under this Code, the burden of proof of the fact that the dog has been licensed shall be on the owner of the dog. No license tag shall be issued for any dog unless there is presented to the treasurer, at the time of application for such license, the certificate of rabies vaccination required by section 4-125. 
(b)  License tax; fees. 
(1)  There is hereby provided and levied an animal license tax upon dogs within the city, four months old or older, consisting of the following fees: 
a.  Fertile males and females, a $10.00 fee; and 
b.  Infertile males and females, a $5.00 fee. Any person who applies for a license tag for a neutered or infertile dog shall present at the time of application a certification from a licensed veterinarian attesting the neutering or infertility of the dog. If such certification is not so presented, the dog shall be taxed the fee levied on fertile dogs. 
(2)  No license tax shall be levied on any dog: 
a.  That is trained and serves as a guide dog for a blind person; 
b.  That is trained and serves as a hearing dog for a deaf or hearing impaired person; or 
c.  That is trained and serves as a service dog for a mobility-impaired person. 
(3)  The fee for a kennel of 20 dogs shall not exceed $25.00 annually; and the fee for a kennel of 50 dogs shall not exceed $35.00 annually. 
(c)  On January 1 and not later than January 31 in the year in which the dog's rabies tag expires, the owner of any dog four months old or older shall pay a license tax as prescribed in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  If a dog shall become four months of age or come into the possession of any person between January 2 and November 2 of any year, the license tax for the current calendar year shall be paid forthwith by the owner. 
(e)  If a dog shall become four months of age or come into the possession of any person between October 31 and December 31 of any year, the license tax for the succeeding calendar year shall be paid forthwith by the owner and such license shall protect such dog from the date of purchase. 
(f)  If a dog license tag shall become lost, destroyed or stolen, the owner or custodian shall at once apply to the treasurer, or the treasurer's agent who issued the license, for a duplicate license tag. Upon affidavit of the owner or custodian before the treasurer or the treasurer's agent that the original license tag has been lost, destroyed or stolen, the treasurer shall issue a duplicate license tag which the owner or custodian shall immediately affix to the collar of the dog. 
(Code 1973, § 4-13; Code 1982, § 4-13; Ord. No. 770; Ord. No. 905; Ord. No. 1595, 1-12-1998) 
Sec. 4-57. - Failure to obtain license. 
    Every dog for which a license has not been obtained within 30 days after such license is required by law may be taken up wherever and whenever found within the city and kept, unless redeemed by owner, for a period of five days and disposed of as provided in section 4-77. 
(Code 1973, § 4-14; Code 1982, § 4-14; Ord. No. 905) 
Secs. 4-58-4-72. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 4-73. - Conditions for seizure. 
    Any dog not under control or confined to its owner's premises as required by section 4-40, or not subject to the exceptions of section 4-40, shall be seized and impounded as directed by the police chief or the designated agent for the chief of police. The owner would be required to pay the cost of impoundment. 
(Code 1973, § 4-16; Code 1982, § 4-16; Ord. No. 1100, 2-25-1985; Ord. No. 1308, 5-14-1990) 
State Law reference- Confinement and disposition of animals, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6546; impoundment of stray animals, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6569. 
Sec. 4-74. - Redemption; fee. 
    An animal confined pursuant to this division shall be kept for a period of not less than five days, such period to commence on the day immediately following the day the animal is initially confined in the facility, unless sooner claimed by the rightful owner. Any dog so seized and impounded may be redeemed by the owner at any time, within five days after its impoundment, upon payment of a fee to be determined by the city manager for board of such dog. Such fees shall be payable, as the city treasurer shall direct, as compensation for the cost of seizing and keeping such dog. 
(Code 1973, § 4-17; Code 1982, § 4-17) 
State Law reference- Confinement and notice to owner, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6546 B. 
Sec. 4-75. - Pound procedures. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal shall not include agricultural animals. 
    Rightful owner means a person with a right of property in the animal. 
(b)  The operator or custodian of the pound shall make a reasonable effort to ascertain whether the animal has a collar, tag, license, tattoo, or other form of identification. If such identification is found on the animal, the animal shall be held for an additional five days, unless sooner claimed by the rightful owner. If the rightful owner of the animal can be readily identified, the operator or custodian of the pound shall make a reasonable effort to notify the owner of the animal's confinement within the next 48 hours following its confinement. 
(c)  If any animal confined pursuant to this section is claimed by its rightful owner, such owner may be charged with the actual expenses incurred in keeping the animal impounded. 
(d)  If an animal confined pursuant to this section has not been claimed upon expiration of the appropriate holding period as provided by this article, it shall be deemed abandoned and become the property of the pound. Such animal may be humanely destroyed or disposed of by the methods set forth as follows in subsection (d)(1) through (5) of this section; however the pound shall release more than two animals or a family of animals during any 30-day period to any one person under subsection (d)(2), (3), or (4) of this section: 
(1)  Release to any humane society, animal shelter, or other releasing agency within the Commonwealth, provided that each humane society, animal shelter, or other releasing agency obtains a signed statement from each of its directors, operators, staff, or animal caregivers specifying that each individual has never been convicted of animal cruelty, neglect, or abandonment and updates such statements as changes occur; 
(2)  Adoption by a resident of the county or city who will pay the required license fee, if any, on such animal, provided that such resident has read and signed a statement specifying that the resident has never been convicted of animal cruelty, neglect, or abandonment; 
(3)  Adoption by a resident of an adjacent political subdivision of the Commonwealth, provided that such resident has read and signed a statement specifying that the resident has never been convicted of animal cruelty, neglect, or abandonment; 
(4)  Adoption by any other person, provided that such person has read and signed a statement specifying that the person has never been convicted of animal cruelty, neglect, or abandonment, and provided that no animal may be adopted by any person who is not a resident of the county or city for which the pound is operated, or of an adjacent political subdivision, unless the animal is first sterilized, and the pound may require that the sterilization be done at the expense of the person adopting the animal; or 
(5)  Release, for the purposes of adoption or euthanasia only, to an animal shelter, or any other releasing agency located in and lawfully operating under the laws of another state, provided that such animal shelter or other releasing agency: 
a.  Maintains records that would comply with Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6557; 
b.  Requires that adopted dogs and cats be sterilized; 
c.  Obtains a signed statement from each of its directors, operators, staff, and animal caregivers specifying that each individual has never been convicted of animal cruelty, neglect, or abandonment, and updates such statement as changes occur; and 
d.  Has provided to the pound, animal shelter, or other releasing agency within the Commonwealth a statement signed by an authorized representative specifying the entity's compliance with subsections (a) through (c) of this section, and the provisions of adequate care and performance of humane euthanasia, as necessary in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
For purposes of recordkeeping, release of an animal by a pound to a pound, animal shelter or other releasing agency shall be considered a transfer and not an adoption. If the animal is not first sterilized, the responsibility for sterilizing the animal transfers to the receiving entity. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the immediate euthanasia of a critically injured, critically ill, or unweaned animal for humane purposes. Any animal euthanized pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be euthanized by one of the methods prescribed or approved by the state veterinarian. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the immediate euthanasia or disposal, by the methods listed in subsection (d)(1) through (5) of this section, of an animal that has been released to a pound, animal shelter, other releasing agency, or animal control officer by the animal's rightful owner after the rightful owner has read and signed a statement: 
(1)  Surrendering all property rights in such animal; 
(2)  Stating that no other person has a right of property in the animal; and 
(3)  Acknowledging that the animal may be immediately euthanized or disposed of in accordance with subsection (d)(1) through (5) of this section. 
(g)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit any feral dog or feral cat not bearing a collar, tag, tattoo, or other form of identification which, based on the written statement of a disinterested person, exhibits behavior that poses a risk of physical injury to any person confining the animal, from being euthanized after being kept for a period of not less than three days, at least one of which shall be a full business day, such period to commence on the day the animal is initially confined in the facility, unless sooner claimed by the rightful owner. The statement of the disinterested person shall be kept with the animal as required by Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6557. For purposes of this subsection, a disinterested person shall not include a person releasing or reporting the animal. 
(h)  No pound shall place a companion animal in a foster home with a foster care provider unless the foster care provider has read and signed a statement specifying that he has never been convicted of animal cruelty, neglect, or abandonment, and each pound shall update such statement as changes occur. The pound shall maintain the original statement and any updates to such statement in accordance with this division and for at least so long as the pound has an affiliation with the foster care provider. 
(i)  A pound that places a companion animal in a foster home with a foster care provider shall ensure that the foster care provider complies with Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6503. 
(j)  If a pound finds a direct and immediate threat to a companion animal placed with a foster care provider, it shall report its findings to the animal control agency in the locality where the foster care provider is located. 
(k)  The pound must be operated in accordance with regulations issued by the state board of agriculture and consumer services. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6546. 
Sec. 4-76. - Suspicion of rabies. 
    No dog shall be released if rabid or suspected of being rabid, but such dog shall be destroyed or held for further examination, at the discretion of a licensed veterinarian. 
(Code 1973, § 4-18; Code 1982, § 4-18) 
State Law reference- Rabid animals, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6522. 
Sec. 4-77. - Disposition of unredeemed dogs. 
(a)  Any dogs which are not redeemed within five days from the date of their seizure shall be humanely destroyed or disposed of by sale or gift to a federal agency, state-supported institution, agency of the commonwealth, agency of another state or a licensed federal dealer, or by delivery to any local humane society or shelter. 
(b)  Any animal destroyed pursuant to the provisions of this division shall be euthanized by one of the methods prescribed or approved by the state veterinarian. Any money derived from the sale of such dogs shall be deposited as directed by the city manager. 
(Code 1973, § 4-19; Code 1982, § 4-19; Ord. No. 905) 
State Law reference- Disposition of animals, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6546. 
Secs. 4-78-4-92. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS DOGS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Dangerous or vicious dogs, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6540. 

Sec. 4-93. - Determination procedure. 
    Any animal control officer who has reason to believe that a canine or canine crossbreed within the city is a dangerous or vicious dog shall apply to a magistrate for the issuance of a summons requiring the owner or custodian, if known, to appear before a general district court at a specified time. The summons shall advise the owner or custodian of the nature of the proceeding and the matters at issue. The animal control officer shall confine the animal until such time as evidence shall be heard and a verdict rendered. If the animal control officer determines that the owner or custodian can confine the animal in a manner that protects the public safety, such officer may permit the owner or custodian to confine the animal until such time as evidence shall be heard and a verdict rendered. If the animal control officer or police officer orders such confinement, the animal may not be removed from the owner's or custodian's immediate property and must be secured on a leash no longer than six feet when not confined indoors or locked within an adequate structure. Failure to comply with such an order shall be a violation of this section. The court, through its contempt powers, may compel the owner, custodian or harborer of the animal to produce the animal. If, after hearing the evidence, the court finds the animal is a dangerous dog, the court shall order the animal's owner or custodian to comply with the provisions of section 4-95. If, after hearing the evidence, the court finds that the animal is a vicious dog, the court shall order the animal euthanized by the animal control officer in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6562. 
(Code 1973, § 4-20; Code 1982, § 4-20(a); Ord. No. 1279, 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1595, 1-12-1998; Ord. No. 1660, 11-8-1999; Ord. No. 1768, 9-27-2004) 
State Law reference- Control of dangerous or vicious dogs, penalties, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6540; dangerous dog registry, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6542. 
Sec. 4-94. - Breed determination prohibited; exempted acts; exceptions. 
(a)  No canine or canine crossbreed shall be found to be a dangerous or vicious dog solely because it is a particular breed, nor is the ownership of a particular breed of canine or canine crossbreed prohibited. 
(b)  No animal shall be found to be a dangerous or vicious dog if the threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who was: 
(1)  Committing, at the time, a crime upon the premises occupied by the animal's owner or custodian; 
(2)  Committing, at the time, a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the animal's owner or custodian; or 
(3)  Provoking, tormenting, or physically abusing the animal, or can be shown to have repeatedly provoked, tormented, abused, or assaulted the animal at other times. 
(c)  No police dog which was engaged in the performance of its duties at the time of the acts complained of shall be found to be a dangerous or vicious dog. 
(d)  No animal which, at the time of the acts complained of, was responding to pain or injury, or was protecting itself, its kennel, its offspring, a person or its owner's or custodian's property shall be found to be a dangerous or vicious dog. If the owner of an animal found to be a dangerous dog is a minor, the custodial parent or legal guardian shall be responsible for complying with all requirements of this section. 
(Code 1973, § 4-20; Code 1982(b), § 4-20; Ord. No. 1279, 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1595, 1-12-1998; Ord. No. 1660, 11-8-1999; Ord. No. 1768, 9-27-2004) 
State Law reference- Control of dangerous or vicious dogs, penalties, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6540; dangerous dog registry, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6542. 
Sec. 4-95. - Registration certificate. 
    The owner or custodian of an animal found by a court to be a dangerous dog shall, within ten days of such finding, obtain a dangerous dog registration certificate from the animal control officer for a fee of $50.00, in addition to other fees that may be authorized by law. The animal control officer shall also provide the owner or custodian with a uniformly designed tag which identifies the animal as a dangerous dog. The owner or custodian shall affix the tag to the animal's collar and ensure that the animal wears the collar and tag at all times. All certificates obtained pursuant to this section shall be renewed annually for the same fee and in the same manner as the initial certificate was obtained. If the owner or custodian fails to obtain such a certificate within the time allotted, the animal control officer shall have the power to seize the animal and euthanize the animal in accordance with state law. The animal control officer shall provide a copy of the dangerous dog registration certificate and verification of compliance to the state veterinarian. 
(Code 1973, § 4-20; Code 1982, § 4-20(c); Ord. No. 1279, 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1595, 1-12-1998; Ord. No. 1660, 11-8-1999; Ord. No. 1768, 9-27-2004) 
State Law reference- Control of dangerous or vicious dogs, penalties, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6540; dangerous dog registry, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6542. 
Sec. 4-96. - Requirements for certificates or renewals. 
(a)  All dangerous dog certificates or renewals required to be obtained under this section shall only be issued to persons 18 years of age or older who present satisfactory evidence that: 
(1)  The animal has a current rabies vaccination; 
(2)  The animal has been neutered or spayed; 
(3)  The animal: 
a.  Is and will be confined in a proper enclosure designed to prevent its escape; 
b.  Is and will be confined inside the owner's or custodian's residence, or is and will be muzzled and confined in the owner's or custodian's fenced-in yard with adequate shelter until the proper enclosure is constructed; 
(4)  The residence of the owner or custodian is and will continue to be posted with clearly visible signs warning both minors and adults of the presence of a dangerous dog on the property; and 
(5)  The animal has been permanently identified by means of a tattoo on the inside thigh or by electronic implant. 
(b)  All certificates or renewals required to be obtained under this section shall only be issued to persons who present satisfactory evidence that the owner has liability insurance coverage, to the value of at least $100,000.00 that covers animal bites. The owner may obtain and maintain a bond in surety, in lieu of liability insurance, to the value of at least $100,000.00. 
(Code 1973, § 4-20; Code 1982, § 4-20(d); Ord. No. 1279, 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1595, 1-12-1998; Ord. No. 1660, 11-8-1999; Ord. No. 1768, 9-27-2004) 
State Law reference- Control of dangerous or vicious dogs, penalties, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6540; dangerous dog registry, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6542. 
Sec. 4-97. - Confinement. 
    While on the property of its owner or custodian, an animal found to be a dangerous dog shall be confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked structure of sufficient height and design, with adequate shelter, to prevent its escape or to prevent direct contact with or entry to minors, adults, or other animals. The structure shall be designed to provide the animals with shelter from the elements of nature. When off its owner's property, an animal found to be dangerous shall be kept on a leash and muzzled in such a manner as not to cause injury to the animal or interfere with the animal's vision or respiration, but as to prevent it from biting a person or another animal. 
(Code 1973, § 4-20; Code 1982, § 4-20(e); Ord. No. 1279, 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1595, 1-12-1998; Ord. No. 1660, 11-8-1999; Ord. No. 1768, 9-27-2004) 
State Law reference- Control of dangerous or vicious dogs, penalties, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6540; dangerous dog registry, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6542. 
Sec. 4-98. - Unemancipated minors as owners or custodians. 
    If the owner or custodian of a dangerous dog is an unemancipated minor, the custodian parent or legal guardian shall be responsible for complying with all requirements of this section. 
(Code 1973, § 4-20; Code 1982, § 4-20(f); Ord. No. 1279, 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1595, 1-12-1998; Ord. No. 1660, 11-8-1999; Ord. No. 1768, 9-27-2004) 
Sec. 4-99. - Notification requirements. 
(a)  The owner of any dog found to be dangerous shall register the animal with the Commonwealth of Virginia Dangerous Dog Registry, as established under Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6542, within 45 days of such a finding by a court of competent jurisdiction. The owner shall also cause the local animal control officer to be promptly notified of: 
(1)  The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all owners; 
(2)  All of the means necessary to locate the owner and the dog at any time; 
(3)  Any complaints or incidences of attack by the dog upon any person or cat or dog; 
(4)  Any claims made or lawsuits brought as a result of any attack; 
(5)  Tattoo or chip identification information or both; 
(6)  Proof of insurance or surety bond; and 
(7)  The death of the dog. 
(b)  After an animal has been found by a court to be a dangerous dog, the animal's owner or custodian, upon learning of same, immediately shall notify the animal control officer if the animal: 
(1)  Is loose or unconfined; 
(2)  Bites or attacks either a person or another animal; or 
(3)  Is sold, given away, or dies. 
(c)  Any owner of a dangerous dog who relocates to a new address shall, within ten days of relocating, provide written notice to the appropriate local animal control authority for the old address from which the animal has moved and the new address to which the animal has been moved. 
(Code 1973, § 4-20; Code 1982, § 4-20(g), (h); Ord. No. 1279, 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1595, 1-12-1998; Ord. No. 1660, 11-8-1999; Ord. No. 1768, 9-27-2004) 
Sec. 4-100. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any owner or custodian of a canine or canine crossbreed or other animal is guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor if the canine or canine crossbreed previously declared a dangerous dog pursuant to this section, when such declaration arose out of a separate and distinct incident, attacks and injures or kills a cat or dog that is a companion animal belonging to another person. 
(b)  Any owner or custodian of a canine or canine crossbreed or other animal is guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor if the canine or canine crossbreed previously declared a dangerous dog pursuant to this section, when such declaration arose out of a separate and distinct incident, bites a human being or attacks a human being causing bodily injury. 
(c)  The provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall not apply to any animal that, at the time of the acts complained of, was responding to pain or injury, or was protecting itself, its kennel, its offspring, a person, or its owner's or custodian's property, or when the animal is a police dog that is engaged in the performance of its duties at the time of the attack. 
(d)  The owner or custodian of any animal which has been found by a court to be a dangerous dog who fails to comply with the requirements of this division shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 4-20; Code 1982, § 4-20(i); Ord. No. 1279, 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1595, 1-12-1998; Ord. No. 1660, 11-8-1999; Ord. No. 1768, 9-27-2004) 
Sec. 4-101. - Appeal of determination. 
    The animal control officer may determine, after investigation, whether a dog is a dangerous dog. If the animal control officer determines that a dog is a dangerous dog, the animal control officer may order the animal's owner to comply with the provisions of this division. If the animal's owner disagrees with the animal control officer's determination, the owner may appeal the determination to the general district court for a trial on the merits. 
(Code 1973, § 4-20; Code 1982, § 4-20(j); Ord. No. 1279, 12-11-1989; Ord. No. 1595, 1-12-1998; Ord. No. 1660, 11-8-1999; Ord. No. 1768, 9-27-2004) 
State Law reference- Control of dangerous or vicious dogs, penalties, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6440; dangerous dog registry, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6542. 
Secs. 4-102-4-124. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RABIES CONTROL[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Rabies vaccination, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6521 A; rabies control, Code of Virginia, §§ 3.2-6521 B-3.2-6526 B. 

Sec. 4-125. - Vaccination required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, hold or harbor any dog over the age of four months, within the city, unless the dog has been vaccinated with a modified live virus (Flury strain) rabies vaccine, approved by the state department of health, within a period of 36 months or inoculated within a period of 12 months with a killed rabies vaccine approved by the state department of health. 
(Code 1973, § 4-21; Code 1982, § 4-21; Ord. No. 1279, 12-11-1989) 
State Law reference- Rabies vaccination required, Code of Virginia, §§ 3.2-6521 A, 3.2-6521 B, 3.2-6526 B. 
Sec. 4-126. - Dogs brought into city. 
    Any person transporting a dog into the city from some other jurisdiction or political entity shall be required to comply with section 4-125 within 30 days of the time of such transporting. 
(Code 1973, § 4-22; Code 1982, § 4-22) 
Sec. 4-127. - Collar tag and certificate of inoculation. 
    At the time of vaccination, a suitable, distinctive and legible collar tag and a certificate of inoculation stating the type of vaccine used shall be obtained by the dog owner or person having custody and care of the dog. The collar tag shall be affixed to the dog's collar and shall be worn at all times when the dog is not on the property of the owner or is not in the immediate control of a responsible person. 
(Code 1973, § 4-23; Code 1982, § 4-23) 
Sec. 4-128. - Impoundment of unvaccinated dogs. 
    Any dog found in the city which is not identified as having been vaccinated in the manner set forth in the provisions of this division shall be impounded by such officials of the city as may be designated for such duty by the city manager and such dog shall be held for a period of five days. Upon presentation of proof of ownership, vaccination of the dog, payment of the cost of impounding the dog as set forth in section 4-74; and upon payment of any fine assessed under the provisions of this Code, the dog shall be released to the owner. 
(Code 1973, § 4-24; Code 1982, § 4-24) 
Sec. 4-129. - Prerequisite to issuance of license. 
    No dog license shall be issued to any applicant unless there is presented to the official issuing licenses a certificate of rabies vaccination properly executed and signed by a licensed veterinarian certifying that the dog has been vaccinated in accordance with the provisions set forth in section 4-125. The certificate shall show the time of inoculation, rabies collar tag number, a brief description of the dog, sex and breed, and the name of the owner of such dog. 
(Code 1973, § 4-25; Code 1982, § 4-25; Ord. No. 905) 
State Law reference- Rabies certificate required, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6529. 
Sec. 4-130. - Rabies epizootic. 
    When, in the judgment of the health officer of the city, an emergency shall exist within the city, or immediately adjacent areas, due to widespread rabies epizootic, the health officer shall declare a quarantine in the city. Upon such declaration, each owner or custodian of a dog shall restrict the dog to the premises of the owner or custodian or the immediate custody of a responsible person for the duration of such emergency. The health officer shall cause to be publicized such declaration by all media available, and shall be advertised in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(Code 1973, § 4-26; Code 1982, § 4-26) 
State Law reference- Declaration of rabies emergency, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6525. 
Sec. 4-131. - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this division shall be enforced by the police officers of the city, the state game warden, the animal control officer and the city health officer. 
(Code 1973, § 4-27; Code 1982, § 4-27; Ord. No. 905; Ord. No. 1660, 11-8-1999) 
Secs. 4-132-4-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CATS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Rabies vaccination, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6521 A; rabies control, Code of Virginia, §§ 3.2-6521 B-3.2-6526 B. 

Sec. 4-161. - Vaccination required. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of a cat to keep, harbor or having in such owner's or custodian's custody or control a cat four months old or older for longer than 14 days, unless such cat has been vaccinated with a rabies vaccine approved by the state department of health and the vaccination is not beyond the expiration date for such vaccination. After the initial vaccination, each cat shall be periodically vaccinated so as to ensure the cat has, at all times, an effective vaccination approved by the state department of health. 
(Code 1982, § 4-36; Ord. No. 1034, 1-10-1983; Ord. No. 1279, 12-11-1989) 
Sec. 4-162. - Certificate of vaccination. 
    Rabies inoculation receipts, issued by a veterinarian at the time of vaccination, shall be carefully preserved by the owner or custodian of a cat and exhibited promptly upon request for inspection by any animal control officer or other law enforcement officer. 
(Code 1982, § 4-37; Ord. No. 1034, 1-10-1983) 
Sec. 4-163. - Violation. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall be guilty, upon conviction, of a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1982, § 4-38; Ord. No. 1034, 1-10-1983) 
Chapter 6 - BUILDINGS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of city to regulate the construction, repair, etc., of buildings, § 2.04. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; architectural advisory board, § 2-137 et seq.; condominiums, § 6-48 et seq.; pools, § 8-474 et seq.; noise, § 14-49 et seq.; outdoor lighting, § 14-127 et seq.; fire prevention, ch. 18; housing, ch. 22; solid waste, ch. 34; erosion and sediment control, ch. 35; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 36; subdivisions, ch. 38; public utilities, ch. 42; water conservation, § 42-65 et seq.; cross connection and backflow prevention control in waterworks, § 42-150 et seq.; underground utilities, § 42-231 et seq.; zoning ch. 48. 
State Law reference- General authority of city relative to building regulations, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1102; authority to abate nuisances including dangerous, unsafe buildings, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-900; damaged, dangerous, unsafe, dilapidated building repair or demolition, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-906, 15.2-1115; authority to remove or repair the defacement of buildings, walls, fences and other structures, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-908; authority to require removal, repair, etc., of wharves, piers, pilings, bulkheads, vessels or abandoned, obstructing or hazardous property, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-909; authority to regulate light, ventilation, etc., for occupancy of buildings, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1117; numbers displayed on buildings, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2024; uniform statewide building code, Code of Virginia, § 36-97 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1-6-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING STANDARDS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-19. - Building official appointed. 
    The city manager shall appoint a building official for the purpose of enforcing the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Code 1982, § 6-1.1; Ord. No. 1164, 11-10-1986) 
State Law reference- Uniform statewide building code, Code of Virginia, § 36-97 et seq. 
Sec. 6-20. - Building board of appeals. 
    The building official shall appoint a building code board of appeals following the regulations as set forth in the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Code 1982, § 6-1.11; Ord. No. 1164, 11-10-1986; Ord. No. 1176, 3-9-1987) 
Sec. 6-21. - Building permit fees. 
    No permit, as required by the building code, shall be issued until the fee, as prescribed by resolution and adopted by city council, has been paid. 
(Code 1973, § 6-6; Code 1982, § 6-3) 
Sec. 6-22. - State maintenance code enforcement. 
    The city manager or his designated assistant shall appoint a property maintenance code official for the purpose of enforcing the state maintenance code. Enforcement of the code shall be on a complaint-only basis. 
Sec. 6-23. - Enforcement, applicability and fines. 
    In addition to the authority granted by Part III of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, the building official, assisted by offices designated by the city manager, is hereby authorized to take corrective actions and issue a warning notice or a notice of violation for any violation of this chapter pursuant to the procedures in this section. 
(1)  Applicability. With respect to a property or use within the city, no owner or agent of the owner, person, tenant or corporation shall violate any provision of this chapter. 
(2)  Penalties. Violations not resulting in injury to persons and not corrected by the compliance date specified on a warning notice shall incur the civil penalties of $100.00 for a first offense, and $150.00 for a second and subsequent offense. The period set for compliance shall not be less than ten calendar days. Violations arising from the same operative set of facts shall not be charged more frequently than once in any ten-day period. 
(3)  Admission of responsibility, request for hearing, failure to respond. At any time before the expiration of the date set for compliance on a notice of violation, the person, persons, firm or corporation receiving a civil violation under this section shall either admit responsibility by paying the civil penalty indicated on the notice of violation at the city treasurer's office, or shall request a hearing by appearing at the clerk of the court's office. Failure to respond by the compliance date may result in additional fines and penalties as provided for by this section and in the same manner as provided by law for civil infractions. 
(4)  Violations for which a summons is issued. A summons may be issued by an authorized official in lieu of a civil violation notice for violations that have gone uncorrected after proper notice to correct has been given. Such summons shall be set for hearing according to the procedures of the district court. 
(5)  Unsafe structures and or violations resulting in injuries to persons. Unsafe structures and structures unfit for human occupancy as defined by the Virginia Maintenance Code, section 105, and violations resulting in injury to persons shall be deemed a misdemeanor punishable pursuant to section 1-12 of the City Code. 
(6)  Collection of fines. If a person charged with a civil infraction violation under this section fails to respond as provided for in subsection 6-23(3), the city treasurer's office shall collect the fines and penalties, if any, pursuant to the procedures of that office. 
(7)  Request for hearing. Cases for which a hearing has been requested under subsection 6-23(3) shall be heard in the general district court of the City of Falls Church in the same manner and with the same right of appeal as provided for by law. In any hearing for a violation of this section, it shall be the burden of the City of Falls Church to show the liability of the violator by a preponderance of the evidence. An admission of liability or finding of liability shall not be a criminal conviction for any purpose. If the violation remains uncorrected at the time of the conviction, the judge or magistrate shall order the violator to abate or remedy the violation in order to comply with the Code. In addition, each day the violation continues after conviction or the court-ordered abatement period has expired shall constitute a separate offense. Except as otherwise provided by the court for good cause shown, the court shall order the abatement of the violation within not less than ten calendar days, or more than six months of the date of conviction. 
(8)  City of Falls Church Uniform Schedule of Civil Penalties for the Virginia Maintenance Code. The following sections of the Virginia Maintenance Code are adopted by reference and subject to the fines provided for in subsection 6-23(2): 
Violations of General Requirements VMC Chapter 3 Violations of Light Ventilation and Occupancy Limitations VMC Chapter 4 Violations of Plumbing Facilities and Fixture Requirements VMC Chapter 5 Violations of Mechanical and Electrical Requirements VMC Chapter 6 Violations of Fire Safety Requirements VMC Chapter 7  
(Ord. No. 1872, 3-12-2012) 
Secs. 6-24-6-47. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONDOMINIUMS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Architectural advisory board, § 2-137 et seq.; swimming pool design and construction, § 8-474 et seq.; outdoor lighting, § 14-127 et seq.; fire prevention, ch. 18; housing, ch. 22; solid waste, ch. 34; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 36; subdivisions, ch. 38; zoning, ch. 48. 
State Law reference- Condominium act, Code of Virginia, § 55-79.39 et seq.; limitations on ordinances regarding condominiums, Code of Virginia, §§ 55-79.43, 55-79.94(e)-(g). 

Sec. 6-48. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this division to regulate the conversion to condominiums and construction of new condominiums to the maximum extent permitted by state law. Should the meaning and application of any provision in this division be unclear, it shall be construed in a manner consistent with this purpose. Should any amendments to state law be made which affect the authority of the city, the city's authority shall be the maximum permitted by those amendments. 
(Code 1982, § 8-1; Ord. No. 1093, 1-14-1985) 
Sec. 6-49. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this division, words and terms shall have the same meaning given to them in the Virginia Condominium Act, Code of Virginia, § 55-79.39 et seq., as amended (the Act). 
(Code 1982, § 8-2; Ord. No. 1093, 1-14-1985) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-50. - Site plan requirements. 
    A site plan shall be required for newly constructed condominiums and for the conversion to condominiums of residential or commercial structures, as provided in chapter 48, article V, division 7, pertaining to site plans. In any case where the conversion does not conform to the zoning and land use regulations of the city, a variance shall be required. A request for a variance shall be granted if the applicant can demonstrate to the reasonable satisfaction of the board of zoning appeals that the nonconformities are not likely to be adversely affected by the proposed conversion. No action on such request shall be unreasonably delayed. As in the case with other variances, variances shall be reviewed by the planning commission for the purpose of advice to the board of zoning appeals. At the time of the review by the planning commission of the site plan, the developer shall be provided with a copy of this division by the department of housing and human services. 
(Code 1982, § 8-3; Ord. No. 1093, 1-14-1985) 
Sec. 6-51. - Application for registration; local requirements. 
    The declarant of a condominium is required to file with the city all information which is required by the state real estate board pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 55-79.89. Such information shall be filed in the department of housing and human services simultaneously with the filing of the application of registration with the state real estate board, and shall be made available for inspection by the public. In the case of conversion condominiums, the director of housing and human services shall cause a notice of the receipt of such information pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 55-79.89, to be prominently posted in the conversion condominium. 
(Code 1982, § 8-4; Ord. No. 1093, 1-14-1985) 
State Law reference- Application for registration, Code of Virginia, § 55-79.89; authority to require filing with the city, Code of Virginia, § 55-79.94 E. 
Sec. 6-52. - Elderly and disabled tenants. 
(a)  The developer of a condominium project which is being converted from multifamily rental use shall offer to those elderly or disabled tenants occupying apartments or units as their residence, at the time of issuance of the general notice required by Code of Virginia, § 55-79.94 B, leases or extension of leases on apartments or units they then occupy, or on other apartments or units of at least equal size and overall quality; provided, however, that no such lease or extension shall be valid unless all of the terms and conditions thereof are agreed upon by the lessor and the lessee; provided, further, that the rent for such apartment or unit shall not be in excess of reasonable rent for comparable apartments or units in the same market area as such conversion condominium. Such lease shall include or incorporate by reference the bylaws and/or rules and regulations, if any, of the association. No such developer shall be required to offer such leases or extensions on more than 20 percent of the apartments or units in such conversion condominium, nor shall any such lease or extension be required to be extended for more than three years from the date of the general notice referred to in this section. 
(b)  The requirements set forth in this section shall not apply in the case of any apartments or units which will, in the course of the conversion, be substantially altered in the physical layout, restricted exclusively to nonresidential use, or be converted in such a manner as to require relocation of the tenant in premises outside of the project being converted. 
(Code 1982, § 8-5; Ord. No. 1093, 1-14-1985) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt, Code of Virginia, § 55-79.94 F. 
Sec. 6-53. - Relocation. 
    The developer of a condominium project which is being converted from multifamily rental use shall reimburse any tenant displaced by the conversion for amounts actually expended to relocate as a result of such dislocation; provided, however, that such reimbursement shall not be required to exceed the amount which the tenant would have been entitled to receive under Code of Virginia, §§ 25.1-407 and 25.1-415 if the real estate comprising the condominium had been condemned by the state department of transportation. 
(Code 1982, § 8-6; Ord. No. 1093, 1-14-1985) 
State Law reference- Authority for certain cities to adopt this requirement, Code of Virginia, § 55-79.94 G. 
Chapter 8 - BUSINESSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 8-1-8-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MASSAGE THERAPY ESTABLISHMENTS AND SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation, ch. 20; zoning, ch. 48. 
State Law reference- Massage therapy, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-3000; municipal license authority, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3703. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-20. - Declaration of findings and policy. 
    It is hereby declared that the city has found it necessary and proper to exercise its regulatory authority under the police power for the protection of the health, safety and general welfare of its citizens by providing for the permitting and regulation of massage therapists and massage establishments. 
(Code 1982, § 19.1-2; Ord. No. 1726, 12-9-2002) 
Sec. 8-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Chief means the City of Falls Church chief of police, or the chief's designee. 
    Client means any person receiving a massage from a massage therapist who has been compensated for administering the massage. 
    Disqualifying offenses means offenses which disqualify an applicant from obtaining a permit pursuant to this article or, if the offender already holds a permit, which mandate revocation of the permit. Disqualifying offenses are: 
(1)  Convictions, pleas of nolo contendere or a forfeiture on a charge of violating any provision of the Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-346, 18.2-347 through 18.2-349, 18.2-355 through 18.2-358, 18.2-361, 18.2-368, 18.2-370, 18.2-370.1, 18.2-371, 18.2-386.1 or 18.2-387, which laws relate to sexual offenses, or any provision of an ordinance of the city or a law or ordinance of another jurisdiction which prohibits the same conduct, within the past ten years. 
(2)  Convictions, pleas of nolo contendere or a forfeiture on a charge of violating any provision of this article, or on a charge of violating a similar law in any other jurisdiction, within the past five years. 
(3)  Making a false statement on a permit application. 
    Erogenous areas means the genitals and the nipples and areolae. 
    Massage means the treatment, for compensation, of soft tissues for therapeutic purposes by the application of massage and bodywork techniques based on the manipulation or application of pressure to the muscular structure or soft tissues of the human body, unless the massage is excluded from regulation by section 8-22. 
    Massage establishment means any fixed place of business where a massage is administered to a client, unless the place is excluded from regulation by section 8-22. 
    Massage therapist means any individual certified as a massage therapist by the Board of Nursing of the commonwealth. 
    Out-call massage means any massage administered for compensation at a location other than at a massage establishment. 
(Code 1982, § 19.1-3; Ord. No. 1726, 12-9-2002) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 8-22. - Exclusions. 
    The provisions of this article do not apply to the following massages, and such massages are expressly excluded from the requirements of this article: 
(1)  A massage administered only to the scalp, face, neck, shoulders, arms, hands, and/or the feet. 
(2)  A massage of the upper body while the client is fully clothed and seated in a chair. 
(3)  A massage administered in a hospital or medical clinic, or in the office of a physician, chiropractor, osteopath or physical therapist licensed by the commonwealth. 
(4)  A massage administered in a nursing home, convalescent care facility, assisted-living facility, progressive care facility or life care facility. 
(5)  A massage administered by a physician, chiropractor, osteopath, physical therapist or nurse, licensed by the commonwealth, in any location. 
(6)  A massage administered at an organized public event, such as a health fair or sporting event, which is open for participation or viewing by the general public. 
(7)  A massage administered at a school which offers a massage therapy program that has received programmatic approval from the state board of education, office of proprietary schools, or that has been certified or approved by the state board of education, office of proprietary schools or the state council of higher education; provided, however, that this exclusion applies only if the individual administering the massage is a student enrolled at the school and receives no compensation for doing so. 
(Code 1982, § 19.1-4; Ord. No. 1726, 12-9-2002) 
Secs. 8-23-8-47. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 8-48. - Violations. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1982, § 19.1-25; Ord. No. 1726, 12-9-2002) 
Sec. 8-49. - Right of entry to enforce provisions. 
    The chief, the director of health, the zoning administrator and the building official, or their duly authorized agents, are hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey, during business hours, any premises in the city for which a massage establishment permit has been issued, pursuant to this article, for the purpose of inspection and to enforce the provisions of this article. The director of health will make best efforts to inspect each massage establishment at least one time per year to determine whether it is being operated in compliance with this article. This section shall not restrict or limit the right of entry vested in any law enforcement agency. 
(Code 1982, § 19.1-26; Ord. No. 1726, 12-9-2002) 
Sec. 8-50. - Revocation or suspension of permits. 
(a)  Grounds for revocation. Grounds for revocation of any permit granted under this article exist if the permittee, operator or manager has committed any disqualifying offense or repeatedly has had a permit issued under this article suspended. If the permittee is a: 
(1)  Privately held corporation. Privately held corporation or company, grounds for revocation exist in the event of such conduct by the corporation or company or by any officer or director. 
(2)  Publicly held corporation. Publicly held corporation, grounds for revocation exist in the event of such conduct by the corporation or by any officer or agent who has responsibility for the daily operations of the establishment. 
(3)  Partnership. Partnership, grounds for revocation exist in the event of such conduct by the partnership or any partner. 
If the chief believes that grounds for revocation of a permit exist, the chief shall give the permittee written notice enumerating the grounds and declaring the chief's intent to hold a hearing at a specified date and time to determine whether revocation is warranted. The notice shall be mailed, by certified mail, to the permittee's last known address, at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing. At the hearing, the permittee may be represented by counsel, may cross examine witnesses and may present evidence in the permittee's favor. If the chief finds that any ground for revocation in fact exists, the chief shall revoke the permit. The chief shall issue a written notice of the chief's findings and decision within ten workdays of the hearing. Any appeal shall be filed by the permittee with the city police department within 30 days after a permittee receives the notice and shall specify the grounds for appeal. The chief's action remains in effect during the pendency of the appeal. The city manager shall hold an appeal hearing as promptly as practicable and in no event more than 60 days after the appeal is filed. 
(b)  Grounds for suspension. Grounds for suspension of any permit granted under this article exist if the permittee has failed to comply with any provisions of this article, other than those which mandate revocation. If the permittee is a: 
(1)  Privately held corporation. Privately held corporation or company, grounds for suspension exist in the event of such failure to comply by the corporation or company or by any officer or director. 
(2)  Publicly held corporation. Publicly held corporation, grounds for suspension exist in the event of such failure to comply by the corporation or by any officer or agent who has responsibility for the daily operations of the establishment. 
(3)  Partnership. Partnership, grounds for suspension exist in the event of such failure to comply by the partnership or any partner. 
The chief or any person with a right of entry under section 8-49 may order the suspension of the permit with or without notice. The order shall set forth the reasons for the suspension. A copy of the suspension order shall be hand delivered or mailed, by certified mail, to the permittee's last known address. The chief may end a suspension at any time if the reason for the suspension is corrected. Any appeal shall be filed by the permittee with the city police department within 30 days after a permittee receives the suspension order and shall specify the grounds for appeal. The city manager shall hold an appeal hearing as promptly as practicable and in no event more than 60 days after the appeal is filed. 
(Code 1982, § 19.1-27; Ord. No. 1726, 12-9-2002) 
Secs. 8-51-8-73. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MASSAGE THERAPIST PERMIT 

Sec. 8-74. - Permit required. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to offer or administer a massage in the city, unless such person has a valid massage therapist permit issued by the chief of police. 
(b)  It is unlawful for the owner, operator or manager of any massage establishment to allow any person who does not have the permit required by this section to administer any massage in the establishment. 
(c)  The chief shall not issue a massage therapist permit to any person who is not certified by the board of nursing of the commonwealth, as a massage therapist. 
(Code 1982, § 19.1-5; Ord. No. 1726, 12-9-2002) 
State Law reference- Certification of massage therapists, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-3005. 
Sec. 8-75. - Permit application, duty to update. 
    Each application for a massage therapist permit shall be upon a form prepared by the chief. The applicant shall provide full answers to all questions on the application under oath. The completed application shall contain the following information, as well as other information which the chief deems necessary to properly evaluate the application: 
(1)  The applicant's full name, names by which the applicant previously was known, date and place of birth, current residential and business addresses and telephone numbers, and e-mail address. 
(2)  A copy of the applicant's massage therapist certification from the board of nursing of the commonwealth. 
(3)  The applicant's personal characteristics, such as, height, weight, eye color, hair color, sex and race. 
(4)  The names and addresses of all massage establishments where the applicant has been employed as a massage therapist within the past three years. 
(5)  Whether the applicant currently holds or previously held a permit or license to offer or administer massages anywhere in the state or in any other state. If the applicant holds or has held any such permit or license, the applicant shall provide the license or permit number and the identity of the issuing authority, and whether such permit or license has ever been revoked or suspended and the reason. 
(6)  The applicant's criminal record, if any, other than misdemeanor traffic violations or traffic infractions, a complete set of the applicant's fingerprints which shall be taken as directed by the chief, a consent form allowing the chief to obtain a search of the central criminal records exchange, and an investigation fee in the amount as established by the state police for conducting the records search. 
(7)  One full-face and one profile photograph, in a size designated by the chief. 
(8)  The application fee of $50.00. The fee is in addition to any business or occupation or occupation license tax imposed by the city and any other taxes or fees which may be required to engage in the business. During the term of the permit, each person to whom a massage therapist permit is issued under this section must report to the chief any change in the information required by subsection (1), (2), (5) or (6) of this section within 21 days of learning of the change. 
(Code 1982, § 19.1-6; Ord. No. 1726, 12-9-2002) 
Sec. 8-76. - Issuance or denial. 
(a)  The chief shall act upon the application for a massage therapist permit within 21 days from the date the chief receives the application. 
(b)  If the chief determines from the information contained in the permit application and from the chief's investigation that the applicant has committed no disqualifying offenses and that the applicant is otherwise qualified, under this division, to administer massage therapy in the city, the chief shall issue the permit. Each permit issued by the chief shall be the property of the city and it shall be returned to the chief in the event the permit is suspended or revoked in accordance with section 8-50 or section 8-78. 
(c)  If the chief determines from the information contained in the permit application and from the chief's investigation that the applicant has committed one or more disqualifying offenses or is otherwise unqualified under this division to administer massage therapy in the city, the chief shall deny the application. 
(d)  If the chief denies an application, the chief shall provide the applicant with written notice setting forth the grounds for the denial. Any appeal shall be filed by the applicant with the city police department within 30 days after the applicant receives the notice and shall specify the grounds for appeal. The city manager shall hold an appeal hearing as promptly as practicable and in no event more than 60 days after the appeal is filed. 
(Code 1982, § 19.1-7; Ord. No. 1726, 12-9-2002) 
Sec. 8-77. - Term. 
    A massage therapist permit shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance, unless sooner suspended or revoked. Within 30 days before the expiration date, a permitted massage therapist may apply for a new permit. 
(Code 1982, § 19.1-8; Ord. No. 1726, 12-9-2002) 
Sec. 8-78. - Validity of permit dependent upon validity of state certification. 
    The validity of a massage therapist permit issued under this division is dependent upon the validity of the state certification as a massage therapist. Suspension of a massage therapist's certification by the commonwealth shall result in the automatic suspension of the permit issued under this division. Revocation of a massage therapist's certification by the commonwealth shall result in the automatic revocation of the permit issued under this division. Automatic suspensions and revocations are not subject to the appeal procedures established in section 8-50. 
(Code 1982, § 19.1-9; Ord. No. 1726, 12-9-2002) 
Sec. 8-79. - Nontransferability. 
    Massage therapist permits are not transferable. 
(Code 1982, § 19.1-10; Ord. No. 1726, 12-9-2002) 
Sec. 8-80. - Permit display. 
    Every person to whom a massage therapist permit has been granted shall display the permit while in a massage establishment. 
(Code 1982, § 19.1-11; Ord. No. 1726, 12-9-2002) 
Secs. 8-81-8-103. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT PERMIT 

Sec. 8-104. - Permit required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to own or operate a massage establishment in the city, unless they have a valid massage establishment permit issued by the chief. 
(Code 1982, § 19.1-12; Ord. No. 1726, 12-9-2002) 
Sec. 8-105. - Permit application; duty to update. 
    Each application for a massage establishment permit shall be upon a form prepared by the chief. The applicant shall provide full answers to all questions on the application under oath. The completed application shall contain the following information, as well as other information that the chief deems necessary to properly evaluate the application: 
(1)  Full application process. 
a.  A description of the facilities and services to be available on the premises of the proposed establishment. 
b.  The location and mailing address of the establishment. 
c.  The name under which the establishment will operate. 
d.  The applicant's full name, names by which the applicant previously was known, date and place of birth, incorporation or organization, and current residential and business addresses and telephone numbers, as applicable. If the applicant is a privately held corporation or company, it must supply the information for the corporation or company, each officer and each director. If the applicant is a publicly held corporation, it must supply the information for the corporation and the officer or agent who will have responsibility for the daily operations of the establishment. If the applicant is a partnership, it must supply the information for the partnership and for each partner. 
e.  Whether the applicant currently holds or previously held a permit or license to operate a massage establishment or to administer massages anywhere in the state or any other state. If the answer is affirmative, the license or permit number, the identity of the issuing authority and whether such permit or license has ever been revoked or suspended and the reason therefor. If the applicant is a privately held corporation or company, it must supply the information for the corporation or company, each officer and each director. If the applicant is a publicly held corporation, it must supply the information for the corporation and for the officer or agent who will have responsibility for the daily operations of the establishment. If the applicant is a partnership, it must supply the information for the partnership and for each partner. 
f.  The criminal record, if any, other than misdemeanor traffic violations or traffic infractions of the applicant, and a consent form allowing the chief to obtain a search of the central criminal records exchange. If the applicant is a privately held corporation or company, it must supply the information for each officer and each director. If the applicant is a publicly held corporation, it must supply the information for the officer or agent who will have responsibility for the daily operations of the establishment. If the applicant is a partnership, it must supply the information for each partner. Each application shall be accompanied by an investigation fee in an amount equal to the fee established by the state police for conducting a records search multiplied by the number of persons making disclosures and providing consent forms. 
g.  The name of the operator or manager of the massage establishment. If the operator or manager of the massage establishment is not an applicant, then the operator or manager must provide the information required in this section relative to the applicant. 
(2)  Streamlined application process. If any individual required by subsection (1) of this section to disclose information holds a massage therapist permit issued under this article, that individual may supply, in lieu of the information required by subsections (1)d, (1)e and (1)f of this section, such individual's name and permit number and either a statement that no changes have occurred since that individual completed the application for the massage therapist permit or a list of any such changes. 
(3)  Changes in required information. During the term of the permit, the applicant must report to the chief any change in the information required in the permit application within 21 days of learning of the change. 
(Code 1982, § 19.1-13; Ord. No. 1726, 12-9-2002) 
Sec. 8-106. - Issuance or denial. 
(a)  The chief shall act upon the application for a massage establishment permit within 60 days from the date the chief receives the application. 
(b)  If the chief determines from the information contained in the permit application and from the chief's investigation that the proposed establishment will meet the requirements of this division, that neither the applicant, nor any officer or director, or its operator or manager, have committed any disqualifying offenses and are otherwise qualified under this division to engage in such business in the city, the chief shall issue the permit. Each permit issued by the chief shall be the property of the city and shall be returned to the chief in the event it is suspended or revoked in accordance with section 8-50. 
(c)  If the chief determines from the information contained in the permit application and from the chief's investigation that the proposed establishment will not meet the requirements of this division, or that the applicant, an officer or director thereof, or an operator or manager have committed one or more disqualifying offenses or are otherwise unqualified under this division to engage in such business in the city, the chief shall deny the application. 
(d)  If the chief denies an application, the chief shall provide the applicant with written notice setting forth the grounds for the denial. Any appeal shall be filed by the applicant with the city police department within 30 days after an applicant receives the notice and shall specify the grounds for appeal. The city manager shall hold an appeal hearing as promptly as practicable and in no event more than 60 days after the appeal is filed. 
(Code 1982, § 19.1-14; Ord. No. 1726, 12-9-2002) 
Sec. 8-107. - Term. 
    A massage establishment permit shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance, unless sooner suspended or revoked. Within 65 days before the expiration date, a permitted massage establishment may apply for a new permit. 
(Code 1982, § 19.1-15; Ord. No. 1726, 12-9-2002) 
Sec. 8-108. - Permit transfer or change of location. 
(a)  Massage establishment permits are not transferable from one person to another whether by sale, lease, merger, or otherwise. 
(b)  If a privately held corporation or company or a partnership holds a massage establishment permit issued under this division, the transfer of more than ten percent of the ownership of the corporation, company or partnership to a person or entity who was not an owner when the application was made shall cause the automatic expiration of the permit. The expiration shall occur on the date of the transfer. 
(c)  A change of location of a massage establishment may be approved by the chief and the establishment's permit transferred to the new location, provided the establishment continues to comply with all applicable provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1982, § 19.1-16; Ord. No. 1726, 12-9-2002) 
Sec. 8-109. - Permit display. 
    Every person to whom a massage establishment permit is issued shall display the permit in a conspicuous place in the massage establishment, so it may be readily seen by persons entering the premises. 
(Code 1982, § 19.1-17; Ord. No. 1726, 12-9-2002) 
Secs. 8-110-8-131. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - MINIMUM STANDARDS 

Sec. 8-132. - Compliance with zoning provisions. 
    Massage establishments shall be located in a proper zoning district, as specified in this Code. 
(Code 1982, § 19.1-18; Ord. No. 1726, 12-9-2002) 
Sec. 8-133. - Requirements for massage establishments. 
(a)  All massage establishments shall comply with all applicable provisions of the uniform statewide building code, including those provisions relating to lighting, ventilation, toilet facilities and accessibility. 
(b)  Nondisposable tools of the trade shall be disinfected after use upon one client. 
(c)  Walls, ceilings, floors, bathrooms, and all other physical facilities for the establishment shall be kept in good repair and maintained in a sanitary condition. 
(d)  All towels and tissue, all sheets or other coverings shall be used singularly for each client and discarded for laundry or disposal immediately after use. 
(Code 1982, § 19.1-19; Ord. No. 1726, 12-9-2002) 
Sec. 8-134. - Cleanliness of therapists. 
    Massage therapists shall cleanse their hands thoroughly with soap and hot running water immediately before administering each massage. 
(Code 1982, § 19.1-20; Ord. No. 1726, 12-9-2002) 
Sec. 8-135. - Massaging infected clients prohibited. 
    No massage therapist may knowingly massage any client infected with any fungus or other skin infections, nor shall service be performed on any client exhibiting skin inflammation or eruptions, unless a licensed physician certifies that a client may be safely served. 
(Code 1982, § 19.1-21; Ord. No. 1726, 12-9-2002) 
Sec. 8-136. - Massage prohibitions for ill therapists. 
    No massage therapist may massage any client when the massage therapist is suffering from any communicable disease transmitted by skin-to-skin contact or through the secretions of the respiratory tract, including, but not limited to, infectious tuberculosis, measles, meningococcal disease, mumps, chicken pox and hemophilus influenzae type B, or from any skin lesions or disease on the hands or arms, or any nasal or ear discharge or inflamed eyes. 
(Code 1982, § 19.1-22; Ord. No. 1726, 12-9-2002) 
Sec. 8-137. - Massaging, touching, exposing erogenous areas. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person in a massage establishment, or during the course of an out-call massage transaction, to touch, with any part of such person's body or with any object, another person's clothed or unclothed erogenous area. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person, in a massage establishment or during the course of an out-call massage transaction, to fail to conceal that person's erogenous areas with a fully opaque covering while in the presence of others. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person owning, operating or managing a massage establishment or an out-call massage business to knowingly cause or allow, in or about such massage establishment or as part of an out-call massage business, any agent, employee or any other person under that person's control or supervision to perform any act prohibited by this section. 
(Code 1982, § 19.1-23; Ord. No. 1726, 12-9-2002) 
Sec. 8-138. - Restrictions on out-call massage. 
    An out-call massage may be administered only in the residence of the client. The term "residence" means one or more rooms in a residential building or residential portion of a building which are arranged, designed, used or intended for use as a complete, independent living facility which includes permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. The term "residence" shall not include a motel, hotel, or other accommodation used for transient occupancy. 
(Code 1982, § 19.1-24; Ord. No. 1726, 12-9-2002) 
Secs. 8-139-8-159. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authorizing city to regulate peddling, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1114. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-160. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Canvasser means any individual, whether a resident of the city or not, who engages in opinion sampling, poll taking or other similar activity from house to house, door to door, street to street or from place to place, in person, for compensation, or who is directed or supervised by a person who is compensated. 
    Chief of police means the chief of the city police department or chief's agent or designee. 
    Peddler means any person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle, motor truck or any other type of conveyance, from house to house, from store to store or established outlet, or from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares and merchandise for the purpose of offering and exposing the same for sale or making sales to purchasers, or who, by traveling from house-to-house, shall sell or offer the same for sale from a wagon, automotive vehicle, motor truck or other vehicle or conveyance, whether or not such individuals are responding to appointments with householders or other individuals prearranged by telephone, telegraph, correspondence or other means of communication. One who solicits orders and, as a separate transaction, makes deliveries to purchasers as a part of the scheme or design to evade the provisions of this article shall be deemed a peddler, subject to the provisions of this article. The term "peddler" shall also include the terms "hawker" and "huckster" and shall also include persons who operate from a stationary location on a street, alley, sidewalk, park or other public place. 
    Resident means any person who has for the six months immediately preceding the date of such person's application under this article maintained that person's place of abode in the city. 
    Solicitor means any individual, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck or any other type of conveyance from house-to-house or from street-to-street, taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares or merchandise, subscriptions, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale, a sample of such goods, wares or merchandise or whether such individual is collecting advance payments on such sales or not, and whether or not such individuals are responding to appointments with householders or other individuals prearranged by telephone, telegraph, correspondence or other means of communication. The term "solicitor" shall include any person who, for that person or for any other person or corporation, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building or structure, lodginghouse, apartment, shop or any other place within the city for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery. 
(Code 1973, § 26-1; Code 1982, § 24-1; Ord. No. 940; Ord. No. 946) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 8-161. - Exemptions. 
    The term "peddler," "solicitor" or "canvasser," as used in this article, shall not be construed to include the following: 
(1)  Farmers or truck gardeners selling, offering for sale or soliciting orders for any products grown, raised or produced by them. 
(2)  Vendors of milk, bakery products, groceries or other food products of any kind. 
(3)  Persons peddling, soliciting or canvassing where the proceeds derived from such peddling, soliciting or canvassing are to be used solely for charitable or religious purposes; or on behalf of a qualified and filed candidate for public office, or on behalf of a political party. 
(4)  Salesmen or agents for wholesale houses or firms who solicit orders from or sell to retail dealers in the city for resale or other commercial purposes, or to manufacturers for manufacturing or other commercial purposes. 
(5)  Children of or under the age of 16 years, except when they are acting as agents of adults covered by this article. 
(6)  Route salesmen or other persons having established customers in the city to which they make periodic deliveries, who may make calls upon prospective customers within their regular service area to solicit an order for future periodic route deliveries. 
(Code 1973, § 26-2; Code 1982, § 24-2; Ord. No. 940) 
Sec. 8-162. - Bond. 
    Every applicant, not a resident, shall file with the city treasurer a surety bond running to the city in the amount of $2,000.00, with a corporate surety licensed to do business in the state, conditioned that the applicant shall comply fully with all provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city and the statutes of the state regulating and concerning the business of peddling, soliciting or canvassing and guaranteeing to any citizen of the city that all money paid will be accounted for and applied according to the representations of the peddler, solicitor or canvasser; and further guaranteeing to any citizen of the city doing business with such peddler, solicitor or canvasser that the property purchased will be delivered according to the representations of such solicitor and that such property purchased meets the standards as represented by the peddler, solicitor or canvasser. Action on such bond may be brought by and in the name of the aggrieved person. A blanket bond, otherwise meeting the requirements of this section, shall be acceptable. 
(Code 1973, § 26-3; Code 1982, § 24-3; Ord. No. 940) 
Secs. 8-163-8-192. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Licenses, § 40-56 et seq. 

Sec. 8-193. - Required; payment of license tax required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any solicitor, canvasser or peddler to engage in such business or act within the meaning and application of this article within the boundaries of the city without first obtaining a license in compliance with the provisions of this division, and paying the license tax required by chapter 40. 
(Code 1973, § 26-5; Code 1982, § 24-4; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-1994) 
Sec. 8-194. - Application and renewal requirements. 
(a)  Contents. Application for such licenses and such renewals shall be made in person on forms provided by the chief of police, and the applicant shall provide the following information under oath: 
(1)  Pertinent personal data, including name and business address and home address, and a statement of residency. 
(2)  Description of physical condition. 
(3)  If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship. 
(4)  A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold or services to be performed. 
(5)  Traffic and criminal record. 
(6)  The length of time the applicant intends to do business in the city. 
(7)  If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with the license number or other means of identification. 
(8)  The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale, are manufactured or produced, where such goods or products are located at the time such application is filed, and the proposed method of delivery. 
(9)  The names of at least two persons who maintain their permanent place of abode in the city, who will certify as to the applicant's good character and business responsibility, or in lieu of the names of references, such other available evidence of the good character and business responsibility of the applicant as will enable an investigator properly to evaluate such character and business responsibility. 
(b)  Fingerprint; photograph. Each applicant shall be required to be fingerprinted and photographed by the city police department. 
(c)  Medical statement. If the chief of police has probable cause to believe that an applicant may not be free of contagious disease, the chief may require a statement by a physician licensed to practice in the state, dated not more than ten days prior to its submission certifying the applicant to be free of contagious, infectious or other communicable disease. 
(Code 1973, § 26-6; Code 1982, § 24-5) 
Sec. 8-195. - Application fee. 
    No application shall be accepted until the applicant shall first have paid the city treasurer $10.00 to cover processing and the costs of the investigation prescribed by this article, and sum shall not be returned to the applicant in the event the license is refused. 
(Code 1973, § 26-7; Code 1982, § 24-6; Ord. No. 940) 
Sec. 8-196. - Investigation of applicant. 
    The chief of police shall have an investigation made of the applicant. A confidential record of the investigation shall be kept on file by the chief of police and be made available to the city manager upon request; a complete disclosure of such record shall also be made available to the applicant upon the applicant's request in the event the application is denied. 
(Code 1973, § 26-8; Code 1982, § 24-7; Ord. No. 946) 
Sec. 8-197. - Issuance or denial; recordkeeping. 
(a)  Unless, as a result of the investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant is found to be unsatisfactory or incompatible with the health, safety and welfare of the public, the chief of police or the chief's authorized agent will, within 30 days following the date of the filing of the application, notify the applicant and issue a license containing the information required in section 8-194, and such other information as the chief deems pertinent; provided the security required in section 8-162 shall have been furnished. A resident may be issued a temporary permit within 72 hours after filing the application based upon a preliminary investigation by the chief of police, which permit shall remain in effect until the issuance, or denial, of a license as herein provided. 
(b)  The chief of police may, on the finding that the health, safety and welfare of the public demands, refuse to issue a license to an applicant for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Conviction of any felony within the five years immediately preceding the date of filing of the application. 
(2)  Conviction of any crime involving moral turpitude, including, but not limited to, violation of any law regulating sexual conduct or the production, sale, possession or use of narcotics; provided, that such conviction shall have been within the five years immediately preceding filing of the application. 
(3)  Fraud, misrepresentation or intentional false statement of material or relevant facts contained in the application. 
No license shall be issued to any applicant proposing the sale of goods or services which would create an unreasonable risk to the personal safety of a purchaser or user. 
(c)  In the event the chief of police denies a license, the chief shall notify the applicant in writing within five days of the decision and in no event more than 30 days from the date of filing of the application. 
(d)  The chief of police shall keep a permanent record of all licenses issued or denied. 
(Code 1973, § 26-9; Code 1982, § 24-8) 
Sec. 8-198. - Contents. 
    A license issued under this division shall contain a license number, the name and photograph of the licensee, the kind of goods to be sold thereunder, the name of the employer, the date of issuance and the date of expiration and the signature of the chief of police. 
(Code 1973, § 26-10; Code 1982, § 24-9) 
Sec. 8-199. - Term; nontransferable; renewal. 
    No license shall be valid for a period longer than one year from the date of its issuance. No license shall be transferable. A license shall expire automatically at such time as an applicant changes employer. No license shall be renewed after expiration or revocation, but applicants may apply for a new license. 
(Code 1973, § 26-11; Code 1982, § 24-10) 
Sec. 8-200. - Failure to carry and exhibit license. 
    It shall be unlawful for peddlers, canvassers or solicitors to fail to carry their licenses at all times while engaged in peddling, soliciting or canvassing in the city, and it shall also be unlawful for any such peddler, solicitor or canvasser to fail or refuse to exhibit such license when requested by any householder or law enforcement officer. 
(Code 1973, § 26-12; Code 1982, § 24-11) 
Sec. 8-201. - Revocation. 
(a)  Any license issued under the provisions of this division may be revoked by the chief of police after notice and hearing, for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Conviction of any felony. 
(2)  Conviction of any crime involving moral turpitude, including, but not limited to, violation of any law regulating sexual conduct, or the production, sale, possession or use of narcotics. 
(3)  Fraud, misrepresentation or intentional false statement of material or relevant facts contained in the application. 
(4)  Fraud, misrepresentation or intentional false statement made in the course of carrying on the business for which the license was issued. 
(5)  Conduct of the business for which the license was issued in an unlawful manner or in such manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or a danger to the health, safety and welfare of the public, including but not limited to the following: 
a.  Use of a threat, expressed or implied, or of coercion as inducement to make a sale; or 
b.  Refusal to discontinue efforts to make a sale when specifically requested to do so by the prospective purchaser. 
(6)  Cancellation or termination of the bond required in section 8-162. 
(b)  Written notice of the hearing for revocation of a license under the provisions of this section shall be given, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at the licensee's last known local business address at least five days prior to the date set for hearing. 
(c)  The chief of police shall keep a permanent record of all licenses revoked. 
(Code 1973, § 26-13; Code 1982, § 24-12) 
Sec. 8-202. - Suspension. 
    Any license issued under this division may be suspended by the chief of police without notice or hearing for a period of not more than ten days, in the event the licensee is charged with a criminal offense, the conviction of which would be grounds for revocation, under section 8-197(b)(1) and (2), or in the event the alleged occurrence of the event described in section 8-201(a)(3) or (a)(6). A notice of continuance of such suspension shall be given the licensee within ten days but suspension may be continued in effect until the charges upon which it is grounded have been disposed of and the licensee shall be entitled to an appeal as hereinafter provided. 
(Code 1973, § 26-14; Code 1982, § 24-13) 
Sec. 8-203. - Filing application after denial or revocation. 
    No application for a license under the provisions of the division may be filed by an individual, whose application for a license has been denied or whole license has been revoked, for a period of one year from the date of such denial or revocation. 
(Code 1973, § 26-15; Code 1982, § 24-14) 
Sec. 8-204. - Appeals. 
(a)  From decisions of the chief of police. 
(1)  Right of appeal. If the chief of police denies, suspends or revokes any license, any person affected may appeal such decision to the city manager. 
(2)  Procedure. 
a.  The appeal shall be filed by the appellant or the appellant's attorney in the office of the chief of police. The appellant or the appellant's attorney shall file a written notice of appeal signed by the appellant or the appellant's attorney requesting a hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the reasons. Such appeal shall be filed within 30 days of receipt of the notice of denial, suspension or revocation. 
b.  Upon receipt of such notice of appeal, the chief of police shall notify the city manager and the city manager shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall give the appellant or the appellant's attorney reasonable notice. All hearings on appeals shall be scheduled and determined as promptly as practicable and in no event more than 30 days from the date the notice of appeal is filed. 
c.  The city manager shall consider the case record as well as any statement offered by any interested party and shall consider the matter de novo and shall, upon the basis of the record before the city manager, affirm or reverse the decision of the chief of police. 
d.  If the city manager affirms the decision of the chief of police to deny, suspend or revoke a license, the denial, suspension or revocation shall be effective from the date of the city manager's order, except as hereinafter provided in this section. 
e.  If the city manager reverses the decision of the chief of police, the city manager shall direct the chief of police to issue or restore the license in accordance with the order of the city manager. 
(b)  From decisions of the city manager. The decisions of the city manager shall in all cases be final; except, that any appellant may, within 30 days after the rendering of such decision, appeal to the circuit court of the county. The effect of the order of the city manager shall be stayed pending a decision by the court where such an appeal has been filed. 
(Code 1973, § 26-16; Code 1982, § 24-15; Ord. No. 946) 
Sec. 8-205. - False statements. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly and intentionally to make or cause to be made any false statement in writing for the purpose of procuring or retaining a license under this division. 
(Code 1973, § 26-17; Code 1982, § 24-16) 
Secs. 8-206-8-233. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS AND JEWELS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Business, professional, occupational licenses, § 40-456 et seq. 
State Law reference- Precious metals dealers, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4100 et seq. 

Sec. 8-234. - License required. 
    No itinerant dealer or dealer regularly licensed to do business in the city may purchase secondhand gold, silver, platinum, gems or semiprecious stones or make loans for which secondhand precious metals or gems are received and held as security without a license, as provided herein; nor shall any dealer hold himself out by advertising or otherwise as a purchaser located in the city without first obtaining said license. Such advertising prior to the granting of the license shall constitute cause for its denial. Such license application shall be made on a form prescribed by the chief of police. 
(Code 1982, § 24-17; Ord. No. 942; Ord. No. 958; Ord. No. 1000, 2-22-1982) 
Sec. 8-235. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dealer. 
(1)  The term "dealer" means any person, firm, partnership or corporation engaged at any location in the city in the business of purchasing secondhand precious metals or gems; removing in any manner precious metals or gems from manufactured articles not then owned by the person, firm, partnership, or corporation; or buying, acquiring, or selling precious metals or gems removed from manufactured articles. As used herein, the term "dealer" includes employers and principals on whose behalf the purchase or loan was made and all employees and agents who personally make such purchases and loans. When any act is required by a corporation, it shall be performed by its president. 
(2)  The term "dealer" shall not be construed to include persons engaged in the following: 
a.  Purchases of precious metals or gems directly from other dealers, manufacturers, or wholesalers for retail or wholesale inventories, provided the selling dealer has complied with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4100 et seq., or any local ordinance which is substantially similar, and provides copies of any reports required to the chief of police. 
b.  Purchases of precious metals or gems from a duly qualified fiduciary who is disposing of the assets of the estate being administered by such fiduciary in the administration of an estate. 
c.  Acceptance by a retail merchant of trade-in merchandise previously sold by such retail merchant to the person presenting that merchandise for trade-in. 
d.  Repairing, restoring or designing jewelry by a retail merchant, if such activities are within the merchant's normal course of business. 
e.  Purchases of precious metals or gems by industrial refiners and manufacturers, insofar as such purchases are made directly from retail merchants, wholesalers, dealers or by mail originating outside the commonwealth. 
f.  Persons regularly engaged in the business of purchasing and processing nonprecious scrap metals which incidentally may contain traces of precious metals recoverable as a by-product. 
(3)  Shall not apply to any bank, branch, trust company or bank holding company, or any wholly owned subsidiary, engaged in buying and selling gold and silver bullion. Additionally, if the applicant is a corporation, firm, partnership or association, the term "dealer" shall include every person who is an officer of or who owns five percent or more of the stock of such corporation, and every person who has any ownership interest in a nonstock corporation, and every member of any such firm, partnership or association whether or not such person actively participates in the business of the corporation. 
    Gems or semiprecious stones means any item containing or having any precious or semiprecious stones customarily used in jewelry or ornamentation. 
    Itinerant dealer means any person, firm, partnership, or corporation engaged at any location in the city in the business of purchasing secondhand gold, silver, platinum, gems or semiprecious stones, or making loans for which such precious metals, gems or stones are received and held as security, who conducts such business from a motor vehicle or hires, leases, uses or occupies any building or structure or any part thereof from which to conduct such business for a period or term of less than one year. For the purposes of this division, any person conducting such business from a hotel or motel room, or from any other building or structure or part thereof, not that person's own, for which he has a lease or rental agreement, written or oral, for any period or term of less than one year, shall be presumed to be an itinerant dealer. Additionally, if the applicant is a corporation, firm, partnership or association, the term "itinerant dealer" shall include every person who is an officer of or who owns five percent or more of the stock of such corporation, and every person who has any ownership interest in a nonstock corporation, and every member of any such firm, partnership or association whether or not such person actively participates in the business of the corporation. 
    Precious metals means any item containing as part of its composition in any degree gold, silver, platinum or pewter, except coins. 
(Code 1982, § 24-18; Ord. No. 942; Ord. No. 958; Ord. No. 1000, 2-22-1982) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Definitions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4100. 
Sec. 8-236. - License issuance, application, contents, term and fee. 
(a)  Licenses shall be issued by the chief of police to any applicant able to produce satisfactory evidence of good character who has not been convicted of felony or a crime of moral turpitude within the immediate past seven years prior to the date of application, upon payment of the required fees, posting of the required bonds and compliance with all other requirements of this division. Application for such license shall be made on forms prescribed by the chief of police, the information upon which shall include the applicant dealer's full name, any aliases, address, age, sex, date of birth, social security number, criminal record if any, fingerprints and photograph, and the name, address and telephone number of the applicant's employer or proposed employer and the location of the dealer's place of business. 
(b)  The license shall designate the premises on which the licensee shall conduct business and specify the date upon which the business may be conducted. The license shall be issued on a calendar-year basis; except that itinerant dealer licenses shall be valid for the period of time stated in the application or one year, whichever is shorter. 
(c)  A fee of $100.00 per day shall be charged to itinerant dealers and a fee of $200.00 per year, in addition to their regular business license, shall be charged to dealers regularly licensed to do business in the city. Such license may be renewed in the same manner as such license was initially obtained with an annual fee of $250.00. 
(d)  Before a license may be issued, the dealer must have all weighing devices used in the dealer's business inspected and approved by state weights and measures officials and present written evidence of such approval to the chief of police. 
(e)  If the business of the dealer is not operated without interruption, with Saturdays, Sundays, and recognized holidays excepted, the dealer shall notify the chief of police of all closings and reopenings of such business. The business of a dealer shall be conducted only from the fixed and permanent location specified in the dealer's application for a license. 
(Code 1982, § 24-19; Ord. No. 942; Ord. No. 958; Ord. No. 1000, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1881, 8-13-2012) 
State Law reference- Requirements, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4108. 
Sec. 8-237. - License nontransferable; display of license. 
(a)  The license issued hereunder shall be a personal privilege and shall not be transferable, nor shall there be any abatement of the tax upon such license by reason of the fact that the licensee shall have exercised the privilege for any period of less than that for which it was granted. The license shall at all times be kept publicly exposed by the licensee on the business premises. 
(b)  If any licensee is convicted of any felony or crime of moral turpitude, or of any violation of the terms of this article, such person's license may be revoked. If such person is an officer or owner of five percent or more of the stock of a licensed corporation, or has any ownership interest in a licensed nonstock corporation, or is a member of a licensed firm, partnership or association, the license of such corporation, firm, partnership or association may also be revoked. Such revocation shall be for a period of not less than one year. 
(Code 1982, § 24-20; Ord. No. 942; Ord. No. 958; Ord. No. 1000, 2-22-1982) 
State Law reference- Nontransferable, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4108. 
Sec. 8-238. - False statements on license application. 
    Any false statement made on the application form voids the license ab initio. 
(Code 1982, § 24-21; Ord. No. 942; Ord. No. 958; Ord. No. 1000, 2-22-1982) 
Sec. 8-239. - Records; items purchased to be retained. 
(a)  Every dealer shall keep at the dealer's place of business an accurate and legible record of each purchase of precious metals or gems. The record of each purchase shall be retained by the dealer for at least 24 months and shall set forth the following: 
(1)  A complete description of all precious metals or gems purchased from each seller. The description shall include all names, initials, serial numbers or other identifying marks or monograms on each item purchased, the true weight or carat of any gem, and the price paid for each item; 
(2)  The date, time and place of receiving the items purchased; 
(3)  The full name, residence address, workplace, home and work telephone numbers, date of birth, sex, race, height, weight, hair and eye color, and other identifying marks; 
(4)  Verification of the identification by the exhibition of a government-issued identification card such as a driver's license or military identification card. The record shall contain the type of identification exhibited, the issuing agency, and the number thereon; and 
(5)  A statement of ownership from the seller. 
(b)  The information required by subsections (a)(1)-(3) of this section shall appear on each bill of sale for all precious metals and gems purchased by a dealer. The dealer shall submit the records by transmitting the required information from the records electronically, in a format acceptable to the receiving law enforcement unit, by noon of the next business day. 
(c)  Licensees shall retain within the city, all precious metals or gems purchased or held as security for a minimum of 15 days from the date on which a copy of the bill of sale is received by the chief of police. Until the expiration of this period, the dealer shall not sell, alter, or dispose of a purchased item, in whole or in part, or remove it from the city. 
(d)  If a dealer performs the service of removing precious metals or gems, the dealer shall retain the metals or gems removed and the article from which the removal was made for a period of ten calendar days after receiving such article and precious metals or gems. 
(e)  In the event the chief of police has a reasonable suspicion that an item is stolen or good cause to believe information furnished by the seller is false, the retention period specified in this section may be extended for a time not to exceed seven days. In such event the licensee shall produce that item and shall permit the chief of police or the chief's designee to inspect and photograph the item. Each dealer shall keep and maintain for at least 24 months an accurate and legible record of the name and address of the person to which the dealer sells any precious metal or gems in its original form after the waiting period required herein. This record shall also show the name and address of the seller from whom the dealer purchased such item. 
(Code 1982, § 24-22; Ord. No. 942; Ord. No. 958; Ord. No. 1000, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1881, 8-13-2012) 
State Law reference- Similar state law, Code of Virginia, §§ 54.1-4101, 54.1-4104. 
Sec. 8-240. - Prohibited purchases. 
    No licensee shall purchase or make a loan on precious metals or gems from any seller who is under the age of 18 years. No dealer shall purchase or make a loan on precious metals or gems from anyone whom the licensee believes or has reason to believe is not the owner of said precious metals or gems unless the seller has written and duly authenticated authorization from the owner permitting and directing such sale. 
(Code 1982, § 24-23; Ord. No. 942; Ord. No. 958; Ord. No. 1000, 2-22-1982) 
State Law reference- Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4103. 
Sec. 8-241. - Record of disposition. 
    Each dealer shall maintain, for at least 24 months, an accurate and legible record of the name and address of the person to whom the dealer sells any precious metal or gem in its original form after the waiting period required by Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4104. This record shall also show the name and address of the seller from whom the dealer purchased the item. 
State Law reference- Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4105. 
Sec. 8-242. - Bond required. 
    Every person so licensed shall, at the time of obtaining said license and before the same shall be operative, enter into a recognizance to the city secured by a corporate surety authorized to do business in this commonwealth in the penal sum of $10,000.00 conditioned upon due observance of the terms of this division. In lieu of a bond, a dealer may cause to be issued by a bank authorized to do business in the commonwealth a letter of credit in favor of the city in the sum of $10,000.00, conditioned upon due observance of the terms of this article. A single bond upon an employer or principal may be written or a single letter of credit issued to cover all other principals and all employees and all transactions occurring at a single location. 
(Code 1982, § 24-24; Ord. No. 942; Ord. No. 958; Ord. No. 1000, 2-22-1982) 
State Law reference- Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4106. 
Sec. 8-243. - Private action on bond or letter of credit. 
    Any person aggrieved by the misconduct of any dealer which violated the provisions of this article may maintain an action for recovery in any court of proper jurisdiction against the dealer and his surety. Recovery against the surety shall be only for that amount of the judgment which is unsatisfied by the dealer. 
State Law reference- Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4107. 
Sec. 8-244. - Identification and statement required. 
    No dealer shall purchase precious metals or gems without first: 
(1)  Ascertaining the identity of the seller by requiring an identification issued by a governmental agency with a photograph of the seller and at least one other corroborating means of identification; and 
(2)  Obtaining a statement of ownership from the seller. 
State Law reference- Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4102. 
Sec. 8-245. - Dealer responsibility for records examinations, searches and seizures. 
    Every dealer or the dealer's employee shall admit to the dealer's place of business during regular business hours the chief of police or the chief's designee or any law enforcement officer of the state or federal government. The dealer or the dealer's employee shall permit the officer to: 
(1)  Examine all records required by this division and any article listed in a record which is believed by the officer to be missing or stolen; and 
(2)  Search for and take into possession any article known to the officer to be missing, or known or believed by the officer to have been stolen. 
State Law reference- Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4101.1. 
Sec. 8-246. - Persons aggrieved by misconduct of licensee. 
    If any person shall be aggrieved by the misconduct of any licensee who has violated the provisions of this division, that person may maintain an action for recovery in any court of proper jurisdiction against such dealer and the dealer's surety. Recovery against the surety shall be only for that amount of the judgment, if any, which is unsatisfied by the dealer. 
(Code 1982, § 24-25; Ord. No. 942; Ord. No. 958; Ord. No. 1000, 2-22-1982) 
State Law reference- Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4107. 
Sec. 8-247. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this division shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor for the first offense. Upon conviction of any subsequent offense such person shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Upon the first conviction of a dealer for violation of any provision of this division, the chief of police may revoke the dealer's license for one full year from the date the conviction becomes final. Such revocation shall be mandatory upon a second conviction. 
(Code 1982, § 24-26; Ord. No. 942; Ord. No. 958; Ord. No. 1000, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1488, 9-12-1994) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-4110. 
Secs. 8-248-8-271. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FOOD AND FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference- Authorization for city to regulate preparation, sale, etc., of food, beverages, etc., § 2.04(h). 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation, ch. 20; tax on meals, § 40-224 et seq.; zoning, ch. 48. 
State Law reference- Food and drink, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-5100 et seq.; sanitary requirements for food establishments, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-5106 et seq.; Virginia Food Act, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-5120 et seq.; authority of city to adopt ordinances regarding the sale, preparation and handling of food, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-1109, 35.1-9; preemption of certain ordinances, Code of Virginia, § 35.1-9; regulations of state board of health governing restaurants, Code of Virginia, § 35.1-14. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-272. - Purpose. 
    This article shall be liberally construed and applied to promote the purpose of safeguarding public health and ensuring that food is safe, unadulterated and properly presented when offered to the consumer. 
(Code 1982, § 12.1-2; Ord. No. 1612, § 3, 6-8-1998; Ord. No. 1796, § 12.1-2, 11-13-2006) 
Sec. 8-273. - Food codes adopted. 
(a)  Chapters 1 through 8, inclusive, and all appendices and annexes of the United States Food and Drug Administration, Public Health Service 2005 Food Code (FDA Food Code), as adopted and promulgated by the United States Food and Drug Administration, Public Health Services (FDA/USPHS), including the modifications of the FDA Food Code that are set out in section 8-275, are hereby adopted and incorporated in their entirety into this article, as if fully set forth herein. In the event of conflict or inconsistency between this article and the FDA Food Code, the provisions of this article shall control. When used in the FDA Food Code, the term "health authority" shall mean the director, as defined in section 8-274. 
(b)  A certified copy of the FDA Food Code shall be maintained by the director at the main administrative office of the health department, and it shall be available for review by members of the public. 
(Code 1982, § 12.1-3; Ord. No. 1612, § 3, 6-8-1998; Ord. No. 1713, 12-10-2001; Ord. No. 1796, § 12.1-3, 11-13-2006) 
Sec. 8-274. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this article, including those in the incorporated FDA Food Code, have the meanings given in this section, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Base of operation means a permitted food establishment that contains all of the necessary equipment and storage facilities to support the operation of a mobile food unit. 
    Certificate means the document issued by the director or the document issued by another jurisdiction or private vendor that is accepted by the director, which demonstrates that the individual identified on the certificate has been determined to be a certified food manager or a certified limited food manager. 
    Certified food manager means a person who has passed an examination approved by the director, or an examination in another jurisdiction that is accepted by the director, and has received a certified food manager's certificate issued or recognized by the director. 
    Certified limited food manager means a person who has passed an examination approved by the director, or an examination in another jurisdiction that is accepted by the director, and has received a certified limited food manager's certificate issued or recognized by the director. 
    City council means the city council of the City of Falls Church, Virginia. 
    Conference for Food Protection means the national conference held biennially during the even-numbered years directed by the delegates of the states, territories and District of Columbia who join together with representatives of industry, academic institutions, professional associations and consumer groups to promote food safety and consumer protection by identifying and addressing problems in the production, processing, packaging, distribution, sale and service of foods and adopting sound, uniform procedures which will be accepted by food regulatory agencies and industry. 
    Director means the director of the Fairfax County Department of Health or the designee of the director. 
    FDA Food Code means the 2005 Food Code, as adopted and promulgated by the United States Food and Drug Administration, Public Health Service, as that code may be amended from time to time. 
    Food establishment. 
(1)  The term "food establishment" means an operation that stores, prepares, serves, or otherwise provides food for human consumption, and provides such food directly to a member of the public for consumption. 
(2)  The term "food establishment" shall not include the following: 
a.  An establishment that offers only prepackaged foods that is not potentially hazardous; 
b.  A produce stand that offers only whole, uncut fresh fruits and vegetables; 
c.  A kitchen in a private home that prepares food that is not potentially hazardous, for sale or consumption at a nonprofit or charitable function, if the consumer is informed, by means of a clearly visible sign at the point of sale or consumption, that the food was prepared in a kitchen that is not subject to regulation or inspection by the director; 
d.  A kitchen in a private home that prepares and offers food to guests for an exchange of consideration, if the home is owner-occupied, the number of available guest bedrooms does not exceed six, breakfast is the only meal offered, the number of guests served does not exceed 18, and the consumer is informed by statements contained in published advertisements, mailed brochures or signs posted in the registration or dining area that the food is prepared in a kitchen that is not regulated and inspected by the director; 
e.  Private homes or vehicles where food is prepared or served for noncommercial consumption by the owners, occupants or their guests; 
f.  A food processing plant; 
g.  Convenience stores or gas stations that have 15 or fewer seats at which food is served to the public on the premises of the convenience store or gas station and are not associated with a national or regional restaurant chain. 
    Limited food establishment means a food establishment that serves only hotdogs or frankfurter-type foods, prepackaged foods or foods that are not potentially hazardous foods. 
    Limited-service mobile food unit means a limited food establishment that is designed to be readily moveable. 
    Mobile food unit means a food establishment that is designed to be readily moveable. 
    Permit means the license issued by the director that authorizes a person to operate a food establishment. 
    Person in charge means the individual present in a food establishment who is responsible for the food service operation at the time of an inspection authorized by this article. If no single individual is responsible for the food service operation, then any employee present shall be deemed the person in charge. 
    Youth athletic activity means an organized event or activity exclusively for children of an age eligible for enrollment in city public schools or younger, where such children participate in sports, physical exercises, or athletic competition. 
    Youth athletic concession stand means a food establishment, as defined in this section, that is located and operated at a youth athletic activity, and that operates for not more than three out of seven days per week and for not more than ten consecutive weeks in total duration. 
(Code 1982, § 12.1-4; Ord. No. 1612, § 3, 6-8-1998; Ord. No. 1713, 12-10-2001; Ord. No. 1796, § 12.1-4, 11-13-2006) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 8-275. - Modifications to FDA Food Code. 
    The following sections of the FDA Food Code, as incorporated into the Code of the city, are modified as follows: 
Section 2-102.11(B), 2-102.20, 8-201.11, 8-20.12, 8-303.10 and 8-304.10 are deleted. 
Section 3-501-16(A)(2)(b)(ii) and 3-501.17(A)(2)(b) of the FDA Food Code is modified to read: The equipment is upgraded or replaced to maintain food at a temperature of 5;deg;C (41;deg;F) or less by January 1, 2008. 
Section 4-205.10 is amended to read: 
(1)  Food equipment, as defined in section 1-201.10(B)(25) Equipment, of the 2005 FDA Model Food Code, that is certified or classified for sanitation by an American National Standards Institute (ANSI)-accredited certification program will be deemed to comply with parts 4-1 and 4-2 of this chapter. The definition of equipment shall not include kitchenware, tableware or utensils. 
(2)  Food equipment in a food establishment shall be: 
a.  Certified or classified for sanitation by an American National Standards Institute (ANSI)-accredited certification program; or 
b.  Certified or classified for sanitation by an equivalent certification program to that specified in subparagraph (1) of this paragraph; or 
c.  Approved by the regulatory authority before installation and/or use. 
Section 6-402.11 is amended to read: "Public toilet rooms shall be provided for consumers whenever seating for consumers is provided on the premises. Consumers shall not be permitted to gain access to toilet rooms bypassing through a kitchen, food preparation, food storage, or utensil washing area. Toilet rooms shall be conveniently located and accessible to employees during all hours of operation. Toilet rooms must be entirely separate and apart from any rooms or areas used for utensil washing or for the manufacture, storage, and handling of food products. Public and employee toilet facilities shall be installed according to and in the number required by the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code (VUSBC)." 
Section 8-802.10(A) of annex 1 is amended to read: If admission to the premises of a food establishment is denied or other circumstances exist that would justify an inspection order under law, to make an inspection that includes the recordation of information by any means of audio-visual recordation including (but not limited to) photography, tape-recording and videotaping. 
(Code 1982, § 12.1-5; Ord. No. 1612, § 3, 6-8-1998; Ord. No. 1713, 12-10-2001; Ord. No. 1796, § 12.1-5, 11-13-2006) 
Sec. 8-276. - Penalties. 
    It shall be unlawful for a person to fail to comply with any provision of this article, including a provision of the FDA Food Code that applies to such person. It also shall be unlawful for any food establishment, limited food establishment, mobile food unit or limited-service mobile food unit to fail to comply with any provision of this chapter that applies to it. A person who fails to comply with any applicable provision shall be in violation of this article. The owner of any such food establishment or mobile food unit which fails to comply with any applicable provision shall be in violation of this article. Each violation of this article is punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor in accordance with state law. The criminal penalty provided in this section shall be in addition to the administrative remedies set forth elsewhere in this article. 
(Code 1982, § 12.1-20; Ord. No. 1612, § 3, 6-8-1998; Ord. No. 1796, § 12.1-20, 11-13-2006) 
Secs. 8-277-8-298. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MOBILE UNITS 

Sec. 8-299. - Identification. 
    Mobile food units and limited-service mobile food units shall comply with the requirements of this division. All units are to be clearly identified with the trade name the unit is operated under and a contact phone number conspicuously displayed on both sides of the unit. 
(Code 1982, § 12.1-6; Ord. No. 1612, § 3, 6-8-1998; Ord. No. 1796, § 12.1-6, 11-13-2006) 
Sec. 8-300. - Requirements for types of mobile food units. 
(a)  A mobile food unit shall be equipped with a hand sink and a three-compartment sink. The director may waive the requirement for a three-compartment sink if the menu items dispensed from the unit do not require extensive preparation and the unit has access to a three-compartment sink at the base of operation. 
(b)  A limited-service mobile food unit shall be equipped with a hand sink and a three-compartment sink. The director may waive the requirement for a hand sink if only prepackaged foods are to be dispensed or if an alternate method to handwashing, approved by the director, is used. Such alternate methods may include, but are not limited to, use of disposable handwashing towelettes, disposable gloves, sanitizing solutions that meet the specifications of 21 CFR 178.1010 or other techniques approved by the director. The director may waive the requirement for a three-compartment sink if the limited-service mobile food unit has access to a three-compartment sink at the base of operations or only prepackaged foods are to be dispensed. 
(Code 1982, § 12.1-7; Ord. No. 1612, § 3, 6-8-1998; Ord. No. 1796, § 12.1-7, 11-13-2006) 
Sec. 8-301. - Single-service utensils. 
    Mobile food units and limited-service mobile food units shall dispense only single-service utensils for use by the customer. 
(Code 1982, § 12.1-8; Ord. No. 1612, § 3, 6-8-1998; Ord. No. 1796, § 12.1-8, 11-13-2006) 
Sec. 8-302. - Base of operations. 
    Mobile food units and limited-service mobile food units shall operate from a base of operation that possesses a food establishment permit issued in accordance with this division. The director may waive this requirement if the mobile food unit or limited-service mobile food unit meets all construction standards applicable to the food items served by the unit. The director may allow a mobile food unit or limited-service mobile food unit to operate from a base of operation outside of the city, if the base of operation meets basic sanitation requirements and is permitted by another jurisdiction. 
(Code 1982, § 12.1-9; Ord. No. 1612, § 3, 6-8-1998; Ord. No. 1796, § 12.1-9, 11-13-2006) 
Secs. 8-303-8-322. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS; COMPLIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 8-323. - Permits for food establishments. 
(a)  Required; term. No person shall operate a food establishment unless that person possesses a valid permit issued by the director. Only a person who complies with the requirements of this article shall be entitled to receive or retain such a permit. Permits are not transferable. A valid permit shall be posted in every food establishment in a conspicuous place in the public view. Food establishment permits are issued for a calendar year and expire on December 31 regardless of the month of issue. 
(b)  Application, renewal fee. An initial application fee and an annual renewal application fee shall be assessed for each permitted food establishment, including temporary food stands operating less than 14 days in accordance with section 8-404.1. A portion of this fee is designated to support a program of food safety education to include, for example, but not be limited to, a quarterly newsletter, food advisories and food safety publications. Such fee shall not be applicable to food establishments operated by the city public schools; or to any city agency; however, such fees shall apply to private vendors subcontracted by the city to operate food establishments. The application fee shall be based on a calendar year and shall be due and payable to the county health department on or before December 31 or upon initial application. The fee shall not be prorated. An additional fee shall be assessed for renewal applications received after December 31. 
(c)  Failure to file. Establishments failing to file the required application for renewal of the permit will be operating without a valid permit and will be subject to immediate closure in accordance with section 8-330. 
(Code 1982, § 12.1-10; Ord. No. 1612, § 3, 6-8-1998; Ord. No. 1713, 12-10-2001; Ord. No. 1796, § 12.1-10, 11-13-2006; Ord. No. 1836, 11-23-2009) 
Cross reference- Business, professional, occupational licenses, § 40-456 et seq. 
Sec. 8-324. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The director may exempt coffee and related beverage services and service areas of such one-time events or affairs from such provisions or requirements of this division as the director may deem advisable upon determining that the operation of such service, service areas, events or affairs will not adversely affect the public health. 
(b)  The provisions of this division shall not apply to youth athletic concession stands at youth athletic activities, if such stands are promoted or sponsored by either a youth athletic association or by any charitable nonprofit organization or group which has been recognized as being part of the recreational program of the city by ordinance or resolution of the city council; provided, however, that the director, or a qualified person designated by the director, shall require such concession stands to be operated incompliance with division 5 of this article. 
(Code 1982, § 12.1-11; Ord. No. 1612, § 3, 6-8-1998; Ord. No. 1713, 12-10-2001; Ord. No. 1796, § 12.1-11, 11-13-2006) 
Sec. 8-325. - Food manager certificate and responsibility. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate a food establishment unless it is under the immediate control of a certified food manager; provided that a limited food establishment shall not be in violation of this subsection, if it is under the immediate control of a certified limited food manager. 
(b)  The food manager or limited food manager shall be responsible for training food service personnel in sanitary food handling techniques and proper methods of food protection, and for ensuring that good public health and food protection practices and sanitary techniques in manufacturing, storing, serving and transporting foods are used at all times on the premises under control of the food manager. 
(Code 1982, § 12.1-12; Ord. No. 1612, § 3, 6-8-1998; Ord. No. 1796, § 12.1-12, 11-13-2006) 
Sec. 8-326. - Issuance of food manager certificate. 
(a)  Any person desiring to obtain a certificate required by section 8-325, shall apply in writing on forms provided by the director or on forms accepted by the director. Such application shall include the name and address of the applicant, the location and type of the proposed food establishment and the signature of the applicant. The director may, by specific contract issued in accordance with appropriate administrative procedures, designate a private vendor to issue, on the director's behalf, a food manager certificate to any person who successfully complies with the provisions of this division. 
(b)  A food manager certificate shall be issued only to a person who has passed a food manager certification examination from a food protection manager certification program that is evaluated and listed by an accrediting agency recognized by the conference for food protection. 
(c)  A food manager certificate shall be issued in the name of an individual applicant, shall not be assignable or transferable, shall be valid for a period of five years from the date of notification of the successful completion of an approved exam and shall remain the property of the issuing authority. 
(d)  A food manager certificate shall be renewed for a five-year period upon passing a food manager certification examination from a food protection manager certification program that is evaluated and listed by an accrediting agency recognized by the conference for food protection. 
(e)  A limited food manager certificate shall be issued only to a person who has passed a limited food manager certification examination approved by the director. 
(f)  A limited food manager certificate shall be issued in the name of an individual applicant, shall not be assignable or transferable, shall be valid only for a period of five years from the date of notification of the successful completion of the approved exam and shall remain the property of the issuing authority. 
(g)  A limited food manager certificate shall be renewed for a five-year period upon passing a limited food manager certification examination approved by the director. 
(h)  If the applicant's certificate has been revoked or suspended during the preceding five years, the applicant shall retake and pass either a food manager certification examination from a food protection manager certification program that is evaluated and listed by an accrediting agency recognized by the conference for food protection or a limited food manager certification examination approved by the director, whichever is appropriate. 
(Code 1982, § 12.1-13; Ord. No. 1612, § 3, 6-8-1998; Ord. No. 1796, § 12.1-13, 11-13-2006) 
Sec. 8-327. - Suspension of permit or certificate in emergencies. 
(a)  If the director deems an emergency to exist, the director may without warning, notice or hearing, order the suspension of any permit or certificate issued under this division if the holder of the permit or certificate does not comply with the requirements of this division, or if the operation of the food establishment does not comply with the requirements of this division, or if the operation of the food establishment otherwise constitutes a substantial and imminent hazard to public health. Suspension is effective upon service of the notice required by subsection (b) of this section. When a permit is suspended, all food handling operations at the food establishment shall immediately cease. When a certificate is suspended, food handling operations shall immediately cease unless another certified food manager or, where appropriate, certified limited food manager is present and in control. If the reason for the suspension is eliminated prior to the suspension being sustained by the director, the suspension shall be terminated. 
(b)  Whenever a permit or certificate has been ordered suspended, the holder of the permit or certificate or the person in charge shall be notified in writing that the permit or certificate is suspended effective upon service of the notice and that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if written request for a hearing is filed with the director by the holder of the permit or certificate within ten days. The holder of the permit or certificate shall be afforded an opportunity for hearing within 20 days of receipt by the director of a request for a hearing from the holder. If no written request for a hearing is filed within ten days, the suspension is sustained. The director may end a suspension at any time if the reason for suspension no longer exists. 
(c)  The director, in lieu of suspending a permit, may suspend the applicability of the permit to a specific commissary or specific products. 
(d)  Prior to the reinstatement of any permit that has been suspended a permit reinstatement fee shall be paid to the director in accordance with section 8-404.2. 
(Code 1982, § 12.1-14; Ord. No. 1612, § 3, 6-8-1998; Ord. No. 1796, § 12.1-14, 11-13-2006; Ord. No. 1836, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 8-327.1. - Enforcement inspections. 
(a)  Whenever the same critical violation is documented and is uncorrected at two consecutive inspections (routine, critical procedure, complaint or follow-up) or if a violation, which contributes to a food-borne illness risk factor, is corrected at the initial inspection but is present at the follow-up inspection, the food establishment will receive a notice of violation with a specific timeframe for a follow-up enforcement inspection. A reinspection fee shall be assessed for each occurrence of enforcement inspection required in accordance with section 8-404-2. 
(b)  A reinspection fee shall be assessed if more than one follow-up inspection is required in order to issue a permit to a new facility or a facility undergoing a change of ownership. A reinspection fee shall be assessed for each occurrence of additional follow-up inspection in accordance with section 8-404.2. 
(Ord. No. 1836, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 8-328. - Revocation of permit or certificate. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this division, the director may, after providing the opportunity for a hearing, order the revocation of a permit or certificate issued under this division for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this division or for interference with the director in the performance of the duties defined in this division. 
(b)  Prior to ordering the revocation, the director shall notify, in writing, the holder of the permit or certificate or the person in charge of the specific reasons for which the permit or certificate is to be revoked, and that the permit or certificate shall be revoked on the tenth day following service of the notice unless a written request for a hearing is filed with the director by the holder of the permit or certificate within such ten-day period. If no request for hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the permit or certificate shall be revoked by order of the director and the revocation shall be final. 
(Code 1982, § 12.1-15; Ord. No. 1612, § 3, 6-8-1998; Ord. No. 1796, § 12.1-15, 11-13-2006) 
Sec. 8-329. - Service of notices. 
    A notice required by this division is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit or certificate or to the person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit or certificate. A copy of the notice shall be filed with the records of the health department. 
(Code 1982, § 12.1-16; Ord. No. 1612, § 3, 6-8-1998; Ord. No. 1796, § 12.1-16, 11-13-2006) 
Sec. 8-330. - Closing of food establishments. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this division, the director shall order the closure of any food establishment which is operated without the permit required by section 8-323, or is operated without a certified food manager being in control as required by section 8-325. The closure order shall be in writing, shall specifically state the reason for the closure and shall clearly specify the compliance requirements necessary to have the order revoked. The sheriff of the city shall enforce the closure order until it is rescinded by the director in writing. Upon receipt of satisfactory proof of compliance with the written requirements set forth in the closure order, the director shall immediately issue a written rescission of the order. 
(Code 1982, § 12.1-17; Ord. No. 1612, § 3, 6-8-1998; Ord. No. 1796, § 12.1-17, 11-13-2006) 
Sec. 8-331. - Hearings. 
    The hearings provided for in this division shall be conducted by the director at a time and place designated by the director. Any oral testimony given at a hearing shall be summarily reported or recorded. The director shall make a finding based upon the hearing record and shall issue, sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the holder of the permit or certificate by the director. 
(Code 1982, § 12.1-18; Ord. No. 1612, § 3, 6-8-1998; Ord. No. 1796, § 12.1-18, 11-13-2006) 
Sec. 8-332. - Application after revocation. 
    Whenever a revocation of a permit or certificate has become final, the holder of the revoked permit or certificate may submit a written application for a new permit or certificate. The establishment for which an application for a new permit is submitted after revocation shall meet all applicable provisions of this division. 
(Code 1982, § 12.1-19; Ord. No. 1612, § 3, 6-8-1998; Ord. No. 1796, § 12.1-19, 11-13-2006) 
Secs. 8-333-8-377. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - REVIEW OF PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 8-378. - Submission and verification of plans, specifications. 
    Whenever a food establishment is constructed or remodeled or whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food establishment, plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling or conversion shall be submitted to the director for review and approval prior to commencement of such construction, remodeling or conversion. The director shall verify that the plans and specifications conform to the requirements of this division and the FDA Food Code. The plans and specifications shall include the intended menu, anticipated volume of food to be stored, prepared, and sold or served, the proposed layout and arrangement of the facilities, plumbing plans, mechanical plans, electrical plans, finish schedules, lighting schedules, and the types, model numbers, locations, dimensions, performance capacities, and installation specifications of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. The director may require additional plans or information, as needed, depending on the nature and extent of the proposed construction, remodeling or conversion. The director shall approve the plans and specifications if they meet the requirements of this division and the FDA Food Code. The director's approval of any plans or specifications shall not be viewed to be a determination that said plans or specifications are free from error. The owner shall have final responsibility for the accuracy and completeness of the plans and specifications, as well as for subsequent construction and installation. No food establishment shall be constructed, remodeled or converted, except in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the director. 
(Code 1982, § 12.1-21(a); Ord. No. 1612, § 3, 6-8-1998; Ord. No. 1796, § 12.1-21(a), 11-13-2006) 
Sec. 8-379. - Initial inspection required. 
    Whenever plans and specifications are required to be submitted and approved, the director shall inspect the food establishment prior to its beginning operation to determine compliance with the approved plans and specifications and with the requirements contained in this division. 
(Code 1982, § 12.1-21(b); Ord. No. 1612, § 3, 6-8-1998; Ord. No. 1796, § 12.1-21(b), 11-13-2006) 
Sec. 8-380. - Plan fees. 
(a)  A fee in accordance with section 8-404.2, shall be paid to the director upon submission of plans. 
(b)  Plans found not in compliance with applicable codes will be rejected and returned for correction and resubmission. First time resubmitted plans will not be assessed an additional review fee. Plans requiring further resubmissions and reviews will be assessed a resubmission plan review fee in accordance with section 8-404.2. 
(c)  If an owner, contractor or agent for the establishment requests an inspection prior to a final inspection, a preliminary inspection fee in accordance with section 8-404.2 will be assessed. 
(Code 1982, § 12.1-21(c); Ord. No. 1612, § 3, 6-8-1998; Ord. No. 1796, § 12.1-21(c), 11-13-2006; Ord. No. 1836, 11-23-2009) 
Secs. 8-381-8-403. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - YOUTH ATHLETICS CONCESSION STANDS 

Sec. 8-404. - Requirement for operation. 
(a)  The association, organization or group sponsoring or promoting a youth athletics concession stand, shall notify the director of the original date and location of the operation of the stand at least ten days prior to beginning operation. Such notification shall include a menu of the food items to be served. 
(b)  No person, association, organization or group shall operate a youth athletics concession stand unless that person, association, organization or group possesses a valid permit issued by the director. Such permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place for public view. 
(c)  Youth athletics concession stands shall be exempt from the application fee in section 8-323. 
(d)  There shall be at least one person present at the site of the concession stand who is responsible for ensuring that safe food handling is practiced by food handlers, and is in possession of a valid food safety workshop certificate. 
(e)  Potentially hazardous foods that require preparation before service shall be prepared and/or cooked on-site at the concession stand. 
(f)  Potentially hazardous food prepared in a private home may not be used or offered for human consumption at the concession stand. 
(g)  Bare hand contact with ready-to-eat food is prohibited. This includes any food that is in a form that is edible without washing, cooking, or additional preparation by the concession stand or consumer and that is reasonably expected to be consumed in that form, as specified in section 1-201.10(B) of the 2005 FDA Food Code. 
(h)  All food shall be obtained from sources that comply with law or are otherwise acceptable to the director based on a determination of conformity, principles, practices and generally recognized standards that protect public health. 
(i)  Food thermometers shall be available at the stand and used to monitor temperatures of potentially hazardous foods if potentially hazardous foods are prepared or served. 
(j)  Hand washing facilities shall be provided and easily accessible for use by food handlers. 
(k)  Food handlers shall frequently, thoroughly wash their hands and the exposed portions of their arms with soap and water before handling food, and as often as necessary to keep them clean. 
(l)  Persons with acute respiratory infections such as colds, flu; persons with symptoms of vomiting, diarrhea or jaundice; or persons with communicable diseases involving organisms that can be transmitted by food, such as: S. typhi, Shigella, Hepatitis A, Norovirus or E-coli, shall not handle food and must be excluded from food preparation and service. 
(m)  Eating, and the use of tobacco products, is prohibited in the food preparation area. 
(n)  Adequate hot and cold holding equipment must be provided to maintain the temperatures of potentially hazardous foods at either 41 degrees Fahrenheit or below, or 135 degrees Fahrenheit or above, unless time is used as a public health control as specified in section 3-501.19 of the 2005 FDA Food Code. 
(o)  Tableware, such as plastic forks, knives, spoons, and paper or foam plates, if provided to the consumer, shall be single-service and disposable. 
(p)  Drinking water shall be obtained from a potable source. Water supply hoses, when used, shall be of food grade quality. 
(q)  Food shall be stored off the ground. 
(r)  Nonpotentially hazardous baked good items (such as cookies, brownies and cupcakes) may be prepared in the homes of members or volunteers of the association, organization or group sponsoring or promoting a concession stand provided a clearly visible sign is posted at the point of sale or service stating: "Consumer Notice-Baked goods items were prepared in a kitchen that is not subject to inspection by the health department". 
(s)  Any person desiring to obtain a food safety workshop certificate shall attend a food safety workshop recognized by the director and pay a fee in accordance with section 8-404.2. 
(t)  A food safety workshop certificate shall be issued to the individual attending the workshop, shall be valid for a period of five years, shall not be transferable, and shall remain the property of the issuing authority. 
(Code 1982, § 12.1-22; Ord. No. 1713, 12-10-2001; Ord. No. 1796, § 12.1-22, 11-13-2006; Ord. No. 1836, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 8-404.1. - Fee schedule; annual. 
    The following fees shall be paid to the director annually by December 31, for facilities operating 12 months a year, or prior to the issuance of the operating permit for facilities operating on a seasonal schedule or facilities operating on a temporary basis: 
Fee Type Fee Annual Food Establishment Application $100.00 Annual Food Establishment Application, Renewal after December 31 $150.00 Temporary Event Application (fee applicable for the first five events) $65.00 Temporary Event Application (after the fifth event) $45.00 Annual Temporary Event Application for exempt organizations under the Code of Virginia §§ 35.1-25 and 35.1-26., must provide proof of organizations status as 501(c)(3), 501(c)(6), 501(c)(7), 501(c)(10), 501(c)(19) or 501(c)(23) $45.00 Temporary Event Application for an individual Falls Church City resident participating in only one event per calendar year $45.00  
(Ord. No. 1836, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 8-404.2. - Fee schedule; supplemental. 
Fee Type Fee Reinspection $100.00 Permit Reinstatement $200.00 Food Safety Workshop $25.00 Preliminary Inspection $100.00 Plan Submission Review $350.00 Plan Resubmission Review $50.00  
(Ord. No. 1836, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 8-405. - Permit suspension; hearing. 
    Concession stands found not to be in compliance with the requirements of this article are subject to immediate closure and suspension of all food handling operations, and/or other remedies as determined by the director. The holder of a permit may request an opportunity for a hearing if the holder of the permit files a written request for a hearing with the director within ten days of a closure or suspension. 
(Code 1982, § 12.1-23; Ord. No. 1713, 12-10-2001; Ord. No. 1796, § 12.1-23, 11-13-2006) 
Secs. 8-406-8-424. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WATER RECREATION FACILITIES[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 42; zoning, ch. 48. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-425. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  Ensure that all public pool facilities are constructed, operated and maintained in a manner which does not adversely affect the public health or safety; and 
(2)  Set forth the requirements necessary to secure a permit for construction, ownership and operation of a water recreation facility. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-2; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-426. - Administration and enforcement. 
    The director of county health services shall administer and enforce this article. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-3; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-427. - Scope. 
    This article shall apply to all water recreation facilities intended for recreational use only and not for competitive swimming or competitive diving, as indicated and herein defined. Facilities constructed for competitive swimming or competitive diving shall meet the requirements set forth by this article and/or by the director and/or the applicable FINA standards. This article applies only to public pools and does not apply to residential pools serving a single-family residence. Swimming pool facilities and spa pool facilities for which building permits are issued, subsequent to the effective date of ordinance from which this article is derived, shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of the VUSBA, the National Electrical Code, OSHA, the City Code provisions pertaining to electrical, fire prevention, plumbing, and zoning, and this article. Whenever any provision of the state code, other City Code, manufacturer's specification or recommendation, or industry standard imposes a greater requirement or a higher standard than is required under this article, compliance with the provision of such state code, other City Code, manufacturer's specification or recommendation, or industry standards shall be required. Nothing in this article shall be held to preclude compliance with the applicable provisions of those codes, standards, specifications and recommendations. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-4; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-428. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Above ground pool means any pool having the pool tank above ground level. 
    Activity pool means a pool which features recreational water activities which may include, but is not limited to, one or more of the following: Climbable bars, ropes, chutes, bubblers, fountains, anchored floating play components or other similar devices. 
    ANSI means the American National Standards Institute. 
    ASME means the American Society of Mechanical Engineers. 
    ASTM means the American Society for Testing and Materials. 
    Backwashing means the process of thoroughly cleaning the filter media or elements by reversing flow, dislodging the filter aid, and/or removing accumulated debris and discharging it to waste. 
    Bathhouse facility means the enclosed structure and related areas, used by patrons of a water recreation facility, prior to entering the pool, which contain the dressing rooms, showers, toilets, lavatories, saunas, steam rooms and mop sinks. 
    Breakpoint chlorination means the addition of a sufficient amount of chlorine to water to destroy the combined chlorine present. Breakpoint chlorination is approximated by the addition of chlorine sufficient to obtain a total chlorine residual ten times the original combined chlorine residual. 
    Centerline means the path defined by geometric midpoints of a component or structure, generally used for the separation of diving boards or platforms in a diving area. 
    Children's activity pool means an activity pool, designed primarily for the use of children, having a maximum depth of 24 inches. 
    Combined residual disinfectant means the amount of halogen or other approved disinfectant which has chemically combined with organic nitrogen compounds, e.g., combined chlorine. 
    Competitive diving board means any diving board recommended by the manufacturer for diving competition. 
    Control fence means a woven steel wire, chainlink, picket, solid board type fence, wall or equivalent barrier capable of directing bathers through the appropriate entry onto the pool deck or to a specific location within the pool facility's perimeter fence. 
    Cross-ventilation means the movement of air from an outside source into and out of a filter/chemical storage room, sufficient to prevent the accumulation of chemical vapors or dust. The cross-ventilation shall be provided by a mechanical exhaust fan. 
    Deck means the smooth, impervious, nonslip walking surface located within the perimeter enclosure and around the pools. 
    Director means the director of county health services or the designee. 
    Disinfectant means an agent that disinfects by destroying, neutralizing or inhibiting the growth of harmful organisms. 
    Diving area means the minimum dimensions of an area within the pool necessary to provide safe entry from a diving board or platform. 
    Diving board means the mechanism used for entering a swimming pool consisting of a semirigid board that derives its elasticity through the use of a fulcrum mounted below the board, and the stand that supports the semirigid board. 
    Diving platform means the raised rigid stage used for diving. 
    Drop slide means a sloped chute exiting the user above the pool operating water level into a receiving pool. 
    Filter means a device that separates solid particles from water by circulating water through a porous substance, the filter media or element. 
    FINA means the Federation Internationale de Natation Amateur. 
    Foothold means areas greater than 13/4 inches, as measured horizontally, that expose horizontal surfaces whose top planes are separated by a vertical distance less than 45 inches. 
    Free available residual disinfectant means the amount of disinfectant which is available to inactive microorganisms and oxidized organic matter, e.g., free chlorine, and which has not reacted with organic nitrogen compounds or any other material in pool water. 
    GFCI means ground fault circuit interrupter. 
    Handhold means the same as foothold. 
    Hard-wired telephone means a telephone that has a direct wire handset and connection to the main telephone system. 
    Hydroject means a fitting which blends air and water creating a high velocity, turbulent stream of air enriched water. 
    Hydrostatic pressure relief valve means any valve which, when properly installed, will relieve underground water pressure caused by high water tables under the pool shell. 
    Industry standards means the American National Standard Institute (ANSI), National Spa and Pool Institute (NSPI) or similar standards. 
    In-ground pool means any pool constructed with the pool tank below ground level. 
    Injury or illness report means the written record of all facts regarding any death, near drowning, injury or illness associated with all regulated facilities. 
    Interactive water feature facility (IWF) means a structure designed to allow for recreational activities with recirculated, filtered and treated water, but having minimal standing water. Water from the interactive fountain type feature is collected by gravity below grade in a collector tank or sump. The water is filtered, disinfected, and then pumped to the feature spray discharge heads. 
    Internal communication system means any combination of devices permitting the immediate passage or exchange of messages between the personnel within the water recreation facility. 
    Lifeguard means an individual, 15 years of age or older, who is trained and certified in lifeguarding, first aid and cardiopulmonary resuscitation. 
    Lifeguard stand means an elevated lifeguard station, which complies with OSHA standards for elevated platforms, and includes a seat and platform. An umbrella emplacement sleeve or alternative shade producing structure is required for outdoor stands. The stand may be portable, and shall be located to allow full visual coverage of the lifeguard's assigned area of responsibility. 
    Lifeguard station means a lifeguard stand or other designated work station of a lifeguard. 
    Light color means any color which has a Munsell Value (V) notation of 6.5 or greater and a Munsell Chroma (C) notation of 7.0 or less. 
    Make-up water means potable water which is added to a pool to bring the water level up to the waterline. 
    Maximum facility load means the maximum number of patrons permitted in any water recreation facility at any one time. The maximum facility load is limited by the sum total of the maximum individual swimming pool and individual spa pool bather loads, bathhouse plumbing fixture restrictions or other restrictions imposed by the director. 
    Maximum individual spa pool bather load means the maximum number of patrons permitted within the water of an individual spa pool at any one time. 
    Maximum individual swimming pool bather load means the maximum number of patrons permitted within the water of an individual pool at any one time. 
    MSDS means material safety data sheets. 
    ORP means oxidation reduction potential. 
    OSHA means the Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 
    Overflow trough or gutter means the surface water collection system designed to remove surface water through pool overflow. 
    Owner means any person, or the legally authorized representative of any person, who owns or leases a water recreation facility and in whose name the owner's annual or seasonal permit is issued. The person in charge of the water recreation facility shall be deemed to be the designee of the owner. 
    Perimeter fence means a closed-type vertical barrier which completely encloses and secures the pool area and prevents unauthorized entry. 
    Person means any and all entities, including individuals, firms, partnerships, associations, public or private governmental agencies, or public or private corporations organized under the laws of this commonwealth or any other state or country. 
    Pinch hazard means any configuration of components that could pinch or entrap the fingers, toes or any other part of the human body. 
    Plummet means a line that is perpendicular to the water surface and extends vertically through a point located at the front edge of a diving board and on the centerline. 
    Pool means any manmade structure, basin, chamber or tank located either indoors, outdoor, or both, containing a body of water with sufficient depth for complete or partial immersion of the body. Residential pools serving a single-family dwelling are not included in this definition. 
    Pool area means a pool and all decks, grounds, and other areas located within the perimeter enclosure. 
    Pool facility means any pools, together with the buildings, equipment and appurtenances pertaining to such a body of water, including, but not limited to all areas located within the perimeter enclosure. 
    Pool management company means any person, firm, corporation or association contracting to manage or operate a water recreation facility. 
    Pool operator means a person, 16 years of age or older, trained to conduct the operation of a water recreation facility. 
    Pool operator's certificate means the document issued to a person who has successfully passed a pool operator's course and/or exam recognized by the director. 
    PPM means parts per million. 
    PSA means pounds per inch. 
    Public pool means any pool, other that a residential pool serving a single-family dwelling, which is intended to be used collectively by a number of persons for swimming, recreation, fitness, relaxation or therapeutic purposes. 
    Radius of curvature means the radius arc which denotes the curved surface from the point of departure from the vertical sidewall (springline) of the pool to the pool bottom, e.g., coving. 
    Recessed stairs means a step or series of steps that do not protrude beyond the pool wall. Recessed stairs extend down from the deck with the bottom step terminating at the pool wall and bottom. 
    Recreational diving board means any diving board that is not recommended by the manufacturer for diving competition. 
    Remodel means to change, rearrange or modify a swimming pool or spa pool structure, circulation system and/or appurtenances, such that the design, configuration and/or operating characteristics are different from the original design, configuration, and/or operating characteristics. The term "remodel" does not include normal maintenance and repair. 
    Repair means the replacement of existing construction with equivalent materials for the purpose of maintenance and the replacement of a previously approved piece of equipment with an equivalent unit having the same specifications, operating characteristics and certifications. 
    Skimmer means a mechanical device connected to the pool water recirculation piping which is used to drain the pool water surface and is equipped with a weir, a flow adjustment device, and a removable and cleanable basket designed to trap small solids. 
    Slide means a drop slide as defined in this section. 
    Spa pool means any pool intended to be used for recreational and therapeutic use which may include a water jet and/or aeration system, may be heated or cooled, and is not drained, cleaned or refilled after each individual use. The term includes, but is not limited to, units designed for hydrojet recirculation, hot water, cold water, mineral bath, air induction bubbles, or any combination thereof. Common terminology for a spa pool includes, but is not limited to, therapeutic pool, hydrotherapy pool, whirlpool, hot spa and hot tub. The term "spa pool" excludes spa pools used by or under the direct supervision and control of licensed medical personnel located in a medical facility; spa pools located in the athletic department of schools, colleges and universities; and spa pools owned and used by professional athletic teams. 
    Springline means the point from which the pool wall breaks from vertical and begins its arc in the radius of curvature to the pool bottom. 
    Superchlorinate means to achieve a rapid increase in the chlorine residual within the pool water to oxidize organic impurities, destroy algae and/or achieve breakpoint chlorination. 
    Swimming pool means any pool intended to be used for swimming and/or diving. 
    Total residual disinfectant means the arithmetic sum of free available residual disinfectant and combined residual disinfectant. 
    Turnover time or period means the time required to recirculate the equivalent of the total volume of pool water through the filter system. 
    UL means Underwriter's Laboratories, Inc. 
    VUSBA means the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
    Wading pool means a swimming pool designed primarily for use by small children which is separate from any other swimming pool within a pool area. A wading pool shall not exceed 18 inches in water depth. 
    Water recreation facility means a pool facility, including, but not limited to, a swimming pool facility, spa pool facility or any related facility. 
    Water slide means a chute that discharges the user at or below the pool operating water level. 
    Waterline means the midpoint of the operating range of the skimmers when there are no users in the pool. For overflow systems, the term "waterline" is defined as the top of the overflow rim. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-5; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 8-429. - Permits for construction and remodeling. 
(a)  Building and other applicable permits shall be obtained before any water recreation facility regulated under this article may be constructed. A building permit or other applicable permits may be required from the building officials before the remodeling of a water recreation facility regulated before the remodeling of a water recreation facility regulated under this article. Plans and specifications shall have been approved by the director prior to the issuance of such permits. 
(b)  If a building permit is not required, plans and specifications for the remodeling of a water recreation facility regulated under this article shall be submitted to the director for review and approval. Duplicate copies of the plans and specifications shall be submitted to the director unless additional sets are required. 
(c)  The approval of any plans or specifications shall not be viewed to be a determination that the said plans or specifications are free from error. The owner shall have final responsibility for the accuracy and completeness of the plans and specifications, as well as for subsequent construction and installation. 
(d)  A plan review fee shall be paid. The fees for the review of plans are as established in section 8-444. 
(e)  The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of all other applicable chapters and codes, including but not limited to, plumbing, building, electrical, mechanical, zoning and fire. 
(f)  Plans found not in compliance with applicable codes will be rejected and returned for correction and resubmission. First time resubmitted plans will not be assessed an additional review fee. Plans requiring further resubmissions and reviews will be assessed a resubmission plan review fee as established in section 8-444 for each additional review. 
(g)  If an owner, contractor or agent for a water recreation facility requests an inspection prior to a final inspection, a preliminary inspection fee shall be assessed as established in section 8-444. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-6; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005; Ord. No. 1836, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 8-430. - Owner's permit required; fee for same. 
(a)  No owner shall allow a water recreation facility to be operated unless the owner has secured an annual or seasonal permit from the director. The permit shall be posted in a location conspicuous to the public on the premises of the facility. Prior to issuing the permit, the director shall determine that the water recreation facility is in compliance with the requirements of this article, that all required fees in section 8-444 have been paid, and that the water recreation facility has been approved by the electrical official. The permit shall be issued in the name of the owner for the calendar year, or if a seasonal pool, for the period during the calendar year the facility will be in operation. In the event the owner is operating a facility without the required annual or seasonal permit, the director shall order the immediate closure of the facility. An order of closure shall be effective upon service of a writing notice to the owner of the facility and shall remain in effect until such time as the owner secures the annual or seasonal permit. 
(b)  The owner and the pool management company, if applicable, of any water recreation facility is responsible for the facility being operated, maintained and managed in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(c)  There shall be no fee assessed for a compliance inspection. In the event that a compliance inspection reveals conditions that require a reinspection of the facility, a reinspection fee as established in section 8-444 shall be assessed to the owner. 
(d)  A permit to operate a water recreation facility will not be renewed for the following annual or seasonal period to any owner that has any outstanding fees assessed. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-7; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005; Ord. No. 1836, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 8-431. - Facility closure and suspension of the owner's permit. 
(a)  The director shall order the immediate closure and permit suspension of any water recreation facility upon finding that a substantial hazard exists to the health or safety of those who utilize the facility. No person shall operate any water recreation facility subject to an order of facility closure and permit suspension. 
(b)  An order of facility closure and permit suspension shall be effective upon service of a written notice to the permit holder or the designee of the permit holder. The order shall remain in effect until such time as the director determines that the hazard no longer exists, or for a time period, imposed at the discretion of the director, not to exceed 30 days past the effective date of the closure/suspension. 
(c)  The holder of a permit for a facility, subject to an order of facility closure and permit suspension, may request a hearing as described in section 8-445. 
(d)  Prior to a suspended permit being reinstated, the owner must schedule a compliance inspection and will be assessed the required permit reinstatement fee established in section 8-444. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-8; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005; Ord. No. 1836, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 8-432. - Revocation of an owner's permit. 
    The director may revoke an owner's permit upon the finding of serious, repeated or flagrant violations of any of the requirements of this article or interference with the performance of the director's duties. No person shall operate any water recreation facility subject to an order of permit revocation. An owner's permit may not be revoked unless the permit holder has been served with written notice of the director's intent to revoke the permit, stating the reason the permit is subject to revocation and informing the permit holder of the opportunity for a hearing before the director. The holder of an owner's permit subject to an order of permit revocation may request a hearing as described in section 8-435. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-9; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-433. - Pool operator requirements. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate a water recreation facility unless it is under the immediate control of a person trained in the basics of swimming pool operation who possesses a valid pool operator's certificate accepted by the director with valid photo identification and that person is on the premises during operation of the water recreation facility. 
(b)  A spa pool shall not be in violation of this subsection if it is under the control of a person who possesses a valid pool operator's certificate accepted by the director, with valid photo identification. That person need not be on the premises during the operation of the spa, provided such person is available on-call and the on-call telephone number is posted in view of the patrons. 
(c)  The pool operator shall have a clear copy of the original pool operator's certificate, with valid photo identification available for inspection during the operation of the water recreation facility. 
(d)  A pool operator shall be at least 16 years of age and shall have successfully passed either an approved course of instruction administered or sanctioned by a nationally recognized swimming pool operators training organization, and who's course and examination is accepted by the director or has received unrecognized training in swimming pool operation and has successfully passed a standardized examination, accepted by the director, that has been developed in accordance with the American Psychological Association Standards for Educational and Psychological Testing. 
(e)  A pool operator's certificate shall be issued only to the person who has passed the operator's certificate examination and shall not be assignable or transferable, and shall be valid only for a period not to exceed three years from the date of issuance. Expired certificates must be reissued in accordance with subsection (d) of this section. 
(f)  Swimming pools are subject to immediate closure and permit suspension [when] operating: 
(1)  Without a trained pool operator on the premises; 
(2)  With an operator unable to satisfactorily demonstrate basic knowledge of swimming pool operation; or 
(3)  In a manner that adversely impacts the public health and safety. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-10; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-434. - Service of notice. 
    A notice of owner's permit suspension or revocation required by this article is properly served when it is delivered to the owner or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the owner's permit. A copy of the notice shall be filed with the records of the health department. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-11; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-435. - Hearings. 
    Any owner who has been denied an owner's permit or any holder of an owner's permit who has received an order of suspension or revocation may request a hearing by filing a written request in the office of the director, within ten business days of the service of the order of permit denial, suspension or revocation. The director shall conduct a hearing within ten business days of receipt of a hearing request. If a written request for a hearing is not filed within the time permitted, the order is sustained. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-12; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-436. - Variances. 
    The director may grant a variance to the requirements of this article. 
(1)  Request. Any owner or pool operator who seeks a variance shall apply in writing to the director. The application shall include: 
a.  A citation of the section to which the variance is requested; 
b.  A statement as to why the owner or pool operator is unable to comply with the section to which the variance is requested; 
c.  The nature and duration of the variance requested; and 
d.  A statement of reasons why the public health or safety would not be jeopardized if the variance was granted. 
(2)  Evaluation of application. The director shall act upon any variance request within 60 calendar days from the receipt of the written application. In evaluating the variance application, the director shall consider the following factors: 
a.  Unusual circumstances unique to the applicant's facility; 
b.  The hardship to the applicant that would result if the variance were denied; 
c.  The effects that such a variance would have on the health and safety of the public at the water recreation facility; and 
d.  Other health or safety factors as determined by the director. 
(3)  Disposition of request. 
a.  If the director or the agent of the director approves a variance request, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the decision. Such notice shall identify the water recreation facility and its location, the nature of the variance, and shall specify the period of time for which the variance will be effective and any conditions attached to the variance. Failure to comply with the specified conditions will result in the immediate revocation of the variance. The effective date of the variance shall be upon receipt by the applicant or other designated agent acceptable to the applicant and the director. 
b.  The director or the designated agent of the director may reject any application for a variance by sending a written rejection notice to the applicant. The applicant may petition the director for a hearing, within 30 calendar days from receipt of the rejection notice, to challenge the rejection. 
c.  No permit holder or applicant may challenge the terms or conditions set forth in the variance after 30 calendar days have elapsed from the date of issuance. 
(4)  Posting. Each variance shall be posted in a conspicuous place for the public to view. Each variance is revoked when the permit attached to it is revoked. A variance is not transferable unless otherwise provided in writing at the time the variance is granted. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-13; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-437. - Condition of equipment and premises. 
    All equipment shall be maintained in satisfactory condition during the operation of any water recreation facility. In addition, the premises, including the pools and decks, or any water recreation facility shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be kept in good repair. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-17; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-438. - Animals. 
    No animal shall be permitted within any water recreation facility; provided, however, this section shall not apply to support animals that provide assistance to the physically challenged. Support animals that provide such assistance shall not enter the pool water. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-15; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-439. - Water supply. 
    A public water supply shall be used at all water recreation facilities unless other sources of water are approved by the director. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-16; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-440. - Sewage disposal. 
    All sewage generated from the plumbing fixtures within a water recreation facility shall be discharged into an approved sewage treatment works, or in the absence thereof, into an approved individual sewage disposal system. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-17; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-441. - Inspections. 
(a)  Upon presentation of the appropriate credentials, the director shall have the power to enter, at reasonable times, any private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of this article. 
(b)  There shall be no fee assessed for an inspection. In the event that an inspection reveals conditions that require a reinspection of the facility, the required reinspection fee in section 8-444, shall be assessed to the owner prior to the reinspection being performed. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-18; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005; Ord. No. 1836, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 8-442. - Emergency order. 
    If an emergency exists, the director may issue an emergency order necessary for the preservation of public health and safety or for the protection of patrons and personnel using any water recreation facility. The emergency order shall state the reasons and precise factual basis upon which it is issued, the actions which an owner or pool operator is required to take, and the time period for which it is effective. A copy of the emergency order shall be served to the owner of the facility or the designee of the owner and may be publicized in any manner deemed appropriate by the director. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-19; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-443. - Grandfather clause. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, the design and construction requirements of this article shall not apply to any water recreation facility that was constructed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived in accordance with the design and construction requirements of the article in effect at the time construction was completed (hereinafter referred to as an existing facility) and that continue to meet those requirements. 
(b)  The design and construction requirements of this article shall apply to the remodeling of an existing facility unless the director determines, in writing, that alternate requirements, including but not limited to the design and construction requirements in effect at the time of construction shall apply to the remodeling of the existing facility. 
(c)  The director shall order reasonable modifications to the design or construction of an existing facility if the director finds that any condition exists that endangers the health or safety of the facility's patrons or personnel. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-20; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-444. - Owner's permit fee schedule. 
    The following fees shall be paid to the director annually, by December 31, for facilities operating 12 months a year, or prior to the issuance of the owner's permit for facilities operating on a seasonal schedule: 
(1)  Base fee. Base fee, determined by the square footage of the main pool at each pool facility: 
Pool Category Area in Square Feet Fee Seasonal 0 to 2,000 $290.00 Seasonal 2,001 to 10,000 $360.00 Seasonal Greater than 10,000 $430.00 Year-Round 0 to 2,000 $360.00 Year-Round 2,001 to 10,000 $430.00 Year-Round Greater than 10,000 $505.00 Interactive Water Feature 0 to 2,000 $250.00 Interactive Water Feature 2,001 to 10,000 $315.00 Interactive Water Feature Greater than 10,000 $375.00 Waterpark Not Applicable n/a  
(2)  Multiple pool facility. The following fees shall apply in addition to the base fee: 
a.  Each additional pool (other than a spa pool) in a multi-pool facility, except that one wading pool at a multi-pool facility shall be exempt from this fee: ..... $220.00 
b.  Each spa pool: ..... $65.00 
c.  Facilities with spa pools only: ..... $285.00 
d.  Plan review, each submission: ..... $250.00 
e.  Plan review, resubmission: ..... $50.00 
f.  Preliminary inspection: ..... $100.00 
g.  Reinspection: ..... $100.00 
h.  Permits reinstatement: ..... $200.00 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-21; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005; Ord. No. 1836, 11-23-2009) 
Sec. 8-445. - Penalties. 
    Any person or owner who fails to comply with the applicable provision shall be in violation of this article. Each violation of this article is punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor in accordance with state law. Each day a violation of this article shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. The criminal penalty provided in this section shall be in addition to the administrative remedies set forth elsewhere in this article. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-22; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Secs. 8-446-8-473. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SWIMMING POOL DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings, ch. 6; condominiums, § 6-48 et seq. 

Sec. 8-474. - Location. 
    The location of a swimming pool shall in no way hinder the operations for which it is designed, nor adversely affect patron safety or water quality. Public pools shall not be located in areas subject to flooding or inundation by groundwater drainage. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-26; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-475. - Access. 
(a)  Outdoor pools. Direct and unobstructed access to any swimming pool area shall be provided for the admission of emergency and service vehicles, equipment and personnel. An emergency access lane providing direct access for emergency vehicles shall terminate at each pool facility's emergency gate required in section 8-497. Emergency access lanes shall be kept clear and unobstructed. 
(b)  Indoor pools. Emergency access to indoor or elevated swimming pools shall be provided at the entrance nearest the pool or the elevator or stairway leading to the pool. Permanent and conspicuous signs shall be posted indicating the most direct route to an indoor or elevated pool. An emergency access lane providing direct access for emergency vehicles shall terminate at the entrance nearest the indoor pool, or the elevator or stairway leading to the indoor or elevated swimming pool. Emergency access lanes shall be kept clear and unobstructed. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-27; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-476. - Construction materials and components. 
    Swimming pools shall be constructed of materials which are rigid, inert, impervious and nontoxic to humans. The materials for components and accessories to be used in and around swimming pools shall be such that the operational strength of the assembly shall not be adversely affected by the exposure to external conditions or normal temperature extremes; and shall be chemically compatible with the materials used in the operation and maintenance of the swimming pool. In addition, construction materials shall provide a tight tank to which a smooth, easily cleanable surface can be applied. The swimming pool surface shall be composed of an impervious material which will retain a smooth, slip-resistant, easily cleanable finish without surface cracks or open joints, and shall be finished in a white or light color. Sand or earth bottoms shall not be permitted. Materials other than those described in this section may be approved by the director. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-28; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-477. - Design. 
    Swimming pools may be of any dimension or shape provided that the satisfactory recirculation of pool water can be obtained and no undue hazards to patrons are created by the dimensions or shape of the pool. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-29; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-478. - Hydrostatic pressure relief valve. 
    In all in-ground swimming pools with water depths exceeding 18 inches, one or more hydrostatic pressure relief valves, or other hydrostatic relief system as approved by the director, shall be installed. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-30; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-479. - Slope of bottom. 
    In water depths of less than five feet, the maximum slope of any swimming pool, other than a wading pool, shall not exceed 1:12. In depths greater than five feet, the slope shall not exceed 1:3. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-31; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-480. - Vertical walls and coving. 
(a)  All corners formed by the intersection of pool walls, floors or other pool walls shall be coved. 
(b)  Vertical walls shall not be greater than 11 degrees from plumb. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-32; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-481. - Minimum requirements for diving boards and platforms. 
(a)  Installation. Diving boards and diving platforms may be installed in a diving area, alone or in combination; provided the minimum requirements set forth in this section are met. 
(b)  Side rails, safety netting, restraints. Side rails, including safety netting or other safety restraints may be required by the director for diving boards one meter in height or greater. 
(c)  Headroom. At least 16 feet five inches of free and unobstructed headroom shall be provided above every diving board and diving platform. 
(d)  Table requirements of this section to be met. When a recreational diving board is installed in a diving area, the minimum dimensions and water depths within the diving area shall meet the requirements specified in table I and table II. Diving board height measurements falling in between two categories of table I and table II, shall comply with the more stringent requirement. 
(e)  Diving board standards. When a diving platform or competitive diving board is installed in a diving area, the minimum dimensions and water depths in the diving area shall meet the applicable FINA standards and/or the standards required by the director. 
(f)  Diving board and diving platform combination standards. When a diving board is installed in combination with a diving platform, the minimum distance between the centerline of the diving board or edge of the diving platform and centerline of an adjacent diving board, the edge of an adjacent diving platform, and/or the pool sidewall edge shall meet the applicable FINA standards or the requirements specified in table I, whichever is more stringent. 
Table I. Diving Board Height and Separation Distance Requirements 
Height of Diving Board above the Waterline 
(in meters) Minimum Distance of Board Centerline to Adjacent Board Centerline of Equal or Lesser Height (in feet) Minimum Distance of Centerline to Sidewall (in feet) 0 to 0.61 10 10 0.62 to 0.77 11 11 0.78 to 1.00 11 11 1.01 to 2.0 12 12 2.01 to 3.0 12 12 ;gt; 3.0 meters * * *Note-As required by the director.  
Table II. Minimum Dimensions and Depths Relative To Board Height 
Height of Diving Board Above the Waterline 
(in meters) Minimum Depth of Water at 
Plummet 
(in feet) Minimum Distance Ahead of Plummet 
(in feet) Minimum Depth of Water at 
Distance L 
From Plummet 
(in feet) Minimum Overhang of Diving Board Beyond 
Pool Edge 
(in feet) H D 1 L D 2 O h 0 to 0.61 8.6 11 8.6 3 0.62 to 0.77 9 11.6 8.10 4 0.78 to 1.00 11 12 10'9" 5 1.01 to 2.00 12 16'5" 11'10 6'1" 2.01 to 3.00 12'6" 19'9" 12'2 6'1" ;gt; 3.00 meters * * * * *Note-As required by the applicable FINA Standards.  
Figure 1. Cross Sectional Diagram Of Swimming Pool Illustrating Distances Referenced in Table II. 

(Code 1982, § 27.1-33; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-482. - Handholds. 
    Swimming pools shall be provided with suitable handholds around their perimeter. Handholds may consist of any one or a combination of the following: 
(1)  Coping, gutter ledges or flanges, or decks which have a top edge that provides a suitable slip resistant handhold located not more than 12 inches above the water level; 
(2)  Ladders, steps or hand rails; and/or 
(3)  Other methods approved by the director. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-34; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-483. - Stairs, steps, ladders, and bench seats. 
(a)  Egress. A minimum of two means of egress shall be provided for swimming pools with a perimeter of 100 feet or less. One additional means of egress shall be provided for each additional 200 feet of pool perimeter, or fraction thereof. Additional means of egress may be required as determined by the director. The location of the means of egress shall be consistent with the design of the swimming pool. A means of egress shall be provided at both sides of the diving area. 
(b)  Conformity of design, construction. The design and construction of swimming pool stairs, ladders, and bench seats shall conform to the following: 
(1)  The treads of all stairs, ladders, and step holes shall be on nonslip construction. 
(2)  When stairs or bench seats are constructed, they shall be recessed into the pool deck, and shall conform to the VUSBA. 
(3)  The top and leading edge of all stair treads and bench seats shall be marked by a permanent, nonslip band of contrasting color that is a minimum of one inch in width and is located within two inches of the step or bench edge. 
(4)  Recessed step holes shall not protrude into the pool. The recessed step shall have a minimum tread width of six inches, a minimum height of five inches, and shall drain into the pool to prevent the accumulation of dirt. Each set of recessed step holes shall be provided with handrails on both sides of recessed step holes to fully service all treads and risers. 
(5)  Below the water level, there shall be a clearance of not more than six inches or less than three inches between any ladder tread edge, measured from the pool wall side of the tread, and the pool wall. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-35; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-484. - Recirculation system. 
(a)  All swimming pools shall be equipped with a recirculation system which, at a minimum consists of a pump, a filter, connecting piping, fittings, valves, disinfecting equipment, necessary pipe connections to the inlets and outlets, a skimmer and/or overflow gutter and main drains. A separate recirculation system shall be provided for each swimming pool. 
(b)  The recirculation system shall be designed to accommodate the following required maximum turnover time: 
(1)  Wading pool: two hours; and 
(2)  Any other swimming pool: six hours. 
(c)  Adequate provisions shall be made for backwashing and/or cleaning of all filters. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-36; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-485. - Filter rooms. 
(a)  Swimming pool facilities shall have a room or structure which encloses the filtration equipment, pumps, electrical equipment, chemical feed equipment, and other recirculation and filtration system appurtenances. The room or structure shall provide working area and access above and around all equipment no less than that specified by the manufacturer and sufficient to permit routine maintenance. The room or structure shall be provided with a lockable door of sufficient width to permit the removal of equipment. The entrance to the filter room shall be easily accessible from the deck so the pool operator can enter the room without having to exit the enclosed pool area. The room or structure shall be impervious to water and resistant to the chemicals necessary for the operation of the facility. 
(b)  The floor of the filter room or structure shall be designed to provide adequate drainage with a minimum floor slope of 1:48 and a maximum floor slope of 1:24 to a floor drain and shall be kept dry at all times, particularly in the vicinity of electrical panels. 
(c)  The filter room shall be provided with mechanical cross ventilation. 
(d)  Illumination of at least 30 footcandles, measured 24 inches above the floor, shall be provided above equipment and working areas. A minimum of two light fixtures shall be installed, and all light fixtures shall be shielded. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-37; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-486. - Requirements for filters and gauges. 
(a)  Design criteria. The recirculation system shall be equipped with a filtration system that is NSF International listed, or the equivalent and will filter the entire water volume of the swimming pool within the required turnover time specified in section 8-484(b). Filtration equipment shall be operated continuously, 24 hours per day. Valves shall be provided at appropriate locations to allow the isolation and maintenance of equipment. Filter components which require servicing shall be accessible for inspection and repair and installed according to the manufacturer's specifications and recommendations. All pressure systems shall be provided with a manual or automatic means to permit the release of air which may accumulate within the filter tank. Design criteria for the indicated type of filters shall be as follows: 
(1)  High-rate filters. A filter utilizing a media capable of filtration at a high rate of flow. The rate of flow shall not be less than five gallons per minute per square foot (5 GPM/ft2) of filter surface area, nor greater that 20 gallons per minute per square foot (20 GPM/ft2) of filter surface area. The backwash rate of flow shall be at the rate specified by the manufacturer. 
(2)  Diatomaceous earth filter. A filter utilizing diatomaceous earth as a filter media. 
a.  Pressure or vacuum type. A diatomaceous earth filter through which the rate of flow does not exceed two gallons per minute per square foot (2 GPM/ft2) of filter surface area. 
b.  Pressure or vacuum with slurry feeder. A filter that is equipped with a feeder that continuously feeds a diatomaceous earth suspension and has a rate of flow not exceeding three gallons per minute per square foot (3 GPM/ft2) of filter surface area. 
c.  Separation tanks, sump pits. Separation tanks or a sump pit with a stand pipe shall be installed to collect spent diatomaceous earth so that it can be collected and disposed of in an approved manner. Alternative methods for diatomaceous earth collection may be approved by the director. When using diatomaceous earth filters with separation tanks, the separation tank shall be provided with a means of release or a lid which provides a slow and safe release of pressure and shall have a readily visible precautionary statement affixed that warns the user that the air release must be opened before opening the separation tank. 
d.  Piping and valves. Piping and valves shall be provided for all diatomaceous earth filters to allow for a pre-coat cycle that recirculates water directly from the outlet to the inlet of the filter without returning to the swimming pool. 
(3)  Rapid sand filters. A filter utilizing sand as the filter media, with a filtration flow rate not exceeding three gallons per minute per square foot (3 GPM/ft2) of filter area. The backwash rate of flow shall be four times the filtration rate. 
(4)  Other filtration systems. Other filtration systems whose performance equals or exceeds those described in this subsection (a) may be used in a pool recirculation system with the approval of the director. 
(5)  Cartridge filters. A cartridge filter through which the rate of flow does not exceed the design rate or a maximum of 375/1,000 gallon per minute per square foot of filter surface area. Cleaning of cartridge filters must be in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. One complete extra set of cartridges shall be available at all times to facilitate cleaning. 
(b)  Gauges and flow meters. The filter system shall be provided with a minimum of one influent pressure gauge for each filter and one effluent pressure gauge following the filter system. Recirculation system pumps shall be fitted with a vacuum and pressure gauge installed as near as practical to the pump suction and discharge pipe connections. All pressure gauges shall measure pressure directly in pounds per square inch (psi). Vacuum gauges shall measure in inches of mercury. The system shall have a flow meter on the return line to measure the flow of filtered water being returned to the swimming pool. The flow meter shall be of fixed calibration, shall measure in gallons per minute, and shall be properly sized to indicate the design rate of flow at approximately mid-scale. Gauges and flow meters shall be readily accessible and clearly visible, shall be in good repair, and shall be located installed according to the manufacturer's specifications and recommendations. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-38; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-487. - Pumps and strainers. 
(a)  Pump. A removable and reinstallable pump shall be installed with adequate capacity for the required turnover time specified in section 8-484(b). Whenever possible, pump shall be so located as to eliminate the need for priming. If the pump or suction piping is located above the overflow level of the swimming pool, the pump shall be self-priming. The pump shall be capable of providing a flow adequate for the backwashing of filters. Pumps shall be securely supported. 
(b)  Hair and lint strainer. All pressure filter systems shall have a hair and lint strainer. The hair and lint strainer baskets shall be corrosion resistant with openings not exceeding one-eighth inch in size, which provide a free flow area of at least four times the area of the pump suction line at the strainer connection, and shall be accessible for frequent cleaning. An extra hair and lint strainer basket shall be provided for each hair and lint strainer. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-39; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-488. - Piping system. 
(a)  The piping system for swimming pools shall be composed of NSF International-listed materials or their equivalent designed for the following operations: 
(1)  Filling the swimming pool; 
(2)  Recirculating the pool water through the treatment equipment; 
(3)  Backwashing or washing each filter to waste; 
(4)  Operating a suction cleaner, if provided; 
(5)  Emptying the pool; and 
(6)  Draining the system. 
In addition, the piping system of any swimming pool containing a hydrojet system or water-conditioning system shall be composed of NSF International-listed materials, or equivalents, which are capable of supporting such systems. 
(b)  There shall be no direct connection between the swimming pool recirculation system and the sewer or potable water supply. Fill spouts, when installed, shall be located under diving boards, under guard chairs, adjacent to pool ladder handrails, or otherwise protected to preclude a tripping hazard and shall be properly supported, if not inherently self-supporting. Fill spouts shall not project into the space above the pool water surface by more than two inches beyond the edge of the pool. Other means of filling the pool shall comply with VUSBC and be approved by the director. Cross connections shall be prevented by providing an air gap between the highest possible flood level of the pool and the pool fill spout. The air gap shall not be less than two fill spout pipe diameters or less than six inches. An approved backflow preventor may substitute for the air gap. 
(c)  The system shall have a means of discharging filter backwash or other pool water to waste as follows: 
(1)  Waste from backwashing or draining of a pool shall be discharged in a manner approved by the director. When only a sanitary sewer is available to a swimming pool, the rate of discharge is subject to the approval of the appropriate authority for sanitary sewers and treatment facilities. 
(2)  An air gap or air break to prevent a cross-connection between waste discharge piping and recirculation piping shall be provided. 
(3)  Discharge receptor and piping of sufficient size to accept backwash water and prevent back flooding. 
(4)  A sight glass in the backwash waste pipe will not accommodate the backwash flow. The design and installation of holding tank shall be required. The holding tank shall be sized to contain 110 percent of the volume of water required to adequately clean the filter at the backwash flow rate and length of time specified by the filter manufacturer. 
(d)  The visible piping system shall be securely anchored, supported or braced, unless inherently self-supporting, and marked with permanent tags, labels or markings to clearly identify the direction of flow and shall be color coded as follows: 
Freshwater (to checkvalve) Blue Backwash Black Influent Yellow Effluent White Suction cleaner (to control valve) Orange Recirculation Green Auxiliary recirculation not part of the filtration system; such as, but not limited to, water features, jets, fountains, waterfalls, aeration systems or similar features Heater piping Red (to nearest isolation valves)  
(e)  All piping shall be designed to minimize friction losses and to carry the required quantity of water at a velocity not to exceed eight feet per second for copper discharge piping, and ten feet per second for discharge piping other than copper. Suction velocity for all piping shall not exceed six feet per second. Pipe suction velocity may also be limited by the maximum flow rate specified by the manufacturer of the suction outlet covers installed in the swimming pool. 
(f)  All piping and appurtenances included in the recirculation and filtration system shall be inspected and approved by the director prior to covering. All piping shall be tested at the time of inspection to at least 25 psi of pressure. All subsurface pool piping shall be imbedded in and covered with sand or an approved equivalent. 
(g)  All valves shall be clearly identified with permanent markings or tags which are referenced by a pool water recirculation system operation manual and/or placard. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-40; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-489. - Main drain outlets. 
(a)  All swimming pools shall have a minimum of two interconnected main drain outlets that cannot be isolated by valves or other means, for each recirculation pump system. Main drain outlets shall be located in the deepest part of the pool. All piping associated with the main drain outlets shall be of equal diameter and each main drain shall be of equal size. Main drain outlets and associated piping shall be hydraulically designed to provide equal flow though each main drain outlet. A main drain outlet shall be no less than three feet and no more than 20 feet from another main drain outlet, and not more than 15 feet from a pool side wall. 
(b)  A main drain outlet opening shall be covered with a protective grate or anti-vortex cover which is not hazardous to patrons, is anchored in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications and recommendations, and is designed to prevent body entrapment or injury. Main drain gates or covers shall be secured so that their removal requires the use of tools. Main drain covers shall be manufactured and installed according to the specifications set forth by the ASME/ANSI and NSF International standards for suction fittings. The cover, frame, and all components shall be corrosion resistant and shall be designed to withstand the maximum anticipated forces generated by active use. The total water velocity through main drain outlets shall not exceed 11/2 feet per second for water depths eight feet and greater or one foot per second for depths less than eight feet, and shall not exceed the maximum flow rate specified by the manufacturer of the main drain cover. 
(c)  Other methods that prevent suction outlet body entrapment and injury may be approved by the director. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-41; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-490. - Inlets. 
    All inlets located in pool walls shall be spaced not more than 20 feet on center around the pool perimeter. When inlets are located in the pool bottom, the number of inlets and their location shall be designed to ensure the proper distribution of filtered water. The minimum number of bottom inlets shall be determined by dividing the perimeter of the pool, in feet, by 20. All wall inlets, except makeup water inlets and wading pool inlets, shall be at least 15 inches below the operating water level of the pool, except for prefabricated gutters with 45 degree angle inlets in the bottom. Each inlet shall be provided with a means of adjusting flow, through a range of at least 50 percent of its design capacity. Inlet flow controls shall be readily accessible. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-42; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-491. - Pool suction cleaner. 
    A suction cleaner shall be provided. Where a suction cleaner is operated by the recirculating pump, a device shall be provided for regulating the flow from the pool outlets. The suction cleaner line shall be connected through a hair and lint strainer. Portable electric suction cleaners shall be UL rated and connected to a GFCI protected electrical outlet. Waste from a portable suction cleaner shall be disposed of as solid waste. Hydraulic jet-type suction cleaners shall be permitted in lieu of other suction cleaners if the fresh water pressure is 30 psi or greater and the water service line is provided with an approved backflow preventor. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-43; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-492. - Overflow gutters and skimmers. 
    Overflow gutters or skimmers shall be provided on the vertical walls of all swimming pools, and designed to adequately skim the pool surface. The overflow gutter or skimming system shall be capable of continuously removing 80 percent or more of the recirculated water and returning it to the filter. 
(1)  Where overflow gutters are used, they shall extend completely around the swimming pool, except at steps, recessed ladders, ramps and stairs. The overflow gutter shall be designed to serve as a handhold. Overflow gutters having a surge capacity less than one cubic foot per linear foot of pool perimeter shall be indirectly connected to the recirculating system through a properly sized and designed surge tank/balancing tank with a minimum surge capacity of one gallon per square foot of water surface area. Overflow gutters having a surge capacity of one cubic foot, or greater, per linear foot of pool perimeter shall be connected to a properly sized and designed balancing tank. The gutter, drains and piping draining to the surge tank/balancing tank shall be designed to rapidly remove overflow water caused by recirculation, displacement, wave action or other causes provided during the maximum swimming pool load. The opening into the gutter beneath the coping shall not be less than four inches and the interior width of the gutter shall not be less than three inches. Where gutters are used, they shall be designed to prevent patron entrapment or injury. The overflow edge or lip shall be rounded and not greater than 21/2 inches for the top two inches. The overflow outlets shall be provided with outlet pipes at least two inches in diameter. The outlet fitting shall have a clear opening in the grating at least equal to 11/2 times the cross sectional area of the outlet pipe. 
(2)  Where skimmers are used they shall be provided at the rate of one skimmer per 40 feet of pool perimeter or fraction thereof, or one per 400 square feet of pool water surface area or fraction thereof, whichever is greater. They shall be spaced so as to provide maximum skimming action of the pool surface. 
a.  Skimmer throats shall be no greater than the width required for ten-inch weirs. 
b.  Skimmer weirs shall be automatically adjustable to variations in water level over a minimum range of four inches. 
c.  A removable basket or screen to entrap large matter shall be provided in each skimmer. 
d.  The flow rate through the skimmer shall not be less than 20 gallons per minute and not greater than 35 gallons per minute. Each skimmer shall be provided with a means of adjusting the flow through the skimmer. 
e.  Skimmer systems shall be designed so that all skimmers are interconnected. 
f.  Skimmer lids shall be securely in place at all times. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-44; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-493. - Decks. 
(a)  All swimming pools shall have a continuous deck at least five feet wide, including the width of the coping, extending around the entire perimeter of the pool. In addition, there shall be at least three feet of clear, unobstructed deck behind any diving stand, guard stand, or other deck-mounted equipment. All decks shall be constructed of continuous poured concrete or other approved impervious material which shall have a smooth, nonslip finish. All decks shall have a slope of not less than 1:48 or more than 1:24 and shall be designed to conduct drainage away from the swimming pool in a manner that will not create a slip hazard or contribute to the ponding of water. Roof runoff or other drainage shall not be wasted onto the deck. All areas surrounding the deck shall have surface drainage directed away from the pool deck area or be served by a drainage system approved by the director. 
(b)  Deck risers and steps shall comply with the VUSBC. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-45; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-494. - Lighting. 
    In addition to requirements set forth in chapter 14, article V, pertaining to outdoor lighting: 
(1)  An indoor swimming pool or an outdoor swimming pool used after dark shall be equipped with lighting fixtures to light all parts of the pool, the pool water, and the swimming pool area. A sufficient number of light fixtures shall be installed to supply a minimum of ten footcandles for the pool surface and 30 footcandles for the pool deck area measured six inches above the pool deck and water surface. The lighting fixtures shall be designed and installed so that the lifeguards and patrons can clearly see every part of the swimming pool, including decks, diving boards, and other appurtenances, without interference from glare. Lighting fixtures shall be installed in a manner which creates no hazard to patrons or employees. All lighting fixtures shall be prohibited directly above the water surface area or within three feet horizontally of the pool rim, except as permitted by the National Electrical Code. All light fixtures shall be shielded. 
(2)  Underwater pool lighting, when installed, shall provide at least one watt per square foot of water surface area, or the equivalent, and shall be equipped with GFCIs, as required by the National Electrical Code. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-46; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-495. - Safety requirements. 
(a)  Swimming pools equipped with pool water heaters shall have a fixed thermometer installed in the main return line. The thermometer shall be located sufficiently downstream from where the water heater effluent pipe connects to the main return line to allow the mixing of the heated and unheated water. The thermometer shall be designed and located so that it may be easily read. 
(b)  A separate room shall be provided for the care and isolation of victims of injury, illness, or accident which is directly accessible from the pool deck. The room shall be well-lighted and ventilated, and shall be large enough to permit an unrestricted movement of both the victim and first aid providers. 
(c)  A direct dial, hard-wired telephone that is fully operational shall be provided within the swimming pool area. The phone shall be immediately accessible from the pool deck. The phone shall be located so a clear and unobstructed view of the pool is provided. Emergency telephone numbers and facility's name and address shall be posted by the telephone. 
(d)  The depth of water in swimming pools shall be marked at every one-foot increment of depth and at least every 20 feet of swimming pool perimeter on both the horizontal surface of the deck and the vertical surface of the pool wall. Horizontal depth markings shall be positioned to be read while standing on the deck facing the water. Depth markings on deck surfaces shall be nonslip. All numbers and letters shall be at least five inches in height and be of contrasting color with the pool walls and deck. Depth markings are not required for wading pools. 
(e)  Fixed, floating, or moveable platforms in swimming pools shall be constructed with an airspace of at least 18 inches between the water surface and the underside of the platform or be provided with a barrier system at the perimeter of the device to prevent access under the device. 
(f)  There shall be a minimum of one lifeguard stand provided for every 2,000 square feet of water surface area within the pool enclosure. Additional lifeguard stands may be required where, due to the configuration of the pool, full visibility is not provided from the installed lifeguard stand. 
(g)  A transition line on the bottom of the pool and a floating lifeline shall be provided at the five-foot water depth between the shallow and deep portions of the swimming pool. The transition line shall be constructed of tile that is of dark and high contrasting color. The lifeline and transition line shall be located within six inches on either side of the break in slope to water greater than five feet in depth. The lifeline shall have clearly visible floats set at not greater than five-foot intervals. The transition line shall be a minimum of two inches wide. The lifeline shall be securely fastened to wall anchors of corrosion resistant materials which shall be recessed and shall have no projections into the pool. The line shall be of sufficient size and strength to offer a good handhold and support loads normally imposed by swimmers. 
(h)  There shall be no protrusions, extensions, means of entanglement, or obstructions which can cause entrapment or injury. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-47; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-496. - Disinfection equipment. 
(a)  All swimming pools shall be provided with approved mechanically operated, positive displacement disinfectant feeding equipment, or other disinfection equipment approved by the director, which: 
(1)  Shall be capable of providing a continuous and effective residual of disinfectant within the swimming pool water 24 hours per day; 
(2)  Shall have a design feed rate which will provide effective disinfection levels when the swimming pool is in peak demand conditions; 
(3)  Shall be capable of applying a dose the equivalent to maintain a concentration of at least one ppm free chlorine throughout the swimming pool at all times of operation; and 
(4)  Shall be equipped with a flow indicator on the supply line. 
(b)  The use of chlorine gas as a disinfectant shall not adversely affect the safety and health of patrons, pool personnel, or the public; shall comply with OSHA and the county fire and rescue department requirements; and shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Chlorine gas feeding equipment and chlorine gas cylinders shall be installed in a room separate from the filter room and electrical panels and shall be equipped with a forced draft fan exhausting to the outside from the floor level. The exhaust fan shall provide a minimum of 60 air changes per hour. A fresh air inlet shall be provided near the ceiling. The gas chlorinator room shall be located above ground level and below the deck level of all pools. The chlorine gas tanks shall be protected from direct sunlight and securely fastened in place during storage and use, and shall be mounted on a scale when in use. A self-contained gas mask for chlorine or a gas mask with a supply of oxygen under positive pressure or compressed air shall be provided at facilities where chlorine gas is utilized. The chlorine gas mask shall be approved by the Bureau of Mines and the county fire department. The gas mask shall be located accessible to, but outside of, the gas chlorinator room. The chlorinator shall be provided with an emergency cutoff device to prevent gas discharge or injection of gas during electrical outage. A gas chlorine detection device with an alarm shall be provided. 
(2)  The use of gas chlorine as a disinfectant shall require a chemical feeder for the feeding of sodium carbonate into the recirculation system. 
(3)  The use of gas chlorine as a disinfectant shall require that a supply of ammonia hydroxide be present for the checking of leaks in the chlorination system. 
(c)  When the pool water recirculation system is equipped with an automatic chemical control mechanism that continuously analyzes the pool water and automatically activates chemical feeding, a water flow sensing device shall be provided that automatically deactivates all associated chemical feeders when the water flow in the recirculation system ceases. 
(d)  When bromine is used as the disinfectant, the following shall be followed: 
(1)  Bromine shall be fed on a continuous basis. 
(2)  A concentration of at least two ppm bromine residual shall be maintained throughout the pool water at all times. A maximum of six ppm bromine residual shall be permitted in any swimming pool during use. 
(3)  Solid stick or tablet type bromine shall be used with the NSF International certified commercial feed equipment. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-48; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-497. - Fencing and barriers. 
    All outdoor pool areas shall be completely enclosed with a perimeter fence, or equivalent barrier, at least six feet in height, measured from the highest ground elevation within three feet adjacent to the outside of the barrier. If horizontal surfaces are used, top planes must be separated by a vertical distance no less than 45 inches and shall prohibit the passage of a sphere larger than 13/4 inches in diameter through any opening in or under the fence or barrier. The fence or barrier shall be nonclimbable from the outside of the enclosure. Nonclimbable shall mean no external handholds, footholds, horizontal members, or other features that are available, which would aid in climbing the fence from the outside of the barrier. There shall be no objects within a six-foot arc from the top of the perimeter fence or barrier and no closer than three feet to any part of the fence or barrier. The material used to construct the fence or barrier shall be approved by the director. If the fence or barrier does not have horizontal surfaces, it shall be constructed so as to prohibit the passage of a sphere larger than four inches in diameter through any opening in or under the fence or barrier. Access gates installed in the perimeter fence or barrier shall have latches and locks at least 48 inches above the deck or ground surface. Emergency gates having a minimum horizontal opening of eight feet shall be provided for outdoor pools. Where grassed areas are provided for patrons within the pool enclosure, they shall be separated from the pool deck by a three-foot-high control fence or equivalent barrier equipped with a waist high shower at each entrance to the pool deck. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-49; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-498. - Spectator areas. 
    Spectators at swimming or diving meets and other special events shall not have access to and shall be separated from the portions of the pool area used by swimmers or divers. Spectator balconies shall not overhang within five feet of any portion of the pool water surface. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-50; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-499. - Drinking fountains. 
    Each swimming facility shall have at least one drinking fountain readily accessible to all patrons within the pool area. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-51; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-500. - Wading pools. 
    Wading pools shall meet all applicable requirements of this division, and the following additional requirements: 
(1)  The slope of the bottom of any wading pool shall be no greater than 1:12 or less than 1:40. 
(2)  Wading pools shall be separated from any other swimming pool or spa pool by a fence approved by the director. 
(3)  A separate recirculation system shall be provided exclusively for the wading pool. 
(4)  Wading pool skimmers and main drain outlets shall be interconnected with equal diameter piping. 
(5)  The distance from the deck to the water lever shall be six inches or less. 
(6)  The total water velocity through the wading pool main drain outlets shall not exceed one foot per second. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-52; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-501. - Slides, sprinklers, fountains, activity pools and other pool equipment. 
(a)  Slides, sprinklers, fountains, activity pools, interactive water features, and other pool equipment for which design standards are not contained in this division, shall meet the design standards in division 6 of this article or shall meet design standards approved by the director. 
(b)  Interactive water features shall be completely enclosed by a perimeter fence or equivalent barrier at least three feet in height. Waist-high foot showers shall be provided at all entrances to the deck. 
(c)  The construction of filter rooms shall meet the requirements of section 8-485. The collector tank or reservoir shall be installed in accordance with manufacturer's specifications. 
(d)  The disinfectant residual, pH, total alkalinity, and calcium hardness shall be continuously maintained within the minimum and maximum ranges specified in the following table. 
Minimum Ideal Maximum IWF free chlorine 3.0 4.0 9.0 Combined chlorine 0.2 Bromine residual 2.0 4.0-6.0 9.0 pH 7.2 7.4-7.6 7.8 Total alkalinity (ppm) 80 100 160 Calcium hardiness (ppm) 200 200-400 800  
(e)  The operations of an IWF facility shall be under the immediate control of a person who possesses a valid pool operator's credential accepted by the director. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-52.1; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Secs. 8-502-8-525. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SWIMMING POOLS; OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 8-526. - Security. 
    Swimming pool facilities shall be operated and maintained in a manner which will not create a nuisance or hazard to the public's safety or health. The pool shall be adequately secured to prevent unauthorized entry when not in use. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-53; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-527. - Water operating levels. 
    The water lever shall be maintained within the operating range of the skimmers or at the top of the overflow rim of a gutter system at all times the swimming pool is open for use. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-54; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-528. - Monitoring, reporting, and recordkeeping. 
    The following information shall be recorded and maintained by the owner for a minimum of one year from the date of the recording, occurrence or incident; and shall be available for inspection at all times while the swimming pool is in operation: 
(1)  Water quality parameters and maintenance. 
a.  The disinfectant residual and pH shall be tested and the results recorded at least once every two hours while the pool is in use. ORP readings, if applicable, shall also be recorded every two hours while the pool is in use. The water temperature, for heated pools, and the total chlorine residual, for pools utilizing chlorine, shall be tested and recorded a minimum of once a day. 
b.  Influent and effluent pressure gauge readings and the flow rate shall be observed every two hours and be recorded at least two times per day; at least once prior to opening to the public and during the last hour of operation. The date and time of each backwash or filter cleaning shall be recorded. 
c.  Total alkalinity and calcium hardness, tests shall be performed and recorded weekly or more often as necessary to provide proper chemical balance of the pool water. Cyanuric acid tests shall be performed and recorded weekly at all pools utilizing cyanuric acid or chlorinated cyanuric. 
d.  The date, time, type, and amount of any chemicals added to the pool water shall be recorded; however, for chemicals added continuously with a chemical feeder, only the type of chemical shall be documented. 
(2)  Other records. 
a.  The owner shall immediately notify the director of all drownings, near-drownings, injuries, water-related illness or deaths which have occurred. Notification of minor injuries, such as minor abrasions or superficial cuts, shall not be required. Owners shall submit a complete written drowning and injury report, containing all relevant facts and information related to the incident, to the director within seven days of an incident. The following information must be included in the report of drownings, near-drownings, injury, water-related illness or deaths which have occurred: 
1.  Pool operator on duty at time of incident. 
2.  Date, time and exact location of incident. 
3.  Name, age and certifications of persons involved in incident. 
4.  Number of lifeguards on duty at time of incident. 
5.  Exact locations of all lifeguards on duty. 
6.  Pool and/or spa water clarity. 
7.  Number of bathers in the pool. 
8.  Number of patrons in the facility. 
9.  Police case number, if available. 
10.  Injury description. 
11.  Names of witnesses. 
12.  Detailed description of accident. 
b.  Owners shall have available at the water recreation facility proof of the credentials, training, and/or certifications required for personnel as detailed in sections 8-433 and 8-533. 
c.  Material safety data sheets (MSDS) for all chemicals used at a swimming pool facility shall be provided in a location readily accessible to all employees. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-55; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-529. - Placards. 
(a)  Water test standards and results. The water test results specified in section 8-528(1)a shall be legibly and conspicuously posted on a permanent, waterproof, and durable placard in a location where it is readily observable by the patrons. The most recent required daily water quality test results, including the date and time of day tested, shall be posted. The minimum and maximum standards for these parameters, as specified in section 8-538, table III, shall be included on the placard. Water temperature shall also be posted for heated pools. 
(b)  Restricted areas. Areas restricted to operating personnel only shall be prominently identified with a permanent, legible placard stating "Authorized Personnel Only" including but not limited to the filter and chemical storage rooms. The placards shall be conspicuously located on the exterior of the doors to the restricted areas. 
(c)  Rules and regulations. A permanent, legible placard specifying facility rules and regulations regarding personal health and safety shall be posted in plain view of patrons within the facility. 
(d)  Filter rooms. 
(1)  A permanent, legible, engraved plastic or laminated paper specification placard shall be conspicuously displayed within the filter room and shall be adequately lighted. The following information shall be included on the placard: 
a.  Name and address of the facility. 
b.  Volume in gallons. 
c.  Water surface area in square feet. 
d.  Minimum turnover time in hours. 
e.  Minimum rate of flow in gallons per minute to provide the required turnover time. 
f.  Maximum facility load, and maximum pool load. 
(2)  Separate legible placards shall be posted in an appropriate location within the filter room to describe the following pool operating procedures: 
a.  Instructions on the proper operation of pumps and filters including the valve lineups for filtration. 
b.  Instructions on proper backwashing or cleaning procedures and valve positions for backwashing. 
(e)  Facility and swimming pool loads. A separate, permanent, legible placard clearly indicating the maximum facility load and individual swimming pool load shall be conspicuously posted at the main entrance to the swimming pool facility. The letters and numbers indicating the load shall be a minimum of two inches in height. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-56; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-530. - Precautions for communicable disease. 
    Any person having an obvious skin disease, nasal or ear discharge, inflamed eye or any communicable disease shall be excluded from the facility. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-57; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-531. - Food service. 
    Any person in the process of eating or drinking shall remain in an area designated for the consumption of food and drink. This area shall be at least ten feet from the swimming pool edge and shall be enclosed by a fence or suitable barrier. Glass containers are not permitted in the pool area. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-58; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-532. - Boisterous, rough play, and running prohibited. 
    Boisterous and/or rough play and running is prohibited at any swimming pool facility. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-59; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-533. - Lifeguards. 
(a)  There shall be at least one lifeguard at all pool facilities. A minimum of one lifeguard shall be required for every 50 patrons or fraction thereof in the pool or when conditions exist that may compromise the health or safety of pool patrons. 
(b)  Lifeguards shall be at least 15 years of age and shall be properly trained and certified in accordance with nationally recognized standards equivalent to or exceeding those set by the American Red Cross. Lifeguards shall also be trained and certified in cardio-pulmonary resuscitation in accordance with national standards equivalent to or exceeding those set by the American Red Cross. It is the responsibility of each training organization that issues lifeguards and/or CPR certifications to ensure the course standards are equivalent to or exceed those set by the American Red Cross. Lifeguards shall have their original document of certification and a valid photo identification at the pool facility during operation of the pool facility. 
(c)  Lifeguards shall wear distinguishing emblems on their clothing clearly identifying them as lifeguards while on duty. Lifeguards shall not be subject to duties that would distract their attention from the proper observation of patrons in the pool area or that would prevent immediate assistance to patrons in distress. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-60; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-534. - Safety and rescue equipment; other safety features. 
(a)  Specific aids. Every swimming pool facility shall be equipped with the following readily accessible safety and rescue aids: 
(1)  A minimum of one rescue tube shall be provided immediately adjacent to each lifeguard stationed poolside. The rescue tube shall measure at least 45 inches in length and shall provide adequate buoyancy to keep two persons afloat in the water. 
(2)  An approved first aid kit, which meets OSHA First Aid 29 CFR 1910.151 standards, shall be readily available. The kit shall meet the minimum requirements of generic first aid kits according to the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Z308.1-1978. 
(3)  A full-length backboard with straps shall be provided. The backboard shall be buoyant, and capable of supporting a minimum of 350 pounds, center loaded, with minimal deflection. The backboard shall have an impervious surface and be provided with runners, numerous hand/strap holes, and a minimum of three backboard straps. 
(4)  Provide one more light, but strong, nontelescopic poles with blunted ends not less than 12 feet in length including a body hook. 
(b)  Other safety features. 
(1)  The room designated for emergency care of casualties shall, at a minimum, be equipped with an approved first aid kit, a cot, and two blankets. Filter or chemical storage rooms shall not be used as emergency care rooms. 
(2)  All chemicals associated with the facility shall be stored and utilized in a safe and approved manner in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations. Incompatible chemicals shall not be stored in close proximity to each other. Cleaning chemicals and supplies shall be stored in safe manner, separate from swimming pool chemicals. Chemicals shall be stored in properly labeled containers which shall be kept covered at all times. 
(3)  Chemical vats shall be covered with proper lids and shall be provided with an approved means of secondary containment such as an outer spill control container or a spill pallet adequate in size and capacity to contain spills and leaks. 
(4)  Protective equipment, including but not limited to goggles or full face shields; neoprene rubber gloves; and rubber aprons shall be provided and used by personnel handling hazardous chemical compounds. 
(5)  Plugs or caps shall be installed at all pool suction cleaner outlet ports when the suction cleaner is not in use. The main valve controlling the water flow from the pool suction cleaner outlet ports shall be closed when the pool suction cleaner is not is use. 
(6)  All safety equipment and features required in this division shall be maintained in good condition and repair. 
(7)  Pool water temperature shall not exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(8)  Safety signs shall be displayed in a prominent location warning against diving into water depths less than five feet of water without specific supervision. The letterings of the safety signs must be a minimum of five inches in height. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-61; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-535. - Laundering. 
    Bathing suits, towels and other reusable materials furnished by a swimming pool facility shall be properly cleaned or laundered and disinfected before being issued to patrons. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-62; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-536. - Water contamination. 
(a)  The following information shall be posted at the entrance of every pool: 
(1)  If you have or have had diarrhea in the past two weeks, please do not use the pool. 
(2)  Shower your child and yourself before entering the pool or after using the toilet. 
(3)  Bathers who are not toilet trained or incontinent persons must wear a swim diaper. 
(4)  Do not drink pool water. 
(b)  The introduction of body waste, including sputum or vomitus, into a pool is prohibited. Patrons wearing cloth or disposable diapers are prohibited from entering the pool water. A pool contaminated by human feces or vomit shall be cleared immediately. The following actions shall be taken prior to reopening the pool: 
(1)  In the event of well-formed stool contamination: 
a.  Clear the pool. 
b.  Remove as much of the contaminating material as possible using a net or scoop. Vacuuming is not recommended unless it discharges directly to waste. 
c.  Raise pool disinfectant level to a minimum of three ppm and adjust pH to a level of 7.5 or less. 
d.  Prohibit patrons from entering the pool for a minimum of one hour. 
(2)  In the event of diarrhea or vomitus contamination: 
a.  Clear the pool. 
b.  Remove as much contaminating material as possible from the water using a net or scoop. Vacuuming is not recommended unless it discharges directly to waste. 
c.  Raise pool disinfectant level to a minimum of three ppm and adjust pH to a level of 7.5 or less. 
d.  Prohibit patrons from entering the pool for a minimum of two hours. 
(3)  In the event of a fecal or vomitus contamination from a patron with Cryptosporiodosis: 
a.  Clear the pool. 
b.  Immediately notify the director of the occurrence. 
c.  Remove as much of the contaminating material as possible from the pool water. Vacuuming is not recommended unless it discharges directly to waste. 
d.  Raise pool disinfectant level to a minimum of 20 ppm and adjust pH to a level of 7.5 or less for a minimum of nine hours. 
e.  Patrons are prohibited from entering the pool during this time period. 
f.  Achieve acceptable disinfectant residuals and chemical balance as specified in section 8-538, table III prior to allowing patrons to enter the pool. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-63; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-537. - Water clarity. 
    When a swimming pool is open for use, the water shall be considered sufficiently clear when the main drain grates are clearly visible. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-64; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-538. - Water treatment and test equipment. 
(a)  The following chemicals may be used to treat swimming pool water: aluminum sulfate, calcium chloride, calcium hypochlorite, carbon dioxide, cyanuric acid, lime, muriatic acid, polyaluminum chloride, sodium bicarbonate, sodium bisulfate, sodium carbonate, sodium hypochlorite, sodium thiosulphate, approved algaecides, approved bromine compounds, and approved chelating, sequestering and clarifying agents. No other chemicals shall be used to treat swimming pool water without prior written authorization from the director. 
(b)  Aluminum sulfate and polyaluminum chloride shall not be fed continuously into a recirculation system using rapid sand filters. Formation of the flock shall be achieved separately and applied directly to the filter influent during the rewash and continuing into the early part of the filter cycle. 
(c)  Chemical water quality standards for swimming pools shall be as follows: 
(1)  Except as noted below, disinfectant residual, pH, total alkalinity, and calcium hardness shall be continuously maintained within the minimum and maximum ranges specified in table III. If the swimming pool is equipped with automatic chemical controllers utilizing ORP measurements, ORP shall be maintained within the range specified in table III. Disinfectant residual limits specified in table III may be exceeded in pools with automatic chemical controllers, which utilize ORP measurements and continually analyze and automatically control pH and the disinfectant residual, only if necessary to maintain the ORP specified in table III; however, the disinfectant residual shall not exceed ten ppm in such pools. The use of ORP sensing equipment does not eliminate the requirement for routine water testing specified in section 8-528. Disinfectant residual limits specified in table III may be exceeded when superchlorinating a swimming pool provided that no patrons are present in the swimming pool and that the disinfectant level is returned to the acceptable range prior to allowing patrons to enter the swimming pool water. 
Table III. Chemical Water Quality Standards for Swimming Pools 
Parameter Minimum Ideal Maximum Free chlorine residual (ppm) 1 1-3 10 Combined chlorine residual (ppm) 0 0 0.2 Bromine residual (ppm) 2 2-4 4-6 Oxidation reduction potential (ORP) (millivolts) 650 750-900 N/A pH 7.2 7.4-7.6 7.8 Total alkalinity (ppm) 60 80-120 180 Calcium hardness (ppm) 150 200-400 1,000  
(2)  Except as noted in this subsection (c) and subsection (d) of this section, disinfectant residuals shall be maintained within the ranges specified in table III, 24 hours per day, through the use of automatic disinfection equipment specified in section 8-496. For swimming pools that backwash/clean filters to storm drains, streams, lakes or other bodies of water, disinfectant levels may be temporarily reduced immediately prior to the backwashing/cleaning of filters, provided the swimming pool facility is not open for patron use. 
(d)  If cyanuric acid or chlorinated cyanurates is used in an outdoor swimming pool, the cyanuric acid levels and disinfectant residuals shall be maintained within the following ranges: A free chlorine residual of at least two ppm shall be maintained for cyanuric acid levels from zero to 50 ppm. The use of cyanuric acid or other chlorine stabilizers is prohibited in indoor swimming pools. 
(e)  An approved water quality test kit for determining free and total chlorine or total bromine residuals, pH, total alkalinity, and calcium hardness shall be provided and maintained. Provisions shall be made for checking superchlorination levels. Diethyl-p-phenylene diamine (DPD), or other testing reagent approved by the director, is required for determining free halogen residual. If another disinfectant has been approved by the director for use at a swimming pool, an appropriate test kit approved by the director shall be provided and maintained. A test kit for measuring the concentration of cyanuric acid, accurate within five ppm, shall be provided at each swimming pool using cyanuric acid or chlorinated cyanurates. 
(f)  Hand-feeding of chemicals shall not be permitted during hours of operation or within 30 minutes prior to opening. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-65; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-539. - Design load. 
    The maximum individual swimming pool bather load shall be determined by dividing the total water surface area in square feet of each swimming pool within the swimming pool facility by 27 square feet. The designated maximum individual swimming pool bather loads and the maximum facility load shall not be exceeded. The pool operator shall be responsible for enforcing the maximum individual swimming pool bather loads and the maximum facility load. The maximum facility load may be temporarily exceeded to allow for spectators of special events, such as, recreational swimming meets or other water sport activities; provided the spectators shall not have access to and shall be separated from the pool both during and after the event. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-66; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-540. - Spectators. 
    No person in street shoes shall be allowed on the deck of a swimming pool within five feet of the pool edge. Exceptions may be made for participants and spectators of swimming meets or other water sport activities, operating personnel, personnel engaged in repair work or the director. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-67; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Secs. 8-541-8-558. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SPA POOLS; DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 8-559. - Location. 
    The location of a spa pool shall in no way hinder the operations for which it is designed, nor adversely affect patron safety or water quality. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-68; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-560. - Access. 
    Direct and unobstructed access to any spa pool area shall be provided as specified in section 8-475(a). Emergency access to indoor or elevated spa pools shall be provided as specified in section 8-475(b). 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-69; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-561. - Construction materials. 
    Spa pools shall be constructed of materials specified in section 8-476. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-70; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001) 
Sec. 8-562. - Design. 
    Subject to the provisions of this section, a spa pool may be of any dimension or shape, provided that satisfactory recirculation of water can be obtained and that no undue hazards to patrons are created. The dimension or shape shall comply with the following specifications: 
(1)  The maximum water depth shall be four feet measured from the water line. 
(2)  The maximum depth of any seat or sitting bench shall not be more than 24 inches below the water line. 
(3)  All corners shall be coved as specified in section 8-480. 
(4)  The slope of the floor shall not exceed a ratio of 1:12. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-71; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-563. - Hydrostatic pressure relief valve. 
    Hydrostatic pressure relief valves shall be installed as specified in section 8-478 unless it can be demonstrated that the spa pool will not be displaced by hydrostatic pressure. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-72; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-564. - Handholds. 
    Spa pools shall be provided with suitable handholds as specified in section 8-482. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-73; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-565. - Stairs and bench seats. 
(a)  Spa pool stairs shall be provided where water depths are greater than 24 inches. 
(b)  The design and construction of spa pool stairs and bench seats shall conform to the following specifications: 
(1)  Step treads shall have a minimum unobstructed horizontal depth of ten inches and a minimum continuous width of 24 inches. 
(2)  Riser heights shall not be less than seven inches nor greater than 12 inches. The bottom tread shall not serve as a bench or seat. 
(3)  Each set of stairs shall be provided with a minimum of one handrail to fully service all treads and risers. 
(4)  The top and leading edge of all stair treads shall be marked on the horizontal surface as specified in section 8-483(b)(3). 
(5)  The step treads of all stairs shall be of nonslip construction. 
(6)  A minimum of one means of egress shall be provided for spa pools with a perimeter of 50 feet or less. One additional means of egress shall be provided for each additional 50 feet of pool perimeter, or fraction thereof. Additional means of egress may be required as determined by the director. The location of the means of egress shall be determined by the design of the spa pool. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-74; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-566. - Decks. 
    All spa pools shall have a continuous deck, at least five feet in width, extending around at least 50 percent of the spa pool. Except as provided above, decks shall comply with the requirements specified in section 8-493. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-75; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-567. - Lighting. 
    Lighting shall be provided according to all applicable specifications of section 8-494. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-76; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-568. - Safety requirements. 
(a)  Depth markings. Spa pools depth markings shall comply with the requirements specified in section 8-495(d). 
(b)  Protrusions, obstructions, entanglements prohibited. There shall be no protrusions, extensions, means of entanglement or obstructions which can cause entrapment or injury. 
(c)  Timer switch. A timer switch that automatically shuts off the hydrotherapy jets and air blowers shall be provided. The timer switch shall be readily accessible to patrons and be located directly adjacent to the spa pool and shall have a maximum setting which does not exceed 15 minutes. The timer switch shall not be accessible from within the spa pool. 
(d)  Emergency pump cutoff switch. A prominently identified and conspicuously located spa pool emergency pump cutoff switch shall be provided at each spa pool and shall be immediately accessible from the spa pool deck to be used strictly in the event of an emergency. The emergency switch shall deactivate all spa pool pumps. An emergency pump cutoff switch sign shall be posted at the switch, and shall have letters at least two inches in height which are color contrasted with the background color of the sign. The emergency pump cutoff switch shall not be capable of activating the spa pool pumps. 
(e)  Telephone. If the telephone specified in section 8-495(c) is not provided, a direct dial, hard-wired telephone that is fully operational shall be provided within 100 feet of the spa pool and shall be readily accessible at all times. The facility name, address, and the emergency numbers, including the phone number for the pool operator, shall be posted by the telephone. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-77; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-569. - Fencing and barriers. 
    Fencing and barriers shall be provided as specified in section 8-497. In addition, for indoor spa pool facilities, locked doors or an equivalent barrier acceptable to the director shall be provided to prevent the entry of unauthorized individuals. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-78; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-570. - Drinking fountains. 
    Each spa pool facility shall have at least one drinking fountain readily accessible to all patrons. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-79; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-571. - Inlets, outlets, piping, drains, and skimmers. 
(a)  Spa pool inlets and outlets shall be provided and arranged to maintain a uniform circulation of water and disinfectant residual. 
(b)  All spa pool piping shall comply with the requirements specified in section 8-488, except only subsurface spa pool piping which is not integrally included in the manufacture of the spa pool shall be embedded in and covered with sand or an approved equivalent. 
(c)  All spa pools shall be provided with a minimum of one skimmer. Spa pool skimmers shall comply with the requirements specified in section 8-492(2). 
(d)  Spa pool suction outlets shall be designed so that each pumping system in the spa pool provides one of the following alternatives: 
(1)  Two or more interconnected suction outlets. The system shall be designed so that none of the outlets can be isolated from the suction line by a valve or by any other means. All piping associated with the suction outlets shall be of equal diameter and each suction outlet shall be of equal size. Suction outlets and associated piping shall be hydraulically designed to provide equal flow through each suction outlet. 
(2)  Other methods that prevent suction outlet body entrapment or injury may be approved by the director. 
(e)  If fill spouts are used at spa pools, they shall be installed according to applicable requirements specified in section 8-488(b). 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-80; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-572. - Recirculation system. 
(a)  All spa pools shall be equipped with a recirculation system consisting of at least a pump, connecting piping, fittings, valves, a filter, disinfecting equipment, necessary pipe connections to the inlets and outlets, skimmers and main drains. 
(b)  The recirculation system shall be designed for a maximum turnover time of 15 minutes. 
(c)  Adequate provision shall be made for backwashing or cleaning the filters. 
(d)  A separate recirculation system shall be provided for each spa pool. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-81; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-573. - Filters and gauges. 
(a)  The recirculation system of a spa pool shall be equipped with a filtration system that will filter the entire volume of the spa pool at the rate specified in section 8-572(b). 
(b)  Only high-rate sand, diatomaceous earth or replaceable cartridge filters shall be used for spa pools. Other filtration systems may be used with the approval of the director. Except as provided in this section, filters and associated piping and valves shall comply with the requirements specified in section 8-486(a). 
(c)  Pressure gauges and flow meters shall be installed as specified in section 8-486(b). 
(d)  When cartridge filters are used, an extra set of cartridge filters shall be on site. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-82; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-574. - Pumps and strainers. 
    A pump shall be provided with adequate capacity to recirculate the spa pool water at the rate specified section 8-572(b). Pumps and strainers shall meet the requirements as specified in section 8-487(a) and (b), except the turnover time specified in section 8-572(b) shall be achieved. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-83; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-575. - Filter room. 
    A filter room shall be provided which meets the requirements specified in section 8-485, except this room shall not be required to be directly accessible from the spa pool area. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-84; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-576. - Air induction systems. 
(a)  An air induction system, when provided, shall prevent water backup that could cause electrical shock hazards. 
(b)  Air intake sources shall be positioned to minimize introduction of contaminants, such as deck water and dirt, into the spa pool. 
(c)  Integral air passages shall be pressure tested at 11/2 times the intended working pressure during the time of installation to ensure airtight integrity. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-85; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-577. - Disinfection equipment. 
(a)  All spa pools shall be provided with disinfection equipment meeting the requirements specified in section 8-496(a) and (c). 
(b)  Chlorine gas shall not be used as a disinfectant in spa pools. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-86; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Secs. 8-578-8-602. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - SPA POOLS; OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 8-603. - Security. 
    Spa pool facilities shall be operated and maintained as specified in section 8-526. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-87; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-604. - Water operating levels. 
    The water level shall be maintained within the operating range of the skimmer or at the top of the overflow rim of a gutter system at all times the spa is open for use. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-88; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-605. - Monitoring, reporting, and recordkeeping. 
    Spa pool water testing shall be performed as specified in section 8-528. In addition, the dates and times the spa pool is drained and cleaned shall be recorded. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-89; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-606. - Placards. 
    Placards shall be provided as specified in section 8-529. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-90; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-607. - Precautions relative to communicable disease. 
    Precautions relative to communicable disease as specified in section 8-530 shall be enforced. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-91; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-608. - Food service. 
    Food service shall be limited as specified in section 8-531. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-92; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-609. - Boisterous and rough play. 
    Boisterous and/or rough play and running at any spa pool facility is prohibited. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-93; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-610. - Temperature requirements. 
    Spa pool water temperature shall not exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit. A thermostat shall be provided for the control of the spa pool water temperature. An accurate, impact resistant spa pool thermometer shall be kept in each spa pool for measuring water temperature. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-94; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-611. - Safety and rescue equipment, other safety features. 
(a)  Every spa pool facility shall be equipped with the following readily accessible: 
(1)  An approved first aid kit, which meets OSHA First Aid 29 CFR 1910.151 standards, shall be readily available. The kit shall meet the minimum requirements of generic first aid kits according to the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Z308.1-1978. 
(2)  A full-length backboard shall be provided as specified in section 8-534(a)(3). 
(3)  A working clock shall be provided which is clearly visible from within the spa pool. 
(b)  Other safety features: 
(1)  The following recommendations for safe use of the spa shall be posted at the entrance of every spa pool: 
a.  Do not use alone. 
b.  Pregnant women, elderly persons and persons suffering from heart disease, diabetes or abnormal blood pressure, or other at-risk persons should not enter the spa pool without consulting a physician. 
c.  Do not use the spa pool while under the influence of alcohol, tranquilizers, or other drugs which may cause drowsiness, alter blood pressure or put the patron at risk. 
d.  Do not use at water temperatures above 104 degrees Fahrenheit. 
e.  Unsupervised use by children is prohibited. 
f.  Enter and exit slowly. 
g.  Limit your use of the spa pool to a maximum of 15 minutes at one time. 
h.  Cool down before revisit. 
i.  Long exposure may result in nausea, dehydration, dizziness, fainting or death. 
j.  The use of oils, body lotions and mineral bath salts is prohibited. 
k.  Patrons with symptoms of a communicable disease are prohibited from entering the spa pool. 
l.  Failure to comply with these regulations constitutes grounds for exclusion from the premises or management action as necessary. 
(2)  All chemicals associated with spa pools shall be stored and utilized in a safe and approved manner as specified in section 8-534(b)(2). 
(3)  Protective equipment shall be provided for handling hazardous chemicals as specified in section 8-534(b)(2). 
(4)  Filter and chemical storage rooms shall be locked at all times when authorized personnel are not present. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-95; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-612. - Laundering. 
    Bathing suits, towels and other reusable materials furnished by a spa pool facility shall be properly cleaned or laundered and disinfected before being issued to patrons. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-96; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-613. - Water clarity. 
    When a spa pool is open for use, the water shall be considered sufficiently clear when the main drain grates are clearly visible. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-97; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-614. - Water treatment and test equipment. 
(a)  No chemicals other than those specified in section 8-538(a) shall be used to treat spa pool water without written authorization from the director. 
(b)  Except as noted below, disinfectant residual, pH, total alkalinity, and calcium hardness shall be continuously maintained within the minimum and maximum ranges specified in table IV. If the spa pool is equipped with automatic chemical controllers utilizing ORP measurements, ORP shall be maintained within the ranges specified in table IV. Disinfectant residual limits specified in table IV may be exceeded in pools with automatic chemical controllers, which utilize OPR measurements and continually analyze and automatically control pH and the disinfectant residual, only if necessary to maintain the ORP specified in table IV; however, the disinfectant residual shall not exceed ten ppm in such pools. The use of IRP sensing equipment does not eliminate the requirement for routine water testing specified in section 8-605. Disinfectant residual limits specified in table IV may be exceeded when superchlorinating a spa pool provided that no patrons are present in the spa pool water and that the disinfectant level is returned to the acceptable range prior to allowing patrons to enter the spa pool water. 
Table IV. Chemical Water Quality Standards for Spa Pools 
Parameter Minimum Ideal Maximum Free chlorine residual (ppm) 2 3-5 10 Combined chlorine residual (ppm) 0 0 0.2 Bromine residual (ppm) 2 3-5 10 Oxidation reduction potential (ORP) (millivolts) 650 750-900 N/A pH 7.2 7.4-7.6 7.8 Total alkalinity (ppm) 60 80-120 180 Calcium hardness (ppm) 150 200-400 1000  
(c)  If cyanuric acid or chlorinated cuyanurate is used in an outdoor spa pool, the cyanuric acid levels and disinfectant residuals shall be maintained within the following ranges: A free chlorine residual of at least four ppm shall be maintained for cyanuric acid levels from zero to 50 ppm. The concentration of cyanuric acid shall not exceed 50 ppm. The use of cyanuric acid or other chlorine stablizers is prohibited in indoor spa pools. 
(d)  An approved water quality test kit shall be provided, as specified in section 8-538(e). 
(e)  Hand-feeding of chemicals shall not be permitted while the spa pool is open or accessible to patrons and within 30 minutes of opening. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-98; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-615. - Water contamination. 
    The introduction of body wastes, including sputum or vomitus, into a spa pool is prohibited. A spa pool contaminated by human feces or vomit shall be closed immediately and the following additional actions shall be taken by the spa pool operator: 
(1)  Remove contaminating material from the pool water. 
(2)  Backwash the filters. 
(3)  Drain the spa pool. 
(4)  Clean and disinfect the bottom and sidewalls of the spa pool and skimmers. 
(5)  Refill with potable water. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-99; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-616. - Posting of water quality test results and water quality standards. 
    The water tests indicated in section 8-614 shall be conducted and the results posted as specified in section 8-529(a). 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-100; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-617. - Design load. 
    An individual spa pool load shall be determined by the director at the time of construction. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-101; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Secs. 8-618-8-637. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - BATHHOUSE FACILITIES; DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 8-638. - Required; exceptions. 
    All water recreation facilities shall provide bathhouse facilities. Motels and other similar establishments which restrict the use of all pools to occupant guests are not required to provide bathhouse facilities. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-102; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-639. - Design and location. 
    The bathhouse shall be designed so plumbing fixtures are located in the line of travel used by patrons prior to entering the pool area. The bathhouse shall be designed so patrons pass through the rooms containing the dressing areas, showers and toilet fixtures prior to accessing the pool. It shall be provided with an entrance and a separate exit opening directly to the swimming pool, or spa pool facility deck; provided, however, the exit shall not be near the deep portion of a swimming pool when the pool depth is greater than five feet. Computations for plumbing fixtures shall be based on the premise that at the time of maximum load, one-half of the patrons will be male and one-half female. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-103; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-640. - Floors. 
    Floors for all showers, toilets and lavatories in a bathhouse shall have a minimum slope of 1:48 to the drains with no low spots which will allow water to pond. Such floors shall have a smooth but nonslip, nonabsorbent, finish and shall not be carpeted and shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. The room shall be mechanically ventilated. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-104; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-641. - Dressing rooms. 
    Separate dressing rooms shall be provided for each sex. Lockers, baskets, hooks, or other sanitary means for storage of clothing and personal accessories shall be provided. Dressing rooms shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Clothing hooks shall not present a puncture hazard to patrons. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-105; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-642. - Showers. 
    Showers shall be provided in the proportion of one per each 40 persons or fraction thereof at each swimming pool or spa pool, based upon the maximum facility load. Each shower shall supply an adequate quantity of heated water through a device that will prevent scalding. The device that prevents scalding shall be adjusted to provide a maximum hot water temperature at the nozzle head of 110 degrees Fahrenheit, and a minimum hot water temperature at the nozzle head of at least 90 degrees Fahrenheit. Water from each shower shall drain separately or each shower shall be located and have the floor sloped so that waste from one shower shall not flow over the floor serving another. Each shower fixture shall be provided with a liquid soap dispenser and an adequate supply of liquid soap. Showers shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-106; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-643. - Toilets, urinals and mop sinks. 
    Toilet facilities shall be provided in the proportion as required by the International Plumbing Code. An adequate supply of dispensed toilet paper shall be provided to each water closet. A separate custodial mop sink shall be provided exclusively for cleaning purposes and shall be located within 100 feet of the shower and toilet rooms. Toilets and urinals shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-107; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-644. - Lavatories. 
    Lavatories shall be provided in the proportion as required by the International Plumbing Code. Each lavatory shall be provided with a liquid soap dispenser and an adequate supply of liquid soap. Each lavatory shall be provided with an adequate supply of dispensed paper towers and/or a mechanical means of hand drying. Lavatories shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-108; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-645. - Hose bibs. 
    Hose bibs with vacuum breakers or approved backflow preventors shall be provided at convenient locations. A minimum of one hose bib shall be provided in both the female and male sections of the bathhouse. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-109; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-646. - Lighting. 
    In addition to requirements set forth in chapter 14, article V, pertaining to outdoor lighting, all areas within the bathhouse facility shall be illuminated at a minimum of 30 footcandles measured 24 inches above the floor. All light fixtures shall be shielded. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-110; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Sec. 8-647. - Saunas and steam rooms. 
    A sauna, steam room, or similar device, in which the patron's body is exposed to water, steam, or moist or dry heat that is provided in conjunction with a regulated swimming pool or spa pool facility, shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of the VUSBC, and shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition; and shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Shielded, vaporproof lighting fixtures shall be provided. 
(2)  Adequate mechanical ventilation shall be provided. 
(3)  The doors to all steam rooms and sauna rooms shall have viewing ports fitted with shatterproof glass or plastic, and shall not be capable of being blocked or otherwise secured against opening by pushing from the inside. The door to the sauna or steam room shall open outward. 
(4)  A timer switch that automatically shuts off the heat or steam source. The timer switch shall be readily accessible to patrons and located directly adjacent to the sauna or steam room and shall have a maximum setting which does not exceed 15 minutes. 
(5)  A suitable barrier shall be provided to prevent patron injury from the heating element or unit. 
(6)  Bench surfaces shall be of a smooth finish and free of protrusions that could cause injury to patrons. 
(7)  A sign shall be posted stating that users must shower prior to entering the pool. 
(Code 1982, § 27.1-111; Ord. No. 1712, 11-26-2001; Ord. No. 1777, 6-27-2005) 
Secs. 8-648-8-677. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PRIVATE SCHOOLS, SPECIAL SCHOOLS AND HOME CHILD CARE FACILITIES[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 1988 states: "That the provisions of this ordinance shall take effect upon adoption. All providers that are permitted under Article VI of Chapter 8 of the City of Falls Church City Code on the effective date of this ordinance, and all adults who reside in the provider's facility, must submit to fingerprinting and provide the personal descriptive information required in City of Falls Church Code § 8-692(a) and the sworn statements and consent forms required in City of Falls Church Code § 8-692(a)(5), as well as any applicable fee required thereunder, to the Fairfax County Office for Children by September 30, 2018. The failure to comply with this requirement will result in a suspension of the provider's permit. Upon receipt of the sworn statements and forms, the Director, Office For Children Fairfax County, will request the criminal history search set forth in § 8-692(b)(3)." 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1890, adopted Feb. 25, 2013, amended art. VI in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. VI, §§ 8-678-8-700, was entitled "Private Schools, Special Schools and Daycare Facilities", and derived from: Code 1982, §§ 28-1-28-23; and Ord. No. 1708, adopted July 23, 2001. 
State Law reference- Social services, Code of Virginia, § 63.2-100 et seq. 

Sec. 8-678. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult means a person 18 years of age or older. 
    Barrier offenses means offenses which bar an applicant from obtaining a home child care facility permit pursuant to this article or mandate revocation of an outstanding permit. Barrier offenses apply: 
(1)  If the provider or any person who resides in the home is convicted of any of the following offenses set out in the Virginia Code: 
a.  A felony violation of § 16.1-253 to § 16.1-253.4, Violation of provisions of protective order; 
b.  Any violation of the following sections of Title 18.2, Chapter 4, Article 1, Homicide: 
1.  18.2-31 Capital murder; 
2.  18.2-32 First and second degree murder; 
3.  18.2-32.1 Murder of a pregnant woman; 
4.  18.2-32.2 Killing a fetus; 
5.  18.2-33 Felony homicide; 
6.  18.2-35 How voluntary manslaughter punished; 
7.  18.2-36 How involuntary manslaughter punished; 
8.  18.2-36.1 Certain conduct punishable as involuntary manslaughter; 
9.  1832.36.2 Involuntary manslaughter; operating a watercraft while under the influence. 
c.  Any violation of the following sections of Title 18.2, Chapter 4 Article 2, Crimes by Mobs: 
1.  18.2-41 Shooting, stabbing, etc., with intent to maim, kill, etc., by mob; 
2.  18.2-42 Assault or battery by mob. 
d.  Any felony violation of the following sections of Title 18.2, Chapter 4 Article 2.1, Crimes by Gang: 
1.  18.2-46.2 Prohibited criminal street gang participation; 
2.  18.2-46.3 Recruitment of persons for criminal street gang; 
3.  18.2-46.3:1 Third or subsequent conviction of criminal street gang crimes; 
4.  18.2-46.3:3 Enhanced punishment for gang activity taking place in a gang-free zone. 
e.  Any violation of the following sections of Title 18.2. Chapter 2, Article 2.2, Terrorism Offenses: 
1.  18.2-46.5 Committing, conspiring and aiding and abetting acts of terrorism; 
2.  18.2-46.6 Possession, manufacture, distribution, etc. of weapon of terrorism or hoax device prohibited; 
3.  18.2-46.7 Act of bioterrorism against agricultural crops or animals. 
f.  Any violation of the following sections of Title 18.2, Chapter 4, Article 3, Kidnapping and Related Offenses: 
1.  18.2-47 Abduction and kidnapping, any violation of subsection a or b; 
2.  18.2-48 Abduction with intent to extort money or for immoral purpose; 
3.  18.2-49 Threatening, attempting or assisting in such abduction; 
4.  18.2-50 Enticing, etc., another into a dwelling house with intent to commit certain felonies 3. 
g.  Any violation of the following sections of Title 18.2, Chapter 4, Article 4, Assaults and Bodily Wounding: 
1.  18.2-51 Shooting, stabbing, etc., with intent to maim, kill, etc.; 
2.  18.2-51.1 Malicious bodily injury to law-enforcement officers, firefighters, search and rescue personnel, or emergency medical services personnel; 
3.  18.2-51.2 Aggravated malicious wounding; 
4.  18.2-51.3 Prohibition against reckless endangerment of others by throwing objects from places higher than one story; 
5.  18.2-51.4 Maiming, etc., of another resulting from driving while intoxicated; 
6.  18.2-51.5 Maiming, etc., of another resulting from operating a watercraft while intoxicated; 
7.  18.2-51.6 Strangulation of another; 
8.  18.2-52 Malicious bodily injury by means of any caustic substance or agent or use of any explosive or fire; 
9.  18.2-52.1 Possession of infectious biological substances or radiological agents; 
10.  18.2-53 Shooting, etc., in committing or attempting a felony; 
11.  18.2-54.1 Attempts to poison; 
12.  18.2-54.2 Adulteration of food, drink, drugs, cosmetics, etc.; 
13.  18.2-55 Bodily injuries caused by prisoners, state juvenile probationers and state and local adult probationers or adult parolees; 
14.  18.2-55.1 Hazing of youth gang members unlawful; 
15.  18.2-56 Hazing unlawful; civil and criminal liability; duty of school, etc., officials; 
16.  18.2-56.1 Reckless handling of firearms; reckless handling while hunting; 
17.  18.2-56.2 Allowing access to firearms by children; 
18.  18.2-57 Assault and battery; 
19.  18.2-57.01 Pointing laser at law-enforcement officer unlawful; 
20.  18.2-57.02 Disarming a law-enforcement or correctional officer; 
21.  18.2-57.2 Assault and battery against a family or household member. 
h.  Any violation of the following sections of Title 18.2, Chapter 4, Article 5, Robbery: 
1.  18.2-58 How punished; 
2.  18.2-58.1 Carjacking. 
i.  Any violation of the following sections of Title 18.2, Chapter 4, Article 6, Extortion and Other Threats: 
1.  18.2-59 Extortion of money, property or pecuniary benefit; 
2.  18.2-60 Threats of death or bodily injury to a person or member of his family; threats to commit serious bodily harm to persons on school property; 
3.  18.2-60.1 Threatening the Governor or his immediate family; 
4.  Any felony violation of § 18.2-60.3, Stalking; 
5.  Any felony violation of 18.2-60.4, Violation of protective orders. 
j.  Any violation of the following sections of Title 18.2, Chapter 4, Article 7, Criminal Sexual Assault: 
1.  18.2-61 Rape; 
2.  18.2-63 Carnal knowledge of child between 13 and 15 years of age; 
3.  18.2-64.1 Carnal knowledge of certain minors; 
4.  18.2-64.2 Carnal knowledge of an inmate, parolee, probationer, detainee, or pretrial or posttrial offender; 
5.  18.2-67.1 Forcible sodomy; 
6.  18.2-67.2 Object sexual penetration; 
7.  18.2-67.3 Aggravated sexual battery; 
8.  18.2-67.4 Sexual battery; 
9.  18.2-67.4:1 Infected sexual battery; 
10.  18.2-67.4:2 Sexual abuse of a child under 15 years of age; 
11.  18.2-67.5 Attempted rape, forcible sodomy, object sexual penetration, aggravated sexual battery, and sexual battery; 
12.  18.2-67.5:1 Punishment upon conviction of third misdemeanor offense; 
13.  18.2-67.5:2 Punishment upon conviction of certain subsequent felony sexual assault; 
14.  18.2-67.5:3 Punishment upon conviction of certain subsequent violent felony sexual assault. 
k.  Any violation of the following of sections of Title 18.2, Chapter 5, Article 1, Arson and Related Crimes: 
1.  18.2-77 Burning or destroying dwelling house, etc.; 
2.  18.2-79 Burning or destroying meeting house, etc.; 
3.  18.2-80 Burning or destroying any other building or structure; 
4.  18.2-81 Burning or destroying personal property, standing grain, etc.; 
5.  18.2-82 Burning building or structure while in such building or structure with intent to commit felony; 
6.  18.2-83 Threats to bomb or damage buildings or means of transportation; false information as to danger to such buildings, etc.; 
7.  18.2-84 Causing, inciting, etc., commission of act proscribed by § 18.2-83; 
8.  18.2-85 Manufacture, possession, use, etc., of fire bombs or explosive materials or devices; 
9.  18.2-86 Setting fire to woods, fences, grass, etc.; 
10.  18.2-87 Setting woods, etc., on fire intentionally whereby another is damaged or jeopardized; 
11.  18.2-87.1 Setting off chemical bombs capable of producing smoke in certain public buildings; 
12.  18.2-88 Carelessly damaging property by fire. 
l.  Any violation of the following sections of Title 18.2, Chapter 5, Article 2, Burglary and Related Offenses: 
1.  18.2-89 Burglary; 
2.  18.2-90 Entering dwelling house, etc., with intent to commit murder, rape, robbery or arson; 
3.  18.2-91 Entering dwelling house, etc., with intent to commit larceny, assault and battery or other felony; 
4.  18.2-92 Breaking and entering dwelling house with intent to commit other misdemeanor; 
5.  18.2-93 Entering bank, armed, with intent to commit larceny; 
6.  18.2-94 Possession of burglarious tools, etc. 
m.  Any felony violation of the following sections of Title 18.2, Chapter 7, Crimes Involving Health and Safety Article 1, Drugs: 
1.  18.2-248 Manufacturing, selling, giving, distributing, or possessing with intent to manufacture, sell, give, or distribute a controlled substance or an imitation controlled substance prohibited; 
2.  18.2-248.01 Transporting controlled substances into the commonwealth; 
3.  18.2-248.02 Allowing a minor or incapacitated person to be present during manufacture or attempted manufacture of methamphetamine prohibited; 
4.  18.2-248.1 Penalties for sale, gift, distribution or possession with intent to sell, give or distribute marijuana; 
5.  18.2-248.5 Illegal stimulants and steroids; 
6.  18.2-250 Possession of controlled substances unlawful; 
7.  18.2-251.2 Possession and distribution of flunitrazepam; 
8.  18.2-251.3 Possession and distribution of gamma-butyrolactone; 1, 4-butanediol; 
9.  18.2-255 Distribution of certain drugs to persons under 18 prohibited; 
10.  18.2-255.2 Prohibiting the sale or manufacture of drugs on or near certain properties; 
11.  18.2-258 Certain premises deemed common nuisance; 
12.  18.2-258.02 Maintaining a fortified drug house; 
13.  18.2-258.1 Obtaining drugs, procuring administration of controlled substances, etc., by fraud, deceit or forgery; 
14.  18.2-258.2 Assisting individuals in unlawfully procuring prescription drugs. 
n.  Any violation of the following of sections of Title 18.2, Chapter 7, Article 4, Dangerous Use of Firearms or Other Weapons: 
1.  18.2-279 Discharging firearms or missiles within or at building or dwelling house; 
2.  18.2-280 Willfully discharging firearms in public places; 
3.  18.2-281 Setting spring gun or other deadly weapon; 
4.  18.2-282 Pointing, holding, or brandishing firearm, air- or gas-operated weapon or object similar in appearance; 
5.  18.2-282.1 Brandishing a machete or other bladed weapon with intent to intimidate; 
6.  18.2-286.1 Shooting from vehicles so as to endanger persons; 
7.  18.2-287.2 Wearing of body armor while committing a crime. 
o.  Any violation of the following sections of Title Chapter 7, Article 5, Uniform Machine Gun Act: 
1.  18.2-289 Use of machine gun for crime of violence; 
2.  18.2-290 Use of machine gun for aggressive purpose. 
p.  Any violation of the following sections of Title 18.2, Chapter 7, Article 6, "Sawed-Off" Shotgun and "Sawed-Off" Rifle Act: 
1.  18.2-300 Possession or use of "sawed-off" shotgun or rifle. 
q.  Any violation of the following sections of Title 18.2, Chapter 7, Article 8, Miscellaneous Dangerous Conduct: 
1.  18.2-314 Failing to secure medical attention for injured child. 
r.  Any violation of the following of sections of Title 18.2, Chapter 8, Article 3, Commercial Sex Trafficking, Prostitution, etc.: 
1.  Any felony violation of § 18.2-346 Prostitution; commercial sexual conduct; commercial exploitation of a minor; 
2.  Any violation of 18.2-355 Taking, detaining, etc., person for prostitution, etc., or consenting thereto; human trafficking; 
3.  Any violation of 18.2-356 Receiving money for procuring person; 
4.  Any violation of 18.2-357 Receiving money from earnings of male or female prostitute; penalties; 
5.  Any violation of 18.2-357.1 Commercial sex trafficking; 
6.  Any violation of subsection B of § 18.2-361 Crimes against nature. 
s.  Any violation of the following of sections of Title 18.2, Chapter 8, Article 4, Family Offenses; Crimes Against Children, etc. Codes: 
1.  18.2-366 Adultery and fornication by persons forbidden to marry; incest; 
2.  18.2-369 Abuse and neglect of incapacitated adults; 
3.  18.2-370 Taking indecent liberties with children; 
4.  18.2-370.1 Taking indecent liberties with child by person in custodial or supervisory relationship; 
5.  18.2-370.2 Sex offenses prohibiting proximity to children; 
6.  18.2-370.3 Sex offenses prohibiting residing in proximity to children; 
7.  18.2-370.4 Sex offenses prohibiting working on school property; 
8.  18.2-370.5 Sex offenses prohibiting entry onto school or other property; 
9.  18.2-370.6 Penetration of mouth of child with lascivious intent; 
10.  18.2-371 Causing or encouraging acts rendering children delinquent, abused, etc.; abandoned infant. 
t.  Any violation of the following of sections of Title 18.2, Chapter 8, Article 5, Obscenity and Related Offenses: 
1.  18.2-374 Production, publication, sale, possession, etc., of obscene items; 
2.  18.2-374.1:1 Possession, reproduction, distribution, solicitation, and facilitation of child pornography; 
3.  18.2-374.3 Use of communications systems to facilitate certain offenses involving children; 
4.  18.2-374.4 Display of child pornography or grooming video or materials to a child unlawful; 
5.  18.2-379 Employing or permitting minor to assist in offense under article; 
6.  18.2-386.1 Unlawful creation of image of another; 
7.  18.2-386.2 Unlawful dissemination or sale of images of another. 
u.  Any violation of the following of sections of Title 18.2, Chapter 9, Crimes Against Peace and Order Article 1 Riot and Unlawful Assembly: 
1.  Any felony violation of 18.2-405 What constitutes a riot; 
2.  Any felony violation of 18.2-406 What constitutes an unlawful assembly; 
3.  Any violation of 18.2-408 Conspiracy; incitement, etc., to riot; 
4.  Any violation of 18.2-413 Commission of certain offenses in county, city or town declared by Governor to be in state of riot or insurrection; 
5.  Any violation of 18.2-414 Injury to property or persons by persons unlawfully or riotously assembled. 
v.  Any violation of the following of sections of Title 18.2, Chapter 9, Article 5, Activities Tending to Cause Violence: 
1.  18.2-423 Burning cross on property of another or public place with intent to intimidate; 
2.  18.2-423.01 Burning object on property of another or a highway or other public place with intent to intimidate; 
3.  18.2-423.1 Placing swastika on certain property with intent to intimidate; 
4.  18.2-423.2 Displaying noose on property of another or a highway or other public place with intent to intimidate. 
w.  Any violation of the following of sections of Title 18.2, Chapter 9, Article 8, Unlawful Paramilitary Activity: 
1.  18.2-433.2 Paramilitary activity prohibited. 
x.  Any violation of the following of sections of Title 18.2, Chapter 10, Article 6, Interference with Administration of Justice: 
1.  18.2-472.1 Providing false information or failing to provide registration information; 
2.  18.2-474.1 Delivery of drugs, firearms, explosives, etc., to prisoners or committed persons; 
3.  18.2-477 Prisoner escaping from jail; 
4.  18.2-477.1 Escapes from juvenile facility; 
5.  18.2-477.2 Punishment for certain offenses committed within a secure juvenile facility or detention home; 
6.  18.2-478 Escape from jail or custody by force or violence without setting fire to jail; 
7.  18.2-479 Escape without force or violence or setting fire to jail; 
8.  18.2-480 Escape, etc., by setting fire to jail. 
y.  Any violation of the following of sections of Title 18.2, Chapter 11, Article 1, Treason and Related Offenses: 
1.  18.2-481 Treason defined; how proved and punished; 
2.  18.2-484 Advocacy of change in government by force, violence or other unlawful means; 
3.  18.2-485 Conspiring to incite one race to insurrection against another race. 
z.  Any violation of the following of sections of Title 37.2, Chapter 9; 
1.  37.2-917 Escape of persons committed. 
aa.  Any violation of the following of sections of Title 53.1, Chapter 7: 
1.  53.1-203 Felonies by prisoners. 
bb.  Any substantially similar offense to those listed above under the laws of another jurisdiction; 
cc.  Any offense set forth in Code of Virginia, § 9.1-902 that results in the person's requirement to register with the Sex Offender and Crimes Against Minors Registry pursuant to § 9.1-901, including any finding that a person is not guilty by reason of insanity in accordance with Chapter 11.1 (§ 19.2-182.2 et seq.) of Title 19.2 of an offense set forth in § 9.1-902 that results in the person's requirement to register with the Sex Offender and Crimes Against Minors Registry pursuant to § 9.1-901, or any substantially similar offense under the laws of another jurisdiction, or any offense for which registration in a sex offender and crimes against minors registry is required under the laws of the jurisdiction where the offender was convicted; (iv) any other felony not included in clause (i), (ii), or (iii), unless five years have elapsed from the date of the conviction; or (v) any offense listed as a "Barrier crime" in Code of Virginia, § 19.2-392.02, including all subsequent amendments or modifications thereto. 
Convictions shall include prior adult convictions and juvenile convictions and adjudications of delinquency based on a crime that would be a felony if committed by an adult within or outside the commonwealth; 
(2)  If the provider or a person who resides in the home is the subject of a founded complaint of child abuse or neglect within or outside the commonwealth; or 
(3)  If the provider makes a false statement regarding a material fact on an application for a home child care permit under this article; this bar shall remain in effect for a period of one year from the time the permit is denied or revoked. 
    Director of health means the director of the county department of health or the authorized agent of the Director of the Fairfax County Department of Health. 
    Director of the office for children means the Director of the Fairfax County Office for Children or the authorized agent of the director of the county office for children. 
    Home child care permit means authorization from the city, issued through the county office for children, to operate a home child care facility for the care, guidance, education, training or protection of children in compliance with this article. 
    Home child care facility means any facility located in a dwelling where a person, for compensation, regularly provides care, protection, supervision and guidance during a part of the day for at least four days of a calendar week to one or more children who do not reside in the facility and who are not attended by a parent, guardian or legal custodian while they are in that facility. If, on a regular basis, a person receives compensation for the care, protection, supervision and guidance of one or more children in a structure other than a dwelling, that facility shall be deemed to be a child care center and included within those facilities defined in this section. A home child care facility does not include: 
(1)  Any family day home licensed by the commonwealth pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 63.2-1701 or any facility exempted from licensure by Code of Virginia, § 63.2-1715; 
(2)  Any dwelling where a person provides care solely for children who reside there; or 
(3)  Any dwelling where a person provides care solely for relatives of the resident owner or tenant. 
However, if, on a regular basis, a person receives compensation for the care, protection, supervision and guidance of one or more children who do not reside in that dwelling and who are not attended by a parent, guardian or legal custodian while they are in that dwelling during a part of the day for at least four days of a calendar week, and a home child care facility is established, then any children who are related to the person who provides such care and are present in that dwelling and any other children who reside in that dwelling or mobile home shall be counted and considered in determining whether the facility complies with the provisions of this article. 
    Private school, nursery school or child care center means any place, home, facility, or institution, however designated, or any part thereof, that: 
(1)  Is eligible for an exemption from state licensure pursuant to Code of Virginia, §§ 63.2-1716 or 63.2-1717; 
(2)  Is operated for the purposes of providing care, guidance, education or training; and 
(3)  Receives on a regular basis, for any period of more than one hour but less than 24 hours in any 24-hour period, one or more children under the age eligible for enrollment in the city public schools who are not attended by a parent, guardian or person with legal custody. 
A home child care facility, as defined in this section, shall not be included within this definition. 
    Occasional child care means care provided on an hourly basis, for one or more children between the ages of six weeks and 12 years of age, for a period not to exceed four hours within any one day, which is contracted for by a parent, guardian, or legal custodian for the same child nor more than ten days within a calendar month. 
    Provider means the adult responsible for obtaining the permit and for the day-to-day operation of the home child care facility. The provider is responsible for providing care, protection, supervision, and guidance to children in a home child care facility. 
    Special use permit means permits referenced herein and issued pursuant to chapter 48, pertaining to zoning, for private schools, special schools and day care facilities licensed by the commonwealth or exempted from licensure from the commonwealth. 
    Substitute care provider means any person who provides care, protection, supervision, and guidance to children when the provider is away from the home child care facility. 
(Ord. No. 1890, 2-25-2013; Ord. No. 1988, § 1, 6-11-2018) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 8-679. - Reserved. 
Sec. 8-680. - Zoning compliance required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate a private school, special school or day care facility within the city for more than five nonresident children unless the provisions of chapter 48 Zoning, are complied with. 
(b)  Applicants for permission to operate a private school, special school or day care facility shall submit a letter of intent to the zoning administrator setting forth the name, type of school or center, owner and operator, number of rooms used, number of children and a site plan as required under chapter 48, article V, division 7, along with floor plans of the building. 
(c)  The zoning administrator shall provide forms and all necessary data to the applicants. 
(d)  The zoning administrator shall review the application and, when required by chapter 48, submit the application and all necessary data to the planning commission which will forward its recommendation to the board of zoning appeals for its consideration for the issuance of a special use permit. 
(Ord. No. 1890, 2-25-2013) 
Secs. 8-681-8-686. - Reserved. 
Sec. 8-687. - Fire prevention. 
    Fire prevention section shall follow the Code requirements under section 18-19 of the City of Falls Church Code. The City of Falls Church Fire Prevention Code incorporates the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code. Operators of these facilities shall be familiar with and agree with the requirements of this Code. Fire prevention code permits are granted by virtue of the party listed having made application. The conditions found in the opinion of the fire official are based upon the observations at the time of the inspection. The fire prevention code inspection does not take the place of any license required by law and is not transferable. Any alterations or additions to the facility shall require a new fire prevention code inspection. 
(1)  Private schools, special schools: 
a.  Fire drills shall be held as required in accordance with the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code and the city fire code official. The school operator shall keep a record of the date and of the time required for the evacuation of the building. 
b.  Provisions must be made for sounding fire alarms throughout the building, and personnel must be properly instructed to call fire departments in case of fire. The fire department telephone number 911 must be posted at each telephone along with the address of the facility location. 
c.  Fire extinguishers shall be mounted on the walls as directed by the fire code official, and all personnel shall be instructed in their use by the owner. Fire extinguishers must be checked at least once a year by a certified contractor using NFPA standards and a record card kept as to the date of filling. 
d.  All exit doors, corridors and stairs must be kept free from obstructions and in good condition at all times. 
e.  All furnace rooms shall be provided with a fixed louver or other approved opening permanently open to the outdoors for supplying air for combustion and ventilation. 
f.  Attics, basements, furnace rooms, and areas under stairs, storage rooms and similar spaces shall be kept free from the accumulation of waste paper, rubbish, old furniture and other combustible materials. 
(2)  Home day care: 
a.  Telephone service shall be available, operable and accessible during the home child care facility's hours of operation. 
b.  All landline telephones shall be labeled with 911 stickers approved by the fire code official. 
c.  Address numbers or building numbers shall be placed in a position that is plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. 
d.  Combustible waste material, lint, and dust creating a fire hazard shall not be allowed to accumulate in or on dryers, heating appliances, and furnaces. 
e.  Kitchen ranges, ovens, and exhaust hoods, grease removal devices, fans, ducts, and other appurtenances shall be free of excessive grease. 
f.  All exit stairs, interior or exterior shall be in good repair and shall be provided with handrails and guard rails as required by the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
g.  All egress pathway and exit doors shall be unlocked and free from obstructions that would prevent their use, including debris, storage, and accumulations of snow and ice. 
h.  Closet and bathroom doors shall be unlocked and designed to permit opening of the locked door from the outside with a readily accessible opening device. 
i.  Electrical hazards identified by the fire code official shall be abated in accordance with the City of Falls Church Fire Prevention Code. 
j.  Extension cords, temporary wiring and flexible cords shall not be substituted for permanent wiring. Extension cords and flexible cords shall not be affixed to structures, extended through walls, ceilings, or floors, or under doors or floor coverings, or be subject to environmental or physical damage. 
k.  A working space of not less than 36 inches shall be provided around electrical, gas, and mechanical service equipment. No storage of any materials shall be located within the designated working space. 
l.  Kitchen ranges, other cooking equipment and other appliances shall be kept in good working order and free from grease, dust, lint, and combustible materials. 
m.  The use of portable unvented fuel-fired heating equipment is prohibited except in single-family dwellings classified R-5 by the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. Where allowed, such equipment must be listed and approved by a nationally recognized testing laboratory. 
n.  Where portable unvented fuel-fired heating equipment is allowed, the heating element or the combustion chamber shall be permanently guarded so as to prevent accidental contact by persons or combustible material. 
o.  Fireplace screens, glass, or doors shall be in good condition and designed to guard against accidental contact with the combustion chamber contents. The fireplace screen, glass, or door shall be affixed to prevent accidental release of embers or products of combustion. 
p.  Wood stoves shall be listed and approved by a nationally recognized testing laboratory. Wood stoves shall be used and installed in accordance with the manufacture's specification. The provider shall have the manufacture's specifications available on-site for the fire code official's review upon request. 
q.  Fireplaces, wood stoves, and chimneys shall be inspected and cleaned annually or as often as necessary to remove the buildup of creosote and other flammable residues. The provider shall have proof of inspection available on-site for the fire code official's review upon request. 
r.  Ashes from fireplaces and wood stoves shall be removed to the outside and stored in a noncombustible container, with a tight-fitting lid, which has been listed and has been approved by the fire code official. 
s.  Heating systems and associated ductwork shall be clean and in good working order. Adequate combustion air must be provided as required by the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. Flues for the exhaust of carbon monoxide and other byproducts or combustion shall be free of leaks and in good repair. Except for those rooms used by children while sleeping under covers, all rooms used for child care shall be maintained at a temperature of not less than 68 degrees Fahrenheit. 
t.  An operable smoke detector shall be provided both outside of each sleeping area and inside each sleeping area, with at least one such device on each floor. Each smoke alarm shall be tested at least once a month and records of testing provided to the fire code official upon request. Smoke alarms may be of the fixed-wired or battery type. 
u.  An operable carbon monoxide alarm shall be installed in homes according to the manufacturer's specifications where appliances may produce carbon monoxide. Each carbon monoxide alarm shall be tested at least once a month and records of testing provided to the fire code official upon request. 
v.  Portable fire extinguishers, having a minimum rating of 1A10BC shall be properly mounted, and readily accessible within 30 feet of cooking equipment; and in areas where flammable liquids are stored, used, or dispensed. 
w.  Portable fire extinguishers shall be selected, installed, and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications. All fire extinguishers shall be replaced at least every six years. 
x.  Storage of flammable or combustible liquids inside buildings in containers and portable tanks shall be in accordance with the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code and the manufacturer's recommendations. Areas of flammable and combustible liquid storage shall be secured to prevent access during the home child care facility's hours of operation. 
1.  Combustible waste material creating a fire hazard shall not be allowed to accumulate in building, structures, or upon premises. 
2.  Areas of storage of machinery such as lawn mowers and power tools shall be inaccessible to the children in care. 
y.  The furnace and other heating appliances shall maintain clearance from ignition sources as specified by the equipment manufacturer unless the provider can establish cause for an exception. 
z.  Storage of combustible materials in buildings shall be orderly. Storage shall be separated from heaters or heating devices by distance or shielding so that ignition cannot occur. 
aa.  The provider shall prepare an emergency evacuation plan, which shall include the preferred method to notify employees, children, and other occupants of an emergency situation; emergency egress routes from each room where child care is permitted; procedures for accounting for employees, children, and other occupants; and the preferred and alternate plans to notify emergency response organizations. 
bb.  Fire evacuations drills shall be conducted monthly in all home child care facilities. Records shall be maintained on-site and provided to the fire code official upon request. Each record shall include the identity of the person conducting each drill; the date and time of each drill; the notification/initiating method used; the number of occupants evacuated; special conditions simulated, problems encountered; weather conditions when occupants were evacuated; and the time required to accomplish a complete evacuation. 
cc.  Rooms used for sleeping must provide two means of exit, one which leads directly to the outside, as required by the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 1890, 2-25-2013; Ord. No. 1941, 10-13-2015) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention, ch. 18. 
Sec. 8-688. - Inspections; enforcement. 
    It shall be the duty of the city fire code official and building official to inspect child care facilities prior to the issuance of any special use permits under this article and as often as it shall be necessary for the adequate control and supervision of same. The city fire code official and building official or their designee shall have the right to enter all such facilities at any reasonable time for the purpose of making necessary inspections and investigations and shall be charged with the responsibility of enforcing and administering their code requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1890, 2-25-2013) 
Sec. 8-689. - Deviation from age and number of children prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for a person to keep or congregate, in any facility to which this article applies, a greater number of children or children of less or greater age than set forth in the occupancy permit. 
(Ord. No. 1890, 2-25-2013) 
Sec. 8-690. - Administration and enforcement home child care facility. 
    Pursuant to agreement with Fairfax County as authorized by the Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1300, the Director of the Fairfax County Office for Children shall administer and enforce the provisions of sections 8-691 through 8-698. 
(Ord. No. 1890, 2-25-2013) 
Sec. 8-691. - Operation without permit prohibited. 
    It is unlawful to operate a home child care facility within the city without a valid permit. Permits shall be issued by the director of the office for children on an annual basis. Permits shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 1890, 2-25-2013) 
Sec. 8-692. - Requirements for annual permit application, issuance or denial of home child care facility. 
(a)  Application contents. A person proposing to operate a home child care facility, and each adult who resides in the proposed facility, shall submit to fingerprinting and shall provide personal descriptive information to be forwarded along with each individual's fingerprints through the central criminal records exchange to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for the purpose of obtaining criminal history record information regarding each such person. The applicant shall also submit an application on a form prepared by the director of the office for children, which shall include: 
(1)  The name and address of the home child care facility; 
(2)  The name of the applicant; 
(3)  A statement of whether the applicant currently holds or previously held a home child care facility permit in the county; or a family day care home voluntary registration in the city; 
(4)  The names of all persons who reside in the home; 
(5)  A sworn statement from the applicant, and each adult who resides in the proposed facility stating whether each has ever been convicted of or is the subject of any pending charges for any offense within or outside the commonwealth; and consent forms signed by the applicant, and each adult who resides in the proposed facility allowing the director of the office for children to obtain the results of the criminal history record search conducted in accordance with Section 30.4.2(b)(iii). The applicant must pay any fee required in connection with such criminal history investigation for each person making disclosures and providing consent forms. 
(6)  A sworn statement from the applicant, and each adult who resides in the proposed facility stating the names of all states in which he or she has lived in the years prior to the date of the application and stating whether he or she has been the subject of a founded complaint of child abuse or neglect within or outside the Commonwealth of Virginia and consent forms signed by the applicant and each adult who resides in the proposed facility giving consent to the director of the office for children to obtain a copy of the results of a search of the central registry maintained pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 63.2-1515, and any child abuse and neglect registry or equivalent registry maintained by any other state in which the applicant or any adult who resides in the proposed facility has resided in the previous five years for any founded complaint of child abuse or neglect; the applicant shall also provide sworn statements from a parent, guardian or legal custodian on behalf of all minors age 14 and older, who reside in the proposed facility stating whether the minor has been the subject of a founded complaint or child abuse or neglect and consent forms signed [by] parent, guardian or legal custodian of all minors age 14 and older who reside in the proposed facility, giving consent to the director of the office for children to obtain a copy of the results of a search of the central registry maintained pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 63.2-1515 for any founded complaint of child abuse or neglect; 
(7)  Copies of the applicant's current certifications infirst aid and cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR); 
(8)  Proof of the applicant's compliance with the training requirements established in section 8-694, which shall consist of records provided by the trainer or, if none are provided by the trainer, records maintained by the applicant; 
(9)  A description of the structure in which the home child care facility is proposed to be operated, including a description of all places and areas to which the children shall have access; 
(10)  The proposed hours of operation; 
(11)  A statement of whether the applicant is 18 years of age or older; 
(12)  A certificate from a physician, physician's designee or a department of health official stating that acceptable screening methods (tuberculin skin test and/or tuberculosis risk and symptom screen and/or chest X-ray), singly or in combination as determined appropriate by the signatory, indicate that the applicant and all adult household members are currently free from communicable tuberculosis. The screen must be performed every two years or more frequently as recommended by a physician or the local health department; 
(13)  A written policy describing what the applicant will do with children in the applicant's care who are sick and a written emergency preparedness plan; 
(14)  Such other information, including, but not limited to, information concerning the applicant's child care training and special skills, as the director of the office for children may deem appropriate; 
(15)  The application fee of $14.00, which is in addition to any business or occupation license tax imposed by the city and any other taxes or fees that may be required to engage in the business. 
If the information the provider submits in accordance in with subsections (a)(5), (6), (7), and (12) changes during the term of the permit, the provider must report the change to the director of the office for children and must promptly submit updated information and documents. 
(b)  Submission procedures. Upon submission of an application to the office for children: 
(1)  The director of the office for children shall inspect the proposed facility to determine whether it is in compliance with this article and all applicable state law that may affect the health and safety of the children who may attend or be present at the facility. 
(2)  The fire code official or designee shall conduct a fire safety inspection of the proposed facility and advise the director of the office for children of any noncompliance with this article or any applicable state law that may affect the health and safety of the children who may attend or be present at the facility. An inspection fee shall be paid directly to the office of the fire marshal in accordance with chapter 15 of the city Code. 
(3)  If the applicant does not hold a permit under this article at the time of the application, the director of the office for children shall require that the fingerprints and personal descriptive information for the applicant and each adult who resides in the proposed facility be forwarded to the central criminal records exchange and request a search of the central criminal records exchange and a national criminal history search by the Federal Bureau of Investigation to determine whether the applicant, or any persons who reside in the home have committed any crimes that constitute barrier offenses. Otherwise, the director may request a criminal records search if three or more years have passed since the last records search on an individual, or upon receipt of new information submitted in accordance with this section, or as the director deems appropriate in extenuating circumstances. 
(4)  If the applicant does not hold a permit under this article at the time of the application the director of the office for children shall request a copy of the results of a search of the central registry maintained pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 63.2-1515 for the applicant and all individuals age 14 and older that reside in the proposed facility, and a copy of the results of a search of any child abuse and neglect registry or equivalent registry maintained by any other state in which the applicant or any adult who resides in the proposed facility has resided in the preceding five years for the applicant and all adults who reside in the proposed facility, for any founded complaint of child abuse or neglect. Otherwise, the director may request a copy of the central registry maintained pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 63.2-1515 if three or more years have passed since the last records search on an individual, or upon receipt of new information submitted in accordance with this section, or as the director deems appropriate in extenuating circumstances. 
(c)  Factors for consideration. The director of the office for children shall issue a permit to an applicant if the director determines, from the information contained in the permit application, the facility inspections and the records searches that: 
(1)  The applicant is an adult; 
(2)  Neither the applicant, nor or any person who resides in the facility has committed any barrier offense; and 
(3)  Both the applicant and the proposed facility is in compliance with this article and all applicable Virginia laws that may affect the health and safety of the children who may attend or be present at the proposed facility. 
The permit shall be displayed in the home child care facility by the provider. 
(d)  Denial. The director of the office for children shall deny a permit to any applicant if the director determines from the information contained in the permit application, the facility inspections and the records searches that: 
(1)  The applicant is not an adult; 
(2)  The applicant, or any person who resides in the facility has committed any barrier offense; or 
(3)  Either the applicant or the proposed facility is not in compliance with this article and all applicable state laws that may affect the health and safety of the children who may attend or be present at the proposed facility. 
If the denial is based on the results of the searches of the records of the central criminal records exchange or the department of social services, the director shall provide the applicant a copy of the information upon which the denial was based. 
(Ord. No. 1890, 2-25-2013; Ord. No. 1941, 10-13-2015; Ord. No. 1959, 6-27-2016; Ord. No. 1988, § 1, 6-11-2018) 
Sec. 8-693. - Temporary family day care permits. 
(a)  A person proposing to operate a home child care facility that is not in compliance with the requirements of this article may apply to the director of the office for children for a temporary permit to operate a home child care facility for a period of not more than six months; provided that a search of the criminal history records and child protective services records of the applicant reveals no barrier offenses. The director of the office for children may grant such a temporary permit for a period of not more than six months if the applicant: 
(1)  Is an adult; 
(2)  Certifies that all the requirements of this article will be met within six months from the date of issuance of the temporary permit or within such lesser period as may be approved by the director; 
(3)  Agrees to apply for a regular permit as soon as the facility is able to comply with the requirements of this article; 
(4)  Certifies that neither the applicant, nor any adult who resides in the proposed facility has committed any barrier offense; and 
(5)  The director of the office for children has no information which is contrary to the applicant's certification. 
(b)  If the holder of a temporary home child care facility permit is unable to comply with the requirements of this article within the period authorized by the temporary permit period, the holder of the temporary permit may apply to the director of the office for children for an extension of the temporary permit for an additional period of not more than six months. If, in the judgment of the director of the office for children, the failure to comply with the provisions of this article was the result of circumstances beyond the control of the holder of the temporary permit, then the director of the office for children may extend the temporary permit for an additional period of not more than six months. 
(Ord. No. 1890, 2-25-2013) 
Sec. 8-694. - Provider qualifications. 
(a)  The provider must be an adult. 
(b)  The provider must be trained in areas such as physical, intellectual, social, and emotional child development, behavior management and discipline techniques, health and safety in the home child care environment, art and music activities for children, nutrition, child abuse detection and prevention, recognition and prevention of the spread of communicable diseases, emergency preparedness, and business practices of family child care. All providers must attend 16 hours of training by an approved trainer during the term of the permit. The director of the office for children shall maintain a list of entities that are approved as trainers. Upon request from the provider, accompanied by information about the entity and/or the course, the director of the office for children may approve additional trainers or a specific course. 
(c)  The provider must be currently certified in first aid and cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR). 
(d)  In addition to the training required in subsection (b) above, and except as set forth in subsections 8-696(o) and (p), a provider who administers prescription medications or nonprescription medications to children in care must satisfactorily complete a training program for this purpose developed or approved by the board of nursing and taught by a registered nurse, licensed practical nurse, doctor of medicine or osteopathic medicine, or pharmacist. Providers required to complete the training program shall be retrained at three-year intervals. 
(Ord. No. 1890, 2-25-2013; Ord. No. 1941, 10-13-2015; Ord. No. 1988, § 1, 6-11-2018) 
Sec. 8-694.1. - Substitute care providers. 
(a)  When a provider must be away from the home child care facility, a substitute care provider may be used. Substitute care shall not exceed 240 hours per calendar year. Any substitute care provider must be an adult. 
(b)  The substitute care provider shall submit to the director of the office for children the disclosure and statement required of providers by subsections 8-692(a)(5) and (6), along with payment of the applicable fees. A provider shall not use a substitute care provider until the director has notified the provider that the substitute care provider has not committed a barrier offense. 
(c)  The substitute care provider must be currently certified in first aid and certified cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR). The provider must maintain copies of the certifications. 
(d)  The substitute care provider must have a tuberculosis screening in accordance with subsection 8-692(a)(12). The provider must maintain copies of the screenings. 
(Ord. No. 1890, 2-25-2013) 
Sec. 8-695. - Permitted numbers of children. 
    No home child care facility shall care for more children than specified in each of the following provisions: 
(1)  The total number of nonresident children at a home child care facility at any one time shall not exceed four; 
(2)  The total number of children at a home child care facility at any one time who are less than two years of age, including any resident children, shall not exceed four; 
(3)  The total number of children at a home child care facility at any one time who are under the age at which they are required to be enrolled in a public or private school pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 22.1-254, including any resident children, shall not exceed six; and 
(4)  The total number of children at a home child care facility at any one time, including any resident children who are less than ten years of age, shall not exceed eight. 
(Ord. No. 1890, 2-25-2013; Ord. No. 1959, 6-27-2016) 
Sec. 8-696. - Physical facilities, equipment and operation. 
(a)  Providers shall supervise children in a manner which ensures that the provider is aware of what the children are doing at all times and can promptly assist or redirect activities when necessary. In deciding how closely to supervise children, providers shall consider the ages of the children, individual differences and abilities, layout of the house and play area, neighborhood circumstances or hazards and risk activities in which children are engaged. 
(b)  All rooms used for child care shall be dry, well-lighted and have adequate ventilation and shall be smoke free when any child in care is present. Windows that can be opened shall be screened from April 1 through November 1 of each year. 
(c)  The provider shall provide each child with adequate space to allow free movement and active play indoors and out. Indoor and outdoor areas shall provide developmentally appropriate activities, supplies, and materials that are safe and accessible. All areas shall be free of dangerous and hazardous conditions. 
(d)  Covered, washable waste receptacles shall be provided for all waste materials, diapers, garbage, and refuse. Trash and other waste materials shall be removed as often as necessary to prevent excessive accumulations and shall be deposited in approved trash or waste disposal containers. 
(e)  Toxic or dangerous materials shall be disclosed at the time of each inspection. These shall be stored in areas that are inaccessible to children and separate from food supplies and areas in which food is prepared. 
(f)  Dogs and cats four months old or older that regularly are present at the facility shall be immunized for rabies, and records of such immunizations shall be kept available at the facility for inspection by the director of the office for children. 
(g)  A refrigerator shall be used for perishable food and that refrigerator shall maintain a constant temperature of 40 degrees Fahrenheit or less. Food brought into any home child care facility for consumption by nonresident children shall be clearly marked for consumption by the children for whom the food is intended. Meals or snacks shall be offered to the children at least once every three hours. Home child care facilities that provide meals or snacks to children in care shall follow the most recent, age-appropriate nutritional guidelines set forth by the United States Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Services. 
(h)  Each home child care facility that is not served by a public water supply shall have a private water supply approved by the department of health. Each home child care facility that is not served by a public sewage disposal system shall have a private sewage disposal system approved by the department of health. Drinking water from a public water supply, well permitted by the department of health, or other source acceptable to the department of health shall be available for all children. 
(i)  Except for those rooms used by children while sleeping under covers, all rooms used for child care shall be maintained at a temperature of not less than 68 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(j)  Providers shall not use or allow any other person to use corporal punishment, physical, verbal, or emotional punishment, or any humiliating or frightening methods of discipline. 
(k)  Firearms of every type and purpose shall be stored unloaded in a locked container, compartment, or cabinet, and apart from ammunition. Ammunition shall be stored in a locked container, compartment, or cabinet during the home child care facility's hours of operation. If a key is used to lock the container, compartment, or cabinet, the key shall be inaccessible to children. 
(l)  Providers shall handle blood, bodily fluids, and other potentially infectious materials as if known to be infectious for human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and other blood-borne pathogens. 
(m)  During rest times the provider shall provide appropriate sleeping equipment that meets the current standards of the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission for children birth through 12 months of age and for children over 12 months of age who are not developmentally ready to sleep on a cot or bed. If children are in care overnight on a regular or frequent basis, then the provider shall provide cribs that meet the current standards of the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission for full-size baby cribs for children from birth through 12 months of age and for children over 12 months of age who are not developmentally ready to sleep on a cot or bed. 
(n)  All home child care facilities shall be maintained free from insects and rodents infestation. 
(o)  Except as set forth in subsection (o) below, whenever the home child care facility has agreed to administer prescription medications or nonprescription medications, the medication shall be administered in compliance with the Virginia Drug Control Act by a provider who has satisfactorily completed the training required by subsection 8-694(d). 
(p)  Notwithstanding subsection (o) above, a provider may administer nonprescription topical skin products such as sunscreen, diaper ointment and lotion, oral teething medicine, and insect repellent, provided the following requirements are met: 
(1)  The provider has obtained written authorization, at least annually, from a parent or guardian noting any known adverse reactions; 
(2)  The product is in the original container and, if the product is provided by the parent, labeled with the child's name; 
(3)  The product is applied in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions; 
(4)  Parents are informed immediately of any adverse reaction; 
(5)  The product shall not be used beyond the expiration date of the product; 
(6)  Sunscreen must have a minimum sunburn protection factor (SPF) of 15; and 
(7)  The product does not need to be kept locked, but shall be inaccessible to children. 
(q)  The home child care facility shall annually obtain written permission from the parent of each child who participates in swimming or wading activities, and a written statement from the parent advising of a child's swimming skills before the child is allowed in water above the child's shoulder height. 
(1)  The provider shall have a system for accounting for all children in the water. 
(2)  Outdoor swimming activities shall occur only during daylight hours. 
(3)  When one or more children are in water that is more than two feet deep in a pool, lake, or other swimming area on or off the premises of the home child care facility: 
a.  The provider and another person 15 years or older shall be present at all times and either the provider or the other person must be currently certified in basic water rescue, community water safety, water safety instruction, or lifeguarding. The certification shall be obtained from a national organization such as the American Red Cross or the YMCA. 
(r)  Access to the water in above ground swimming pools shall be prevented by locking and securing the ladder in place or storing the ladder in a place inaccessible to children. 
(1)  A non-climbable barrier at least four feet high such as, but not limited to, a fence or impenetrable hedge shall surround outdoor play areas located within 30 feet of drowning hazards such as, but not limited to, in-ground swimming or wading pools, ponds or fountains not enclosed by safety fences. 
(2)  Portable wading pools without integral filter systems shall be emptied, rinsed, and filled with clean water after use by each group of children or more frequently as necessary; and shall be emptied, sanitized, and stored in a position to keep them clean and dry when not in use during the home child care facility's hours of operation. Portable wading pools shall not be used by children who are not toilet trained. Bathtubs, buckets, and other containers of liquid accessible to children shall be emptied immediately after use. 
(3)  Hot tubs, spas, and whirlpools shall not be used by children in care, and shall be covered with safety covers while children are in care. 
(Ord. No. 1890, 2-25-2013; Ord. No. 1941, 10-13-2015; Ord. No. 1959, 6-27-2016) 
Sec. 8-697. - Immunizations. 
    The provider shall not accept into care any child who has not been immunized, or exempted from mandatory immunization, in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 32.1-46. The provider shall maintain for each child a copy of the child's immunization records; or a statement from the parents certifying that they object on religious grounds but that, to the best of the parents' knowledge, the child is in good health; or a statement from a physician indicating that immunization is not currently advisable for specific health reasons and an estimated date when immunizations can be safely administered. 
(Ord. No. 1890, 2-25-2013) 
Sec. 8-698. - Inspection of facilities. 
    In addition to the inspections required by section 8-692 with the consent of the owner, provider or agent in charge of the facility or pursuant to a duly issued inspection warrant, the director of the office for children shall have the right at all reasonable times to inspect all areas of any home child care facility that are accessible to children for compliance with this article. Warrants to inspect any such facility shall be based upon a demonstration of probable cause and supported by affidavit. 
(Ord. No. 1890, 2-25-2013) 
Sec. 8-699. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Any person operating a home child care facility without the permit required by this article shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. In addition, the continuance of violations under the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code is punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person subject to this article who fails to comply with any other requirement of this article or the permit shall be subject to such administrative action as prescribed in this section. Administrative action by the director of the office for children shall not preclude any other administrative, civil or criminal proceedings authorized by law as a result of the same conduct. 
(c)  The director of the office for children may revoke any permit granted under this article if, during the term of the permit, the home child care facility is found by the director to be in violation of the permit or this article; or if any circumstances exist which, if existing at the time of the permit application, would have warranted denial of the application. The director of the office for children may suspend any permit granted under this article if during the term of the permit the director reasonably suspects a violation of the permit, this article, or any applicable state laws that may affect the health and safety of the children who may attend or be present at the facility. Prior to suspending or revoking any permit, unless in the judgment of the director of the office for children there are exigent health and safety conditions which justify immediate suspension of a permit, the director of the office for children shall give the provider at least ten calendar days' written notice of the proposed suspension or revocation. In the case of exigent health and safety conditions which in the judgment of the director of the office for children justify the immediate suspension of the permit, the director of the office for children shall suspend the permit immediately and notify the provider as soon as is practicable. 
(d)  If a permit to operate a home child care facility is revoked or suspended by the director of the office for children, the provider shall notify all clients. Evidence of such notification shall be submitted to the director of the office for children. 
(Ord. No. 1890, 2-25-2013) 
Sec. 8-700. - Appeals from permit denials, revocations and suspensions. 
    Any applicant for a home child care facility permit whose application is denied and any provider whose permit is suspended or revoked may submit a written request to the director of the office for children for a hearing on the matter. Any request for hearing must be submitted to the director of the office for children within ten business days of the time the provider receives notice of the action regarding which the provider seeks a hearing, and must specify the grounds for appeal. 
    The provisions of this article are severable, and if any provision of this article or any application thereof is held invalid, that invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or applications of this article that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application. 
    The provisions of this article shall take effect on March 1, 2013. 
(Ord. No. 1890, 2-25-2013) 
ARTICLE VII. - ADULT USES 

Sec. 8-701. - Declaration of policy. 
    It shall be the public policy of the City of Falls Church, Virginia, and the City Council of the City of Falls Church, Virginia, hereby declares, that the licensing of adult uses is required to protect the public health, safety and general welfare, and the City Council of the City of Falls Church hereby exercises its regulatory authority under the police power. 
(Ord. No. 1846, 6-28-2010) 
Sec. 8-702. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult bookstore or adult video store means an establishment that has 20 percent or more of its stock for sale or rent on the premises, or has 20 percent or more of its stock on display either in plain view or in an enclosed or partitioned area, in books, magazines, other periodicals, videotapes, computer disks, CD-ROMs, DVD-ROMs, virtual reality devices or similar media that are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas". 
    Adult entertainment means dancing, modeling or other live entertainment if the entertainment is characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or is intended for the sexual stimulation or titillation of patrons; or the showing of films, motion pictures, videotapes, slides, photographs, CD-ROMs, DVD-ROMs, or other media that are characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult merchandise means magazines, books, other periodicals, videotapes, films, motion pictures, photographs, slides, CD-ROMs, DVD-ROMs, virtual reality devices, or other similar media that are characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; instruments, devices or paraphernalia either designed as representations of human genital organs or female breasts, or designed or marketed primarily for use to stimulate human genital organs; or, lingerie or leather goods marketed or presented in a context to suggest their use for sadomasochistic practices. 
    Adult model studio means a commercial establishment, including a lingerie store or novelty store, in which a person performs or simulates specified sexual activities, exposes specified anatomical areas, or engages in other performances intended for the sexual stimulation or titillation of patrons. 
    Adult motel means a motel, hotel, or similar commercial establishment that: (i) provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and advertises the availability of this sexually-oriented type of material by means of a sign visible from the public right-of-way, or by means of any off-premises advertising, including, but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio or television; or (ii) offers a sleeping room for rent for a time period of less than ten hours; or (iii) allows a tenant or occupant to subrent the sleeping room for a time period of less than ten hours. 
    Adult movie theater means an enclosed building regularly used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons, excluding movies that have been rated "G," "PG," "PG-13," or "R" by the Motion Picture Association of America. 
    Adult nightclub means a restaurant, bar, club, or similar establishment that regularly features adult entertainment. 
    Adult store means an establishment having 20 percent or more of its stock-in-trade in adult merchandise. 
    Adult use means any adult bookstore, adult video store, adult model studio, adult motel, adult movie theater, adult nightclub, adult store, business providing adult entertainment, or any other establishment that regularly exploits an interest in matter relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or regularly features live entertainment intended for the sexual stimulation or titillation of patrons. 
    Applicant means the owners, managers, and any other persons having an ownership interest, financial interest, or managerial responsibility in an adult use. For a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or other legal entity, "applicant" includes each officer, director, partner, manager or principal of the entity, and the managers of the business. 
    Employee means an individual working or performing services for any adult use, including any independent contractor who provides services on behalf of any adult use to the patrons of such adult use, whether or not the individual receives any remuneration, gratuity, or tips of any kind, or pays the permittee or manager for the right to perform or entertain in the adult use. 
    Entertainer means a person performing adult entertainment. 
    Live entertainment means entertainment provided in person including, but not limited to, musical performances, music played by disc jockeys, public speaking, dramatic performances, dancing, modeling, or comedy performances. 
    Permittee is defined as the person(s) or legal entity to whom a city business license for an adult use has been issued. 
    Specified anatomical areas means less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities means human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; sexual intercourse or sodomy; or fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast, including masturbation. 
(Ord. No. 1846, 6-28-2010) 
Sec. 8-703. - Permit required from chief of police; application; issuance; duration; renewal. 
(a)  Every applicant either operating or desiring to operate an adult use, in addition to obtaining any required business license, shall apply to the chief of police for a permit to conduct such adult use. Each such application shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of $500.00. 
(b)  Information required on and with the permit application shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  The applicant's full name, age, sex, race, weight, height, hair and eye color, address, telephone number, date and place of birth and Social Security Number. 
(2)  Names and addresses of references. 
(3)  Whether the applicant has been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor, and, if so, the nature of the offense, when and where convicted, and the penalty or punishment assessed. 
(4)  Whether the applicant holds or has held, in the name of this business or any other, any other permits under this article or a similar adult use ordinance from another locality within the past five years, and, if so, the names and locations of such other permitted businesses. 
(5)  Whether the applicant has been denied a permit or has had a permit revoked under any statute or ordinance requiring a permit to operate an adult business or adult use, and, if so, when and where the denial or revocation occurred. 
(6)  Photograph and fingerprints of applicant. 
(7)  Name, including any fictitious names, and address of the adult use for which a permit is sought. 
(8)  A criminal records check of the applicant, which shall include a Virginia State Criminal Records Check and a local police records check from the jurisdiction in which the applicant resides, shall be provided by the applicant with the application, along with the applicant's written authorization to investigate whether the information provided by the applicant is true. 
(9)  A description of the intended adult use, and, if adult entertainment is to be provided, a detailed description of such entertainment. 
(10)  A statement of whether the special use permit required pursuant to section 48-1212 of the Code for the intended adult use has been obtained, and on what date it was granted. 
(11)  Written declaration, dated and signed by the applicant, and notarized, certifying that the information contained in the application is true and correct. 
(c)  The chief of police shall act on the application within 30 days of the filing of an application containing all of the information required by this section, unless information requested from other law enforcement agencies is not received within that 30-day period, in which case the chief of police shall have an additional 30 days to act on the application. Upon the expiration of the applicable time period, unless the chief of police requests and is granted an extension of time for no more than 90 days, and has provided reasonable grounds for such extension, the applicant may, at its option, begin operating the adult use for which the permit is sought, unless and until the chief of police notifies the applicant of a denial of the application and states the reasons for denial. 
(d)  The applicant shall be issued a permit unless the city's investigation or the information furnished by the applicant shows any of the following: 
(1)  The applicant has failed to provide information required by this article or has falsely answered a question. 
(2)  The applicant has been convicted of a violent felony (for the purposes of this section, "violent felony" shall mean rape, robbery, malicious wounding, aggravated sexual battery, manslaughter, or murder) within the past 15 years. 
(3)  The applicant has been convicted of a felony not listed in subsection (d)(2) above within the past five years. 
(4)  The applicant has been convicted of a crime of moral turpitude or a crime involving the obscenity laws within the past three years. 
(5)  The applicant has been denied a permit or has had a permit revoked within the past 12 months under any statute or ordinance requiring a permit to operate an adult business or adult use. 
(6)  Failure of the applicant's adult use to comply with the city's business license, zoning, building, plumbing, utility, health, electric or fire prevention codes, or with any other applicable city or state laws or regulations. 
(7)  The application fee has not been paid. 
(8)  The applicant has not obtained the special use permit required by section 48-1212 of the Code. 
(e)  If the application is denied, the chief of police shall notify the applicant of the denial and state the reasons for the denial. 
(f)  The permit shall be valid for 12 months from the date of issuance, and may be renewed in the same manner as it was initially obtained. The application fee for a renewal permit shall be $300.00. No permit shall be transferable. 
(g)  Any changes in the officers, directors, partners, managers or principals of the business entity to which the permit is issued or in the managers of the adult use shall be reported to the chief of police within five days of the change, and an application for the new owners, officers, directors, partners, managers, or principals of the entity, or managers of the business shall be submitted for review in accordance with subsection (c) above, within ten business days of the change. In the event the chief of police denies the application, the applicant shall have ten business days to terminate its relationship with the owners, officers, directors, partners, managers, or principals of the entity, or managers of the business, that are the subject of the denied application. If the relationship is not terminated, then the chief of police may revoke the permit. 
(h)  The issuance of a permit hereunder shall not constitute receipt of the zoning approvals required by chapter 48, article II, division 10, nor shall it operate as evidence that the permitted adult use complies with the requirements of chapter 48, article II, division 10. 
(Ord. No. 1846, 6-28-2010) 
Sec. 8-704. - Same-Grounds for revocation. 
    The chief of police may revoke any permit issued pursuant to this article for the following: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or any false or misleading statement contained in the application. 
(2)  Conviction of the permittee, an employee, or manager for any felony, crime involving moral turpitude, or crime involving the obscenity laws after the permit is issued. For a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or other legal entity, "permittee" includes each officer, director, partner, manager or principal of the entity, and the managers of the business. 
(3)  The permittee or an employee or manager of the permittee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of illegal controlled substances in or on the premises. 
(4)  The permittee or an employee or manager of the permittee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises. 
(5)  The permittee or an employee or manager of the permittee has refused to allow an inspection of the adult use as authorized by this article. 
(6)  On two or more occasions within a 12-month period, employees or managers of the adult use committed an offense in or on the premises of the adult use for which a conviction has been obtained constituting: 
a.  Aiding, abetting or harboring a runaway child; 
b.  Prostitution or promoting of prostitution; 
c.  Exposing minors to the materials or services provided by the adult use; 
d.  Dissemination of obscenity; 
e.  Sexual assault; or 
f.  Public nudity. 
The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the permit. 
(7)  The permittee is convicted of violations regarding any taxes or fees related to the adult use. 
(8)  The permittee has failed to operate or manage an adult use in a peaceful and law-abiding manner. 
(9)  The permittee or an employee or manager of the permittee, except a permittee or employee of a permittee of an adult motel, has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sexual activity to occur in or on the permitted premises. 
(10)  The permittee has been operating an adult use not approved under the applicable permit. 
(11)  The permittee has failed to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(12)  The permittee's business fails to comply with other applicable city or state laws or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1846, 6-28-2010) 
Sec. 8-705. - Procedure upon denial of an application or revocation of a permit. 
(a)  If the chief of police denies an application or revokes a permit, he shall notify the applicant or permittee in writing of such action, the reasons therefor, and the right to request a hearing. Such notice shall be given via registered mail to the address of record of the applicant or permittee, and, in the case of revocation of a permit, shall also be given by hand delivering such notice to the manager on duty during normal business hours. To receive a hearing, the applicant or permittee must make a written hearing request which must be received by the chief of police within ten days of the date of the notice of denial or revocation. If a timely hearing request is not received by the chief of police, the decision of the chief of police shall be final. If a hearing is properly requested, it shall be held within ten days from receipt of the hearing request. The hearing shall be presided over by the chief of police. The applicant or permittee shall have the right to present evidence and argument or to have counsel do so. The chief of police may have counsel present also. Within five days of the hearing, the chief of police shall render his decision which shall be final. A permittee must discontinue operation of its adult use when the decision to revoke the permit becomes final. 
(b)  When an imminent threat of substantial harm to public health or safety requires such action, the chief of police may immediately revoke a permit issued under this article by so stating in a written notice to the permittee. When action is taken pursuant to this subsection, the permittee shall immediately discontinue operation of its adult use, but shall have the right to a hearing as stated in subsection (a). 
(Ord. No. 1846, 6-28-2010) 
Sec. 8-706. - Availability of prompt judicial review. 
    After denial of an initial or renewal application or after revocation of a permit by the chief of police, the applicant or permittee may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action in the Circuit Court of Arlington County. Any such request for judicial review shall be filed within 30 days of when the administrative action becomes final. 
(Ord. No. 1846, 6-28-2010) 
Sec. 8-707. - Inspection. 
(a)  In addition to any existing legal authority, representatives of city departments shall have the authority to inspect an adult use for the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) shall not apply to sleeping rooms of an adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer. 
(Ord. No. 1846, 6-28-2010) 
Sec. 8-708. - Regulations pertaining to adult uses providing adult entertainment. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, adult entertainment is defined as dancing, modeling or other live entertainment if the entertainment is characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or is intended for the sexual stimulation or titillation of patrons. 
(b)  No person shall provide adult entertainment for patrons of an adult use except upon a stage located in an area open to all patrons of the business. The stage shall be at least 18 inches above the level of the floor and separated by a distance of at least three feet from the nearest area occupied by patrons. No patron shall be permitted within three feet of the stage while the stage is occupied by an entertainer. 
(c)  The adult use shall provide separate dressing room facilities for female and male entertainers which shall not be occupied or used in any way by anyone other than them. 
(d)  The adult use shall provide entertainers access between the stage and the dressing rooms which is completely separated from the patrons. If separate access is not physically feasible, the establishment shall provide a walk aisle at least four feet wide for entertainers between the dressing room area and the stage with a railing, fence or other barrier separating the patrons and the entertainers which prevents any physical contact between patrons and entertainers. 
(e)  No entertainer shall have physical contact with any patron and no patron shall have physical contact with any entertainer while in or on the premises of the adult use. 
(f)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any entertainer. A patron who wishes to pay or give a gratuity to an entertainer shall place the gratuity in a container that is at all times located separately from the entertainers for the purpose of preventing any physical contact between a patron and an entertainer. No entertainer shall solicit any gratuity from any patron. 
(g)  Patrons must be at least 18 years of age. 
(h)  This section shall not apply to an employee of an establishment who, while acting as a waiter, waitress, host, hostess, or bartender, comes within three feet of a patron. No employee shall engage in any specified sexual activity or other activity intended for the sexual stimulation or titillation of patrons, or expose any specified anatomical area while acting as a waiter, waitress, host, hostess, or bartender. 
(Ord. No. 1846, 6-28-2010) 
Sec. 8-709. - Regulations pertaining to adult motels. 
(a)  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel, as that term is defined in section 8-702 of this Code. 
(b)  No person who is in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that does not have an adult use permit shall rent or subrent a sleeping room to a person, and within ten hours from the time the room is rented, rent or subrent the same sleeping room again. 
(c)  For purposes of subsection (b), the terms rent or subrent mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
(Ord. No. 1846, 6-28-2010) 
Sec. 8-710. - Transfer of permit prohibited. 
(a)  A permittee shall not operate an adult use at any places or locations other than at the addresses designated in the approved permits. 
(b)  Permits are not transferable, whether by sale, lease, merger or otherwise, to another person or legal entity. The permit shall automatically be null and void in the event of transfer. 
(Ord. No. 1846, 6-28-2010) 
Sec. 8-711. - Public nudity and obscenity prohibited. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to permit any conduct which violates any city laws pertaining to public nudity and obscenity. 
(Ord. No. 1846, 6-28-2010) 
Sec. 8-712. - Violations. 
    Except as permitted in subsection 8-703(c), operation of an adult use without a permit is prohibited. Violations of this article shall be unlawful and subject to the provisions of section 1-12 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1846, 6-28-2010) 
Sec. 8-713. - Severability and conflict. 
(a)  Should any portion or portions of this article be declared unconstitutional or invalid by a valid decree or order of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the validity of this article in its entirety or of any part thereof other than that portion or portions of the article declared to be invalid. 
(b)  To the extent any provision of this article may conflict with any other provision in the Code of the City of Falls Church, Virginia, existing on the effective date of the ordinance establishing this article, then this article shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 1846, 6-28-2010) 
Secs. 8-714-8-800. - Reserved. 
Chapter 10 - CABLE TELEVISION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 42; underground utilities, § 42-231 et seq. 
State Law reference- Cable television, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2108 et seq.; franchise fees and public rights-of-way fees on cable operators, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2108.1:1; tampering with or unlawful use of cable television service, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-165.1; obtaining cable television service without payment, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-187.1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1-10-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LOBBYISTS 

Sec. 10-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Compensation means a salary, gift, payment, benefit, subscription, loan, advance, reimbursement or deposit of money or anything of value; or a contract, promise or agreement, whether or not legally enforceable, to make compensation. 
    Engage means to make any arrangement whereby a person is employed or retained for compensation to act in some part to influence cable television franchise legislation. 
    Expenditure means payment, distribution, loan, advance, deposit, reimbursement or gift of money, real estate or anything of value; or a contract, promise or agreement, whether or not legally enforceable, to make an expenditure. 
    Influence legislation means to promote, advocate or oppose the passage or defeat of cable television franchise legislation by direct communication with any member of the city council, the city manager or a member of the managerial staff of the city. 
    Legislation means ordinances, resolutions, amendments, nominations and other matters pending before the city council pertaining to a cable television franchise. 
    Person or applicant means any individual, partnership, trust, estate, business trust, association, corporation or entity being a bidder or prospective bidder for a cable television franchise, or having a financial relationship therein, through employment, stock interest or otherwise. 
(Code 1982, § 7-11; Ord. No. 956) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-20. - Offenses. 
(a)  No person engaged to influence cable television franchise legislation shall fail to register as required under section 10-21. 
(b)  No person engaged to influence cable television franchise legislation shall fail to keep a receipt or maintain a record as required by section 10-22. 
(c)  No person engaged to influence cable television franchise legislation shall fail to file a statement as required by section 10-23. 
(Code 1982, § 7-12; Ord. No. 956) 
Sec. 10-21. - Registration. 
(a)  Any person seeking to influence cable television franchise legislation, directly or through another, shall file with the city clerk a registration statement showing all of the following: 
(1)  The person's name, business address and occupation. 
(2)  The amount and method of compensation, except for regular, fulltime employees of the company making the representation. In cases in which it is impractical or impossible to determine exact dollar amounts or values of expenditures, reporting of good faith estimates, based upon reasonable accounting procedures, shall constitute compliance with this section. 
(3)  The name and business address of the persons who are compensating such person to influence the legislation, or a description of the financial relationship involved. 
(4)  A brief description of the legislation such person is being compensated to influence. 
(b)  Upon a change in any information required by this section, the registration statement filed, pursuant to this section, shall be amended within 30 days to reflect such change. 
(c)  No registration statement shall be valid beyond December 31 of each even-numbered year. 
(d)  No registration fee shall be charged. 
(Code 1982, § 7-13; Ord. No. 956) 
Sec. 10-22. - Records and receipts. 
(a)  Statement of expenditures. 
(1)  Each person who is compensated to influence cable television franchise legislation shall file in the office of the city clerk a statement of expenditures. The statement shall show the amount of each expenditure made by the person filing the statement to influence such legislation, the specific purpose of that expenditure and the total amount of all such expenditures. The person shall also state the name of the public body, public officer or employee to whom or on whose behalf the expenditure was made, the total amount of the expenditure and the exact legislation sought to be influenced, by ordinance or resolution number. The statements shall be filed on or before the fifth day of each month. Each statement shall cover expenditures made during the preceding month. 
(2)  In cases in which it is impractical or impossible to determine exact dollar amounts or values of expenditures, reporting of good faith estimates, based upon reasonable accounting procedures, shall constitute compliance with this section. 
(b)  Requirements. All persons who are compensated to influence cable television franchise legislation shall retain receipts or maintain records for all expenditures that are required to be reported pursuant to this section. These receipts or records shall be maintained for a period ending on December 31 of the second calendar year after the year in which the expenditure was made, and during such time shall be made available to the city manager or the designee of the city manager for investigation of compliance with this article. 
(Code 1982, § 7-14; Ord. No. 956) 
Sec. 10-23. - Report of campaign contributions. 
    All persons who are compensated to influence cable television franchise legislation shall report any campaign contributions which have been made to members of or candidates for the city council or their campaign treasurer. Such report shall be filed when a franchise proposal is submitted and within 60 days after the contribution is made during the term of any franchise. The report of campaign contributions will be filed with the expenditure statements required in section 10-22. 
(Code 1982, § 7-15; Ord. No. 956) 
Sec. 10-24. - Requirements for disclosure of communications with city council, etc. 
(a)  City councilmembers, members of citizens advisory committee on cable television, the city manager and other city officials, as well as any consultants retained by the city, are required to disclose any discussions held, information provided or meetings attended other than the council's public sessions with applicants, their agents and their representatives. 
(b)  The aforesaid disclosure shall be made by filing a statement with the city clerk summarizing the discussions within one week of the contact. The statement shall contain the name of the persons contacting the official; the method of communication, with a copy of it attached, if written; and the date, place and subject matter of the communication. The city clerk shall keep these statements in accordance with section 10-25. 
(Code 1982, § 7-16; Ord. No. 956; Ord. No. 988, 11-9-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982) 
Sec. 10-25. - Duties of city clerk. 
    The city clerk shall keep on file the statements required by sections 10-21 and 10-22. Such statements are public records and open to public inspection. The city clerk shall provide copies of the statements to the general public upon request and may charge a reasonable fee, not to exceed the cost of copying and delivering the statement. 
(Code 1982, § 7-17; Ord. No. 956) 
Sec. 10-26. - Powers of city manager. 
    The city manager or designee may investigate compliance with this article and, in the event of an apparent violation, shall institute such proceedings as are appropriate. 
(Code 1982, § 7-18; Ord. No. 956) 
Sec. 10-27. - Penalties. 
(a)  A violation of any provision of this article is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00. 
(b)  The city council, in its discretion, may eliminate from consideration any applicant for the award of a cable television franchise within the city because of a violation of this article by any of its members, agents or representatives. 
(Code 1982, § 7-19; Ord. No. 956) 
Secs. 10-28-10-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REGULATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Franchise regulations, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2100 et seq.; public rights-of-way use fee, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2108.1:1; authority to grant negotiated cable franchise and regulate cable systems as provided in 47 USC 521 et seq., Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2108.20. 

Sec. 10-58. - Purposes. 
    The purposes of this article are to: 
(1)  Provide for the franchising and regulation of cable television systems within the city; 
(2)  Provide for the payment of a fee and other valuable consideration to the city for the construction and operation of cable television systems; 
(3)  Provide for the regulation by the city of the rates to be charged to subscribers for cable television service; 
(4)  Provide for the development of cable television as a means to improve communication between and among the members of the public and public institutions of the city; and 
(5)  Provide remedies and prescribe penalties for violation of this article and the franchise granted hereunder. 
(Code 1982, § 7-20; Ord. No. 984, 10-13-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982) 
Sec. 10-59. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word shall is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
    Application expenses means expenses paid or incurred by a person who applies for a cable television franchise. Such expenses shall include: 
(1)  Expenses paid for engineering or other consultant services utilized in preparing the application filed with the city for a cable television franchise. 
(2)  Legal expenses paid or incurred for services utilized in preparing the application filed with the city for a cable television franchise. 
(3)  Readily identifiable salaries (or portions thereof) or compensation, in any form, of employees of the applicant whose services have been used to further, in any way, the application; provided, that if the amount of a salary or value of compensation of an employee which is attributable to such services is less than $1,000.00 in a reporting period as set forth herein, then such a salary or compensation need not be included as an application expense. 
(4)  Assignment, issuance, promise of assignment or issuance to any person, of any ownership interest in the applicant and the consideration, if any, paid or promised; provided, however, that such ownership interests need not include security interests which are registered pursuant to the provisions of the Securities Act of 1933, 15 USC 77, and which are either traded on a recognized securities exchange or are regularly traded and the trading activity of which is reported by the National Association of Securities Dealers through NASDAQ, its automated communications system; provided, however, the previous proviso shall not exclude assignments, issuances, promises of assignments or issuance of ownership interests for a consideration less than the fair market value. Any person who acquires an ownership interest without payment of good and valuable consideration, shall be specifically identified. 
(5)  Payments, or promises of payment of money or any other thing of value, to any person used to further, in any way, the application. The disclosure required by this subsection shall not include those expenses disclosed pursuant to subsections (1) through (4) of this section. 
    Basic cable service consists of, at a minimum: 
(1)  All domestic television broadcast signals carried in fulfillment of the requirements of 47 USC 534 and 535; 
(2)  Any public, educational, and governmental access programming required by the franchise of the cable system to be provided to subscribers as basic service; 
(3)  Any signal of any television broadcast station that is provided by the cable operator to any subscriber, except a signal which is secondarily transmitted by a satellite carrier beyond the local service area of such station, regardless of how such signal is ultimately received by the cable system; and 
(4)  Any additional video programming signals or service added to basic service by the cable operator. 
    Business associates includes any person with whom one is jointly or mutually engaged in any profit-seeking enterprise or endeavor; and any person, corporation, partnership, syndicate, joint venture, or other entity in which one or one's immediate family is an officer, director, employee, or holder of a legal, equitable, actual or beneficial interest. 
    Cable service means: 
(1)  The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming services; and 
(2)  Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video programming or other programming service. 
    Cable television administrator means the present or succeeding employee of the city or so designated. 
    Cable television system means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within the city, except that such definition shall not include: 
(1)  A system which serves fewer than 20 subscribers; 
(2)  A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; 
(3)  A facility which serves only subscribers in one or more multiple unit dwellings under common ownership, control, or management, unless such facility uses any public right-of-way; 
(4)  A facility of a common carrier which is subject in whole or in part, to the provisions of title II of the Communications Act of 1934, 47 USC 201 et seq., except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; 
(5)  Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric systems; or 
(6)  Any portion of a system that serves fewer than 50 subscribers in the city where such portion is a part of a larger system franchised in an adjacent county, city or town. 
    Educational access channel means any video channel or portion thereof provided on the cable system as part of the regular subscriber service and reserved for the exclusive use of one or more schools, colleges, universities, or other institutions of higher learning in accordance with the minimum requirements of section 10-64(b)(2) and the offerings of the company as described in its proposal and its franchise agreement with the city. 
    Fair market value means the price which property will bring when it is offered for sale by one who desires, but is not obligated, to sell it, and is bought by one who is under no necessity of having it. 
    Federal Communications Commission or FCC means that federal agency as presently constituted by the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, or any successor agency. 
    Franchise means the nonexclusive initial authorization or renewal granted by the city to construct and operate a cable television system along the public ways in the city, or within specified areas in the city, and is not intended to include any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the city as may be required by other ordinances and laws of the city. 
    Government access channel means any video channel or portion thereof provided on the cable system and included as part of the regular subscriber service by the company for the exclusive use of one or more city, county, or state governments or agencies in accordance with the minimum requirements of section 10-64(b)(2) and the offerings of the company as described in its proposal and its franchise agreement with the city. 
    Grantee means the natural person, partnership, domestic or foreign corporation, limited liability company, association, joint venture, or organization of any kind granted a franchise by the council under this article and its lawful successor, transferee or assignee. 
    Gross revenues means those revenues derived from the supplying of regular subscriber service, monthly, or periodic charges for service, installation fees and reconnect fees, revenues derived from per-program or per-channel charges, leased channel revenues, advertising revenues, and any other revenues received by the grantee, its employees, agents, successors, assignees and lessees for cable television services rendered by the system within the city. 
    Housing unit means dwelling unit as defined in chapter 48, pertaining to zoning. 
    Immediate family includes spouse, siblings, children, spouses of siblings and their children, parents, and grandchildren, whether or not they are members of the same household. 
    Institutional channel means any channel or portion thereof not designated as a public, educational or government access channel provided on the grantee's subscriber network or separate cable network for the use of any government agency, school, college, university or any other public institution for the transmission of data, voice or video information in accordance with the offerings of the company as described in its proposal and its franchise agreement with the city. 
    Interest includes, as that term is used in section 10-65(m) and (n), any relationship: 
(1)  Whether by ownership, employment, gift, fee, or otherwise; 
(2)  Whether present, promised, or reasonably expected; 
(3)  Whether direct or indirect; 
(4)  Whether legal or equitable; 
(5)  Whether actual or beneficial; 
from or because of which a person, such person's immediate family or business associates have received financial benefit or have a right or reasonable expectation, whether or not legally enforceable, whether vested or contingent, to receive financial benefit in the future, directly or indirectly. 
    Lease access channel means any channel or portion thereof provided on the cable system for a reasonable fee for use by any person, partnership, domestic or foreign corporation, association, joint venture, or organization of any kind in accordance with the minimum requirements of section 10-64(b)(2) and the offerings of the company as described in its proposal and its franchise agreement with the city. 
    Net profit means the amount remaining after deducting from gross revenues all of the actual, direct and indirect, expenses associated with operating the cable television system including the franchise fee, interest, depreciation and federal or state income taxes. 
    Officer or employee includes members of city council, the cable television administrator, members of the citizens' advisory committee on cable television, member of any franchise evaluation committee, all officers and directors of any consulting firm hired by the city for cable television purposes and any other persons designated by ordinance. 
    Public access channel means any video channel or portion thereof provided on the cable system included as part of the regular subscriber service by the company for use by all residents of the city on a first-come, nondiscriminatory basis in accordance with the minimum requirements of section 10-64(b)(2) and the offerings of the company as described in its proposal and its franchise agreement with the city. 
    Public way means the surface, the airspace above the surface and the area below the surface of any public street, highway, lane, path, alley, sidewalk, boulevard, drive or other public right-of-way, and any temporary or permanent fixtures or improvements located thereon, now or hereafter held by the city, which shall entitle the city and the grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing and maintaining the grantee's cable television system. 
    Rate regulated service means basic cable service, all equipment provided by a cable operator to a subscriber's home which is used to receive basic cable service, regardless of whether such equipment is used to receive other regulated or unregulated services, and the installation of all equipment which is used to receive basic cable service. Such equipment shall include, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Converter boxes; 
(2)  Remote control units; 
(3)  Connections for additional television receivers; and 
(4)  Other cable home wiring. 
    Regular subscriber service means the distribution to subscribers of signals over a cable television system on all channels except those for which a per-program or per-channel charge is made, two-way services, and those intended for reception by equipment other than a television broadcast receiver. 
    Service tier means a category of cable service or other services provided by a grantee's cable television system and for which a separate rate is charged by the grantee. 
    Subscriber means any member of the general public who receives or contracts with a grantee to receive the regular subscriber service and/or any one or more of such other services as may be provided by the grantee's cable television system, and does not further distribute such service. 
    Video programming means programming provided by or generally considered comparable to programming provided by a television broadcast station. 
(Code 1982, § 7-21; Ord. No. 984, 10-13-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1460, 2-14-1994) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-60. - Grant of authority. 
(a)  Requirement of a franchise. No person, firm, company, corporation or association shall construct, install, maintain or operate a cable television system or part of a cable television system within the confines of a public way in the city, or within the confines of any other public property of the city, unless a franchise has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this article, and unless such franchise is in full force and effect. 
(b)  Franchise applications. 
(1)  An application for a cable television franchise shall be submitted to the council, or its designee, on a written application form furnished by the city, and in accordance with procedures and schedules to be established and published by the city. An application form may request facts and information the city deems appropriate. Applications shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee of $3,500.00 made payable to the order of the "City of Falls Church," which amount shall be used by the city to offset expenses incurred in the franchising and evaluation procedures, including, but not limited to, staff time and consulting assistance. 
(2)  An applicant (grantee) to whom the council grants one or more nonexclusive franchises shall, in addition to the nonrefundable fee specified hereinabove, pay to the city at the time the grantee files the written instrument specified in section 10-65(h), an amount to reimburse the city for all costs incurred, including all out-of-pocket and reasonable allocation of direct overhead and personnel costs, not to exceed $20,000.00 per franchise area, which shall be prescribed by the council. Said payment shall be nonrefundable, shall be made payable to the order of the "City of Falls Church" and shall be used to offset any direct costs incurred by the city in granting the franchise not defrayed by fees forthcoming from the provisions of subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
(c)  Financial expense report. 
(1)  Every person submitting an application for a cable television franchise shall, simultaneously with the submission of the application, provide the city with a complete statement of application expenses, as defined in section 10-59, incurred up to the 13th day prior to the filing of an application. 
(2)  Every person submitting an application for a cable television franchise shall, on or before the 13th day following the filing of an application for a cable television franchise, provide the city with a disclosure of application expenses incurred by the applicant for the period beginning on the 13th day prior to the filing of the application and ending at the close of business on the day of the filing of the application. 
(3)  Every person submitting an application for a cable television franchise shall, on or before the 19th day following the filing of an application for a franchise, provide the city with a disclosure of such additional application expenses incurred by the applicant for the period beginning on the day following the filing of the application and ending on the 16th day following the filing of the application. 
(4)  Every person submitting an application for a cable television franchise shall provide the city with a disclosure of application expenses incurred for each 60-day period following the filing of the application, and such disclosure shall be submitted to the city on or before the 13th day following the close of each 60-day period. 
(5)  The disclosures described in the preceding sections shall be in writing. Each item of expenses shall indicate the payer, payee, amount of payment, and the date of payment. A payment of money need not be itemized if the payments to the payee do not exceed $100.00 during any reporting period. Until the city shall have rejected an application or until an applicant withdraws its application, every person submitting an application shall provide the city with the disclosures described in this section. Failure to provide the disclosures described in this section shall be an offense. 
(d)  Applicant representatives. Any person who files an application with the city for a cable television franchise shall forthwith, at all times, disclose to the city, in writing, the names, addresses and occupations of all persons who are authorized to represent or act on behalf of the applicant in those matters pertaining to the application. The requirement to make the disclosure, described in this section, shall continue until the city shall have rejected an applicant's application, or until an applicant withdraws its applications. Failure of any person to provide the written disclosures required by this section shall constitute an offense. 
(Code 1982, § 7-22; Ord. No. 984, 10-13-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1460, 2-14-1994) 
Sec. 10-61. - Cable television administrator. 
(a)  Powers and responsibilities. Day-to-day administration of cable television operations within the city may be assigned to a cable television administrator. The administrator's powers and responsibilities may include, but not be limited to, the following functions: 
(1)  Preparing invitations to bid for a franchise; establishing criteria for review and ranking of franchise applications; reviewing and evaluating applications for franchises and making selection recommendations to the council through the city manager. 
(2)  Monitoring the timely performance of grantees in making application for and obtaining all certificates, permits and agreements as provided for in this article. 
(3)  Monitoring the performance of grantees in meeting the construction timetable as provided for in this article. 
(4)  Advising and making recommendations to the council, through the city manager, on matters which may constitute grounds for revocation of a franchise in accordance with this article. 
(5)  Monitoring and reviewing changes in, additions to, or reductions of subscriber fees and rates for conformity to the stipulations of this article and advising and making recommendations to the council, through the city manager, on the regulation of rates in accordance with this article. 
(6)  Advising and making recommendations to the council, through the city manager, on technical, engineering, and police power regulations of CATV operations within the city. 
(7)  Cooperating with other systems, cable television system operators and governmental units in the development of and in the supervision of the interconnection of systems. 
(8)  Reviewing all franchise records and reports as required by this article, as well as all franchise reports filed with the FCC and, in the administrator's discretion, requiring the preparation and filing of information in addition to that required therein, as may reasonably be required to accomplish the purposes of this article. 
(9)  Monitoring performance of grantees under any other terms of the franchise agreements and this article and making recommendations to the council, through the city manager, to ensure such compliance. 
(10)  Making an annual report to the council, through the city manager, which shall include: An account of franchise fees received, the total number of hours of utilization of public channels with hourly subtotals for various programming categories, and a review of any plans submitted during the year by the grantee for development of new services. 
(11)  Conducting evaluations of the systems at least every three years and, pursuant thereto, making recommendations to the council, through the city manager, for amendments to this article or to the franchise agreement. 
(12)  Seeking recovery, with the assistance or through appropriate legal counsel, if necessary, of liquidated damages in accordance with this article. 
(13)  Receiving and investigating complaints against grantees by any person or upon the direction of the council. 
(14)  Advising grantees of the receipt of subscriber complaints affecting the grantee's system. 
(15)  Taking steps necessary: 
a.  To administer the rate regulatory provisions of the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, Pub. L. No. 102-385, including the establishment of administrative rules and procedures which are consistent with applicable Federal Communications Commission regulations; and 
b.  To exercise that authority granted to the administrator by the council. 
(b)  Automatic adjustments. In addition to the powers and responsibilities set forth in subsection (a)(1) of this section, the cable television administrator shall have authority to act on written notice from a cable television operator for any change in the price to be charged to a subscriber for inflationary and external cost adjustments, as permitted by 47 CFR 76.922(d) (hereinafter termed "automatic adjustment"). The cable television administrator shall act on a notice of proposed automatic adjustment within 30 days of receipt of that notice or within such other time as may be allowed by the FCC. The cable television administrator shall notify the council through the city manager whenever notice of a proposed automatic adjustment is received, and any action taken by the cable television administrator on an automatic adjustment shall be reported to the council in the same manner. If any such notice of automatic adjustment is in strict compliance with applicable federal regulations, the cable television administrator shall approve the proposed automatic adjustment. If any such notice of automatic adjustment is not in strict compliance with applicable federal regulations, the cable television administrator shall approve that portion of the change that qualifies as an automatic adjustment and shall refer the balance of the proposed automatic adjustment to the council for consideration in accordance with section 10-63, as an application to amend the schedule of rate regulated services. 
(c)  Agreements with the county. The council may, by duly adopted resolution, enter into any agreement with the county it deems appropriate, whereby the duties set forth in subsection (a) of this section may be assumed by or delegated to the county cable television administrator, in whole or in part. 
(Code 1982, § 7-23; Ord. No. 984, 10-13-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1460, 2-14-1994) 
Sec. 10-62. - Franchise conditions. 
(a)  Term. The term of an original franchise shall be 15 years from the date the franchise is accepted by a grantee. The term of a renewed franchise shall be no more than 15 years. 
(b)  Notice to grantee. The council shall not take final action at any meeting of the council involving the review, renewal or revocation of a grantee's franchise unless the city has given the grantee at least 30 days' written notice of such meeting. The notice shall advise the grantee of the meeting's time, place and proposed action affecting the grantee. 
(c)  Amendment policy. It shall be the policy of the city to amend a franchise upon application of a grantee, the recommendation of a cable television administrator or upon the council's own motion when necessary or advisable to enable the grantee to take advantage of advancements in the state-of-the-arts which will afford it an opportunity to more effectively, efficiently or economically serve its subscribers or the city; provided, this section shall not be construed to require the city to make any amendment for such purposes. 
(d)  Renewal. 
(1)  The council may adopt a resolution setting forth the time and place of a council meeting to be publicly announced, the purpose of which will be to review a grantee's performance during the entire term of its franchise, to consider the adequacy of the franchise from the standpoint of the city, the grantee, and the Federal Communications Commission Rules for Cable Television, and to determine the advisability of renewing the grantee's franchise. 
(2)  The council may hear interested persons during said council meeting and may determine whether the grantee did reasonably comply with the terms and conditions imposed by this article and the franchise. 
(3)  If the council determines that the grantee has been in reasonable compliance with the terms and conditions imposed by this article and the franchise, the council may, by ordinance, renew the grantee's franchise, with any modifications it deems desirable, for a period of time not inconsistent with the provisions of this article. The council may require a grantee to pay the city, as a condition of renewal of the franchise, an amount which the council determines will compensate the city for those direct expenses above normal administrative costs incurred in connection with the renewal of the franchise. 
(4)  Notwithstanding the fact that the council may determine that the grantee has been in reasonable compliance with the terms and conditions imposed by this article and the franchise, it shall have the right not to renew the franchise. If the council does not renew the franchise, the council shall have an option, to the extent then permitted by existing law, to acquire the assets of the grantee's cable television system, or the option to permit a succeeding grantee to acquire such assets. The total amount paid for such assets shall be the fair market value of the system, as of the expiration date of the franchise, and shall be determined by using a hypothetical assumption that the cable system is a going concern with an existing franchise which will expire ten years from the aforesaid expiration date. The council's option to acquire the assets of the grantee or to permit a succeeding grantee to acquire such assets must be exercised within one year from the date of expiration. 
(e)  Revocation procedure. The franchise may be revoked for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Whenever a grantee shall refuse, neglect or willfully fail: 
a.  To construct, operate or maintain its cable television system in accordance with the terms of this article and the franchise; 
b.  To comply with the conditions of occupancy of any public lands; 
c.  To make required extensions of service; or 
d.  Willfully or knowingly make false statements on or in connection with its franchise application or, in any other way, violate the terms and conditions of this article, the franchise or any rule or regulation adopted thereunder; or substantially violates any provision of the Virginia Consumer Protection Act of 1977, as amended. 
If a grantee becomes insolvent or unable or unwilling to pay debts or seeks or obtains relief under the bankruptcy laws, then, as may otherwise be permitted by law, the franchise may be revoked. 
(2)  In the event that the cable television administrator believes that grounds for revocation exist or have existed, the cable television administrator may notify a grantee, in writing, setting forth the nature and facts of such noncompliance. If, within 30 days following such written notification by the cable television administrator, the grantee has not furnished proof that corrective action has been taken or is being actively and expeditiously pursued, or evidence that the alleged violations did not occur, or that the alleged violations were beyond the grantee's control, the cable television administrator shall refer the matter to the council through the city manager. 
(3)  The council may revoke a franchise, pursuant to subsection (e)(1) of this section, by ordinance. 
(4)  The council shall not adopt an ordinance pursuant to subsection (e)(3) of this section until it has given notice to the grantee that it proposes to adopt such an ordinance and the grounds. Further, the council shall not adopt such an ordinance until the grantee, or the representative of the grantee, has had reasonable opportunity to be heard before the council and show that the proposed grounds for revocation did not or do not exist, as the case may be. 
(5)  A grantee shall not be subject to the sanctions of this section for any act or omission wherein such act or omission was beyond the grantee's control. An act or omission shall not be deemed to be beyond a grantee's control if committed, omitted, or caused by a corporation or other business entity which holds a controlling interest in the grantee, whether held directly or indirectly. Further, the inability of a grantee to obtain financing, for whatever reason, shall not be an act or omission which is beyond the grantee's control. 
(6)  In the event that a franchise has been revoked by the council, the council shall have an option, to the extent then permitted by existing law, to either purchase the tangible assets of the grantee's cable television system previously governed by the franchise or assign such rights to purchase. Such an option must be exercised within one year from the date of the revocation of the franchise, or the entry of the final judgment by a court reviewing the question of the council's revocation, or the entry of a final order upon appeal of same, whichever is later. 
(7)  The termination of a grantee's rights under a franchise shall in no way affect any other rights the city may have under the franchise or under any provision of law. 
(f)  Arbitrary and capricious action by grantee. If a grantee arbitrarily and capriciously discontinues service to a substantial number of its subscribers, the grantee's franchise may be revoked by a resolution of the council following notice to the grantee and an opportunity to be heard. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, notice to the grantee under this section may be less than 30 days, provided, further, that the city may seek appropriate judicial or other relief and/or may proceed to exercise its rights and powers as provided for herein. 
(g)  Provision for arbitration. In the event the city elects to purchase a grantee's cable television system, or any of its assets, and the fair market value cannot be agreed upon, the final price shall be determined by a panel of arbitrators. The panel shall be composed of one arbitrator chosen by the city, one arbitrator chosen by the grantee, and a third arbitrator chosen by the first two. The expenses of the arbitration, including the fees of the arbitrators, shall be borne by the parties in such manner as the arbitrators provide in their award, but in no event will the city be obligated for more than one-half of the expenses. The determination of a majority of the arbitrators shall be binding on the parties. The arbitrators shall follow the rules and procedures of the American Arbitration Association except where in conflict with an express provision of this article. The arbitration hearing shall take place in the city, unless otherwise agreed to by the parties in writing. 
(h)  Transfer of ownership to city. 
(1)  In those circumstances provided for in this article wherein the city shall have the right to purchase ownership of a grantee's cable television system or any of its assets, the city may give notice that it elects to exercise such right and the city may acquire such assets, at the option of the city, at one of the following times: 
a.  At the time of giving notice of election of its right to purchase, in which case the assets shall automatically transfer to the city; 
b.  At any time specified by the city subsequent to the giving of notice of its election of its right to purchase; in which case the assets shall automatically transfer to the city at such subsequent time; or 
c.  At the time of payment of the fair market value. 
Unless the notice of election by the city specifically exercises a right described in subsection (h)(1)a or (h)(1)b of this section, subsection (h)(1)c of this section shall apply. In those circumstances where subsection (h)(1)c of this section applies, and the question of fair market value has been submitted to arbitration, the city may affirmatively accept the award of the arbitrators within 90 days after the rendering of the arbitrators' decision, at which time the assets shall automatically transfer to the city. If the city fails to accept the arbitrators' decision within the aforesaid 90-day period, the rights of the city to purchase shall expire. 
(2)  In those circumstances provided for in this article wherein the city shall have the right to purchase ownership of a grantee's cable television system, or any of its assets, no question of fair market value shall be submitted to arbitration until 120 days have lapsed from the giving of such notice. Thereafter, either a grantee or the city may submit the matter to arbitration. 
(3)  If any time lapses between the time of transfer of assets and the time of payment, the grantee shall be entitled to interest during the interim at the rate of eight percent per annum. 
(i)  City's right to assign. A franchise shall not limit the right of the city to assign its rights to acquire any or all of the assets of a grantee's cable television system. 
(j)  Grantee's obligation as trustee. 
(1)  At all times from the expiration or revocation of a franchise and until either a grantee transfers to the city or other succeeding operator of the system all of its rights, title and interest to all assets, real and personal, related to its cable television system or the city's right to either acquire or assign its rights to acquire any of the grantee's assets expires without the city having exercised such a right, whichever occurs first, the grantee shall have a duty to such successor as a trustee holding such assets for the benefit of such successor and the grantee shall not sell any of the system assets nor shall the grantee make any physical, material, or administrative operational changes that would tend to degrade the quality of service to the subscribers, decrease gross revenues, or materially increase expenses without the expressed permission, in writing, of the city or its assigns. The grantee shall, at all times, operate the system in accordance with terms of this article and the terms of the franchise as if the franchise had not expired or had not been revoked. 
(2)  In the event of expiration or revocation of a franchise, this section shall not be construed to give a grantee any vested or other franchise right, but the right of the grantee in such circumstances shall exist only on a day-to-day basis until the transfer is effected. 
(3)  For its management services during this interim period as a trustee, the grantee shall be entitled to receive as compensation the net profit, as defined herein, generated during the period between the expiration or revocation of the franchise, as the case may be, and the transfer of the grantee's assets to the city or a successor. 
(4)  Further, this section shall in no way limit the power of the city, upon expiration or revocation of a franchise, to require the grantee to cease all operations whatsoever and/or remove its facilities or otherwise exercise any rights the city would otherwise have. 
(k)  Franchise fee. 
(1)  A grantee, in consideration of the privilege granted under a franchise for the operation of a cable television system, shall build a cable television system in accordance with the terms of its franchise and shall pay to the city a percentage of its annual gross revenues during the period of operation under the franchise. The percentage to be paid shall be the lesser of either the maximum amount permitted under federal or state law, or the percentage of its annual gross revenues in accordance with the following schedule and formula: 
Level of Penetration(%) Percentage of Annual Gross Revenue(%) Less than 40 5 40 and greater and less than 55   
penetration (%) - 8.3 
---------- 
3 
  55 and greater 10  
For the purposes of determining the percentage of annual gross revenue payable to the city, the term "penetration" shall be defined as the ratio of the number of housing units in the city subscribing to cable television to the total number of housing units in the city. The number of housing units subscribing to cable television service shall be provided by the grantee and shall be the greatest number of subscribing housing units during the current calendar year. The total number of housing units in the city shall be provided by the staff of the planning department and shall be the number of housing units existing on January 1 of the calendar year immediately preceding the year in which the franchise fee payment is due. A grantee shall, at all times, have the duty to forthwith take all steps and do all things that may be necessary and/or proper to relieve itself and the city from any limitations which may exist under law, including but not limited to applying for waivers of franchise fee limitations, etc. 
(2)  A grantee shall file with the city, within 30 days after the expiration of each of the grantee's fiscal quarters, a financial statement clearly showing the gross revenues received by grantee during the preceding quarter. Payment of the quarterly portion of the franchise fee shall be made to the city within the above-mentioned 30 days, at or before the time such financial statement is filed. A grantee shall also file, within 120 days following the conclusion of the grantee's fiscal year, the grantee's financial statements for that year, examined and reported on by an independent public accountant, certified in the commonwealth. The cost of such audit shall be borne by the grantee. 
(3)  The city shall have the right, consistent with the provisions of section 10-63(b)(2), to inspect a grantee's income records, the right of audit and the right to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under this article. Any additional amounts due the city, as indicated by the audit, plus interest as specified in subsection (k)(4) of this section, shall be paid to the city forthwith. 
(4)  In the event that any franchise payment is not made on or before the applicable dates specified, interest shall be charged at a rate equal to the interest rate then chargeable for unpaid federal income taxes, 26 USC 6621. In addition to the foregoing, the failure of the grantee to make a timely payment, as defined by Code of Virginia, § 6.1-330.26, of any amount shall subject the grantee to an additional late charge of five percent of the amount of such payment. 
(5)  In the event a franchise is revoked prior to its expiration date, the grantee shall file with the city, within 30 days of the date of revocation, a financial statement clearly showing the gross revenues received by the grantee since the end of the previous fiscal quarter and shall pay within that time the franchise fees accrued as of the date of revocation. 
(l)  Insurance, bonds, indemnity. 
(1)  Upon the granting of a franchise and following simultaneously with the filing of the acceptance required under section 10-65(h), and at all times during the term of the franchise, including the time for removal of facilities or management as a trustee as provided for herein, the grantee shall obtain, pay all premiums for and deliver, to the city, written evidence of payment of premiums and originals of the following: 
a.  A general comprehensive public liability policy indemnifying, defending and saving harmless the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents or employees from any and all claims by any person whatsoever (including the costs, defenses, attorney fees and interest arising therefrom) on account of injury to or death of a person or persons occasioned by the operations of the grantee under the franchise granted, or alleged to have been so caused or occurred, with a minimum liability of $1,000,000.00 per personal injury or death of any one person and $2,000,000.00 for personal injury or death of any two or more persons in any one occurrence. 
b.  A property damage insurance policy indemnifying, defending and saving harmless the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees from and against all claims by any person whatsoever (including the costs, defenses, attorney fees and interest arising therefrom) for property damage occasioned by the operation of the grantee under the franchise granted, or alleged to have been so caused or occurred, with a minimum liability of $500,000.00 for property damage to the property of any one person and $1,000,000.00 for property damage to the property of two or more persons in any one occurrence. 
c.  Copyright infringement insurance, indemnifying, defending and saving harmless the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents, and employees from and against all claims of any person whatsoever (including the costs, defenses, attorney fees and interest arising therefrom) for copyright infringement occasioned by the operation of the grantee under the franchise granted or alleged to have been caused or occurred with a minimum liability of $1,000,000.00 for the infringement of said copyrights. 
d.  A performance bond or bonds running to the city with good and sufficient surety approved by the city in the sum of $250,000.00 conditioned upon the faithful performance and discharge of the obligations imposed by the ordinance and the franchise awarded hereunder from the date thereof, including, but not limited to, faithful compliance with the construction timetable proposed by the grantee in its application as incorporated into the franchise. The amount of the bond may be reduced to $100,000.00 when regular subscriber service is available to more than 50 percent of the occupied dwelling units within the city, as described in section 10-64(a), as certified by the cable television administrator to the council; and may be further reduced to the sum of $25,000.00 when regular subscriber service is available to more than 90 percent of the occupied dwelling units within the city, as certified by the cable television administrator to the council. The city's right to recover under the bond shall be in addition to any other rights retained by the city under this article and other applicable law. 
(2)  All bonds and insurance policies called for herein shall be in a form satisfactory to the city attorney. The city may at any time, if it deems itself insecure, require a grantee to provide additional sureties to any and all bonds or to replace existing bonds with new bonds with good and sufficient surety approved by the city. No bond or insurance policy shall be cancelable. Insurance policies written for a period less than the terms of the franchise shall be renewed at least 60 days before a policy's expiration and the renewed polices and evidence of premium payments shall be delivered forthwith to the city. 
(3)  A grantee shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officials, boards, commissions, agents and employees against any and all claims, suits, causes of actions, proceedings, and judgments for damage arising out of the operation of the cable television system under the franchise. These damages shall include, but not be limited to penalties arising out of copyright infringements and damages arising out of any failure by a grantee to secure consents from the owners, authorized distributors or licensees of programs to be delivered by the grantee's cable television system whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed, or prohibited by the franchise. Indemnified expenses shall include, but not be limited to, all out-of-pocket expenses, such as costs and attorney fees, and shall also include the reasonable value of any services rendered by the city attorney or the attorney's assistant or any employees of the city. 
(4)  No grantee shall permit any policy or bond to expire or approach less than 30 days prior to expiration without securing and delivering to the city a substitute, renewal or replacement policy or bond in conformance with the provisions of this article. 
(m)  Transfer of franchise. 
(1)  The franchise granted under this article shall be a privilege to be held in personal trust by the grantee. It shall not be assigned, transferred, sold or disposed of, in whole or in part, by voluntary sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise or by forced or involuntary sale, without prior consent of the council expressed by ordinance and then on only such conditions as may be prescribed. The city is hereby empowered to take legal or equitable action to set aside, annual, revoke, or cancel the franchise, or the transfer of the franchise, if said transfer is not made according to the procedures set forth in this article. 
(2)  Any sale, transfer or assignment of a franchise shall be subject to the provisions of this article and shall be made in writing, an executed copy of which shall be filed with the cable television administrator within 30 days after any such sale, transfer or assignment. The council shall not withhold its consent unreasonably; provided, however, the proposed assignee must agree to comply with all the provisions of this article, the franchise, and reasonable amendments thereto, and must be able to provide proof of financial and character qualifications as determined by the council; provided, further, however, that failure of the grantee to have constructed at least 50 percent of the system may be a reason to refuse consent for the transfer of the franchise. 
(3)  No such consent shall be required for a transfer in trust, mortgage or other instrument of hypothecation, in whole or in part, to secure an indebtedness except when such hypothecation shall exceed 75 percent of the fair market value of the property used by the grantee in the operation of its cable television system. Prior consent of the council, expressed by resolution, shall be required for such transfer and said consent shall not be withheld unreasonably. This subsection (m)(3) shall not apply to a transfer resulting from a foreclosure or default in the conditions of such indebtedness. 
(4)  Prior approval of the council shall be required where ownership or control of 50 percent or more of the right to control of the grantee is acquired in any transaction or series of transactions by a person or group of persons acting in concert, none of whom already own or control 50 percent or more of such right of control, singularly or collectively. By acceptance of a franchise, a grantee shall specifically grant and agree that any such acquisition occurring without prior approval of the council shall constitute a violation of the franchise by the grantee. 
(5)  The consent of the council to any sale, transfer, lease, trust, mortgage or other instrument of hypothecation shall not constitute a waiver or release of any of the rights of the city under this article and the franchise. 
(Code 1982, § 7-24; Ord. No. 984, 10-13-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982) 
Sec. 10-63. - Fees and records. 
(a)  Subscriber fees. 
(1)  To the extent allowed by law, the council shall regulate, by ordinance, subscriber rates and charges for rate regulated services. Except as otherwise provided herein, all rates and charges for rate regulated services shall be approved by the council, or by ordinance after providing public notice as set forth in the Charter of the city and after conducting a public hearing which will provide a reasonable opportunity for the consideration of the views of interested parties. In establishing such rates and charges, the council shall comply with the rate regulatory rules and procedures adopted by the Federal Communications Commission pursuant to 47 USC 543(b); provided, however, proposals for automatic adjustments which are in strict compliance with 47 CFR 76.922(d) may be implemented after review and approval by the cable television administrator without public notice or hearing in accordance with the procedure set forth in section 10-61(b). 
(2)  All charges to subscribers shall be consistent with a schedule of rates and charges for all services offered by a grantee. Except as otherwise provided by the council or by ordinance, any change in the schedule of rates and charges approved in accordance with subsection (a) of this section or any automatic adjustment to a schedule of rates and charges approved pursuant to section 10-61(b) shall not take effect until at least 60 days after approval. In addition, no change in rates or charges shall be implemented unless each subscriber subject to such change in rates and charges has been notified of the change at least 60 days in advance of the change. In lieu of the grantee providing 60 days' written notice to each subscriber subject to the change, such notification may be cablecast to subscribers by the grantee in a manner approved by the cable television administrator, but in the event a cablecast notice is provided to subscribers, the grantee shall also give each subscriber subject, to the change, written notice of the change no less than 30 days before the change is implemented. In addition, the grantee shall provide oral or written notification of any pending changes to rates and charges to any person who requests cable television service or becomes a subscriber after any approval of changes to rates and charges but before the rate change becomes effective. 
(3)  Except as may be otherwise provided in a franchise, a grantee shall not, with regard to rates or charges, discriminate or grant any preference or advantage to any person; provided, however, that the grantee with the approval of the council may establish different rates for different classes of subscribers based upon cost of service differentials, provided that the grantee shall not discriminate between any subscribers of the same class. 
(4)  A grantee shall have the right to adjust its rates or charges to recover additional costs for copyright royalty payments in accordance with the procedure set forth in section 10-61(b). Such additional costs shall be limited to those costs imposed as a result of changes in royalty payments made pursuant to an action of the Royalty Tribunal, 17 USC 801 et seq., or similar tribunal, or judicial actions affecting the validity of tribunal actions. The changes or actions described in the preceding sentence shall be limited to changes or actions which have occurred since the filing of the grantee's application for its franchise. 
(5)  A grantee shall notify in writing each subscriber of all applicable fees and charges for providing cable television service prior to executing a contract of service with such subscriber or installing any equipment to serve such subscriber. 
(6)  A grantee may, for promotional purposes, at its own discretion, waive, reduce or suspend connection fees or monthly service fees, to the extent permitted by law. 
(7)  Except as may be otherwise provided in a franchise, a subscriber shall have the right to have cable television service terminated without charge. A subscriber shall not be charged for cable television service for more than two business days following the subscriber's notice of termination to the grantee. No grantee shall enter into any agreement with a subscriber which imposes any charge following disconnection of service, except for reconnection and subsequent monthly or periodic charges, and those charges shall be no greater than charges for new customers. This subsection shall not prevent a grantee from refusing service to any person because the grantee's prior accounts with that person remain due and owing. 
(8)  Except as may be otherwise provided in a franchise, a grantee may offer service which requires advance payment of periodic service charges for no more than one year in advance, subject to the conditions contained in this subsection (a)(8). A customer shall have the right at any time to have service disconnected without charge and with a refund of unused service charges paid to the customer within 30 days from the date of service. Refunds shall be made on a pro rata basis. Rate increases shall not be effective with respect to any subscriber until after the expiration of any period for which advance payment has been accepted by the grantee. 
(9)  A grantee shall, at least 30 days prior to the date it intends to terminate service to any subscriber because of the reason of nonpayment of subscriber fees, notify such subscriber in writing of such intention, the reason and the date such termination is to be effective. 
(b)  Books and records. 
(1)  A grantee shall, within 30 days following the acceptance of a franchise and at least yearly thereafter and within 30 days of the sale of three percent or more of the outstanding stock or equivalent ownership interest of a grantee to any one person, furnish the city a list, showing the names and addresses of persons owning three percent or more of the outstanding stock or equivalent ownership interest of the grantee. Such a list shall include a roster of the grantee's officers and director, or equivalent managerial personnel, and their addresses. 
(2)  A grantee shall maintain books and records of its operations within the city to show the following in sufficient detail, consistent with generally accepted accounting principles: 
a.  Total revenues by service category. 
b.  Operating expenses categorized by general and administrative expenses, technical expenses, programming expenses and overhead, where applicable. 
c.  Capital expenditures, to include capitalized interest and overhead, if any. 
d.  Depreciation expenses by category. 
(3)  A grantee shall retain such books and records, in any reasonable form, for a period of not less than 15 years. The city shall have the right to extend the retention period through the term of any renewed franchise. 
(4)  The books and records of a grantee's operation within the city shall be made available in the grantee's offices in or near the city during normal business hours, for inspection and audit by the city within a reasonable period of time not to exceed 30 days after such request has been made by the city. 
(5)  Copies of a grantee's schedule of charges, contract or application forms for regular subscriber service, policy regarding the processing of subscriber complaints, delinquent subscriber disconnect and reconnect procedures and any other terms and conditions adopted as the grantee's policy in connection with its subscribers shall be filed with the city and conspicuously posted in the grantee's local office. 
(Code 1982, § 7-25; Ord. No. 984, 10-13-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982) 
Sec. 10-64. - System operations. 
(a)  Franchise area. The franchise area shall be defined as the corporate limits of the city, as set forth in Charter, section 1.02. 
(b)  System description and service. 
(1)  The cable television system to be installed by a grantee shall comply in all respects as a minimum with the technical performance requirements set forth in the FCC's Rules for Cable Television, including applicable amendments. If the FCC should delete said requirements or otherwise fail to preempt this area of regulation, the city hereby reserves the right to amend this article to incorporate technical standards. 
(2)  Applications for a franchise may include proposals for the provision of public, education, local government, and leased access channels. It is intended by this article that the requirements set out in this subsection apply to channels which are owned, managed, and operated by the grantee of the franchise, as opposed to a public access channel which may be managed by a public, nonprofit corporation or an institutional channel managed by the city or other entity. Such proposals by a grantee may be incorporated into the franchise granted and, to the extent so incorporated, shall subject the grantee to the following minimum requirements; however, should a bidder's proposal include provisions in this respect that are more favorable to the city than those set in this subsection, then those more favorable provisions shall prevail: 
a.  The grantee shall have available equipment for local production and presentation of cablecast programs other than automated services and permit its use for the production and presentation of public access programs. The grantee shall not enter into any contract, arrangement, or lease for use of its cablecast equipment which prevents or inhibits the use of such equipment for a substantial portion of time for public access programming. 
b.  The grantee shall have no control over the content of access cablecast programs; however, this limitation shall not prevent taking appropriate steps to ensure compliance with the operating rules described herein. 
c.  The public access channel shall be made available to residents of the city on a nondiscriminatory basis, free of charge. Charges for equipment, personnel, and production of public access programming shall be free and consistent with the goal of affording users a low-cost means of television access. A grantee shall provide without charge such production facilities and personnel to enable users of the public access channels to reasonably produce television programs not exceeding 30 minutes duration. A grantee shall without charge also provide the replay of users' supplied video tapes on the public access channel provided that such tapes do not exceed 15 minutes duration. The grantee may require that such tapes be in a standard format compatible with the grantee's playback facilities. The grantee shall adopt operating rules for the public access channel, to be filed with the cable television administrator prior to the activation of the channel, designed to prohibit the presentation of any advertising material designed to promote the sale of commercial products or services, including advertising by or on behalf of candidates for public office, lottery information and obscene or indecent matter, as well as rules requiring nondiscriminatory access, and rules permitting public inspection of a complete record of the names and addresses of all persons or groups requesting access time. Such a record shall be retained for a period of two years. 
d.  The education access channel shall be made available for the use of local educational authorities free of charge. The grantee shall adopt operating rules for the education access channel, to be filed with the cable television administrator prior to activation of the channel, designed to prohibit the presentation of any advertising material designed to promote the sale of commercial products or services; including advertising by or on behalf of candidates for public office; lottery information and obscene or indecent matter, as well as a rule permitting public inspection of a complete record of the names and addresses of all persons or groups requesting access time. Such a record shall be retained for a period of two years. 
e.  The local government access channel shall be made available for the use of local government authorities free of charge. 
f.  The leased access channel shall be made available to leased users. Priority shall be given part-time users on at least one channel. The grantee shall adopt operating rules for the channel, to be filed with the cable television administrator prior to activation of the channel, designed to prohibit the presentation of: lottery information, obscene or indecent matter and shall establish rules to this effect; and other rules requiring nondiscriminatory access and sponsorship identification specifying an appropriate rate schedule and permitting public inspection of a complete record of the names and addresses of all persons or groups requesting time. Such a record shall be retained for a period of two years. 
(3)  A grantee shall provide, without charge within the city, one service outlet activated for regular subscriber service to each fire station, public school, police station, public library and such buildings used for public purposes as may be designated by the city; provided, however, that if it is necessary to extend a grantee's trunk or feeder lines more than 300 feet solely to provide service to any such school or public building, the city shall have the option either of paying the grantee's direct costs for such extension in excess of 300 feet, or constructing such extension in excess of 300 feet itself, or of releasing the grantee from or postponing the grantee's obligation to provide service to such building. Furthermore, a grantee shall be permitted to recover, from any public building owner entitled to free service, the grantee's actual cost for any additional converters required and the direct cost of installing, when requested to do so, more than one outlet, or concealed inside wiring, or a service outlet requiring more than 250 feet of drop cable; provided, however, that the grantee shall not charge for the provision of regular subscriber service to the additional service outlets so installed in public schools, police stations, fire stations, public libraries and city offices in addition to any such other facilities as are specified in the grantee's franchise. The grantee shall provide full operational capability to the service outlets in the city, described in this subsection, in accordance with the construction schedule mandated by subsection (g)(2) of this section or in accordance with the construction schedule submitted with the grantee's proposal, whichever is earlier. 
(4)  A grantee shall not refuse cable television service to any person or organization who requests such service for lawful purposes. 
(5)  A grantee shall not permit the transmission of any programming under its control that is obscene or indecent. At the option of the subscriber, the grantee shall provide, at cost, a device capable of blocking out or otherwise disabling a television set from receiving those channels upon which the grantee imposes a charge based upon a per-program basis or a per-channel basis. This device shall be designed to permit a subscriber, by the use of a key or similar locking system, to prevent others, who do not have a key, from viewing or receiving the programs on the aforementioned channels. 
(c)  Operational requirements and records. 
(1)  A grantee shall construct, operate, and maintain the cable television system subject to full compliance with the rules and regulations, including applicable amendments, of the Federal Communications Commission and all other applicable federal, state, or city laws and regulations. The cable television system and all its parts shall be subject to inspection by the city, and the city reserves the right to review a grantee's construction plans prior to commencement of construction. 
(2)  A grantee shall maintain an office in or near the city which shall be open and accessible to the public with adequate telephone service during normal business hours. A grantee shall employ an operator or maintain a telephone answering device 24 hours per day, each day of the year, to receive subscriber complaints. 
(3)  A grantee shall exercise its best effort to design, construct, operate, and maintain the system at all times so signals carried are delivered to subscribers without material degradation in quality, within the limitations imposed by the technical state-of-the-art. 
(4)  Copies of all correspondence, petitions, reports, applications, and other documents sent or received by a grantee from federal or state agencies having appropriate jurisdiction in matters affecting cable television operation shall be promptly furnished by the grantee to the city. 
(5)  In the case of an emergency or disaster, a grantee shall, upon request of the city, make available its facilities to the city or its agents or agencies for emergency use during the disaster period. The term "emergency" or "disaster" shall be limited to mean a natural disaster, manmade disaster, major disaster, state of emergency, and/or local emergency as defined in Code of Virginia, § 44-146.16. 
(d)  Tests and performance monitoring. 
(1)  Not later than 90 days after any new or substantially rebuilt portion of the system is made available for service to subscribers, technical performance tests shall be conducted by the grantee to demonstrate full compliance with all technical standards including the Technical Standards of the Federal Communications Commission and subsection (c)(3) of this section. Such tests shall be performed by or under the supervision of a registered professional engineer or an engineer with proper training and experience. A report of such tests shall be submitted to the city, describing test results, instrumentation, calibration and test procedures, and the qualifications of the engineer responsible for the tests. 
(2)  System monitor test points shall be established at or near the output of the last amplifier in the longest feeder line, at or near trunk line extremities, and at locations to be specified in the franchise. Such periodic tests shall be made at the test points as shall be described by the cable television administrator. 
(3)  At any time after commencement of service to subscribers, the city may require additional reasonable tests, including full or partial repeat tests, different test procedures, or tests involving a specific subscriber's terminal, at the grantee's expense to the extent such tests may be performed by the grantee's employees utilizing its existing facilities and equipment; provided, however, that the city reserves the right to conduct its own tests upon reasonable notice to the grantee and if noncompliance is found, the expense shall be borne by the grantee. The city will endeavor to arrange its request for such special tests so as to minimize hardship or inconvenience to a grantee or to subscribers. 
(4)  The city shall have the same rights as the Federal Communications Commission has to inspect a grantee's performance test data. 
(5)  The city shall have the right to employ qualified consultants, if necessary or desirable, to assist in the administration of this or any other section of this article. 
(e)  Service, adjustment and complaint procedure. 
(1)  A grantee shall establish a maintenance service capable of promptly locating and correcting system malfunctions. Said maintenance service shall respond at all hours to correct system malfunctions affecting one or more percent of a grantee's total number of subscribers. 
(2)  A grantee shall maintain a listed local telephone number which shall be available to subscribers for service calls, 24 hours per day. Corrective action shall be initiated by a grantee not later than the next business day after a service call is received; and corrective action shall be completed as promptly as practicable. Appropriate records shall be made of service calls, showing when and what corrective action was completed. Such records shall be available to the city during normal business hours and retained in grantee's files for not less than three years. Microfilm copies of such records shall satisfy the requirements of this section. A summary of such calls shall be prepared by the grantee and submitted to the cable television administrator annually in a form acceptable to the cable television administrator beginning 12 months after service is provided to the first subscriber. 
(3)  A grantee shall provide each subscriber, at the time service is first provided to the subscriber, written information which shall include: 
a.  The name, address, mailing address and telephone number of the grantee's representative to whom the subscriber may submit consumer or service complaints. 
b.  The business address, mailing address, and telephone number of the cable television administrator to whom the subscriber may submit consumer or service complaints. 
(4)  The cable television administrator shall keep records of subscriber complaints for such lengths of time as may be required by the council. 
(5)  A grantee may interrupt system service after 7:00 a.m. and before 1:00 a.m. only with good cause and for the shortest time possible and, except in emergency situations, only after giving notice, reasonably calculated to reach subscribers, of service interruption at least 24 hours in advance of the service interruption. Service may be interrupted between 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., for routine testing, maintenance and repair, without notification, except on Saturday, Sunday, or a holiday. 
(f)  Street occupancy. 
(1)  A grantee shall utilize existing poles, conduits and other facilities whenever possible, and shall not construct or install any new, different or additional poles, conduits or other facilities, whether on public property or on privately owned property, until the approval of the city manager and the property owner or appropriate governmental authority is obtained. Approval shall not be unreasonably withheld; however, no location of any pole or wire-holding structure of a grantee shall be a vested interest and such poles, structures or facilities shall be removed, replaced or modified by a grantee at its own expense whenever the council or other governmental authority determines that the public convenience would be enhanced. 
(2)  Where the city, other unit of government or a public utility serving the city desires to make use of the poles or other wire-holding structures of a grantee but an agreement with the grantee cannot be reached, the council may require the grantee to permit such use for such consideration and upon such terms as the council shall determine to be just and reasonable, if the council determines that the use would enhance the public convenience and would not unduly interfere with the grantee's operations. 
(3)  Unless otherwise regulated, all transmission lines, equipment and structures shall be so installed and located as to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of owners of property which adjoins or abuts a street, way or other property upon which a grantee has placed its facilities, and at all times such facilities shall be kept and maintained in a safe, adequate, and substantial condition and in good order and repair. A grantee shall at all times employ at least reasonable care and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public. Suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares, or other devices shall be used at such times and places as are reasonably required for the safety of all members of the public. Any poles or other fixtures placed in any public way by a grantee shall be placed in such a manner as not to interfere with the usual travel on such public way. 
(4)  In those areas of the city where electric and telephone utility lines have been placed underground, a grantee shall place its lines and installations underground. In areas where either telephone or electric utility facilities are aboveground at the time of installation, the grantee may install its service aboveground; provided that at such time as both of those facilities are placed underground, the grantee shall forthwith place its facilities underground, and the cost of same shall be paid by the grantee and no special charge shall be imposed upon any subscriber for such placing of facilities underground. 
(5)  In the event of a disturbance of any road or private property by a grantee, the grantee shall, at the expense of the grantee and in a manner approved by the city, other appropriate governmental authority or the owner, as the case may be, replace and restore such road or private property in as good a condition as before the work causing such disturbance was done. In the event the grantee fails to perform such replacement or restoration, the city, other governmental authority or the owner shall have the right to do so at the sole expense of the grantee. Payment to the city, governmental authority, or owner for such replacement or restoration shall be upon demand. 
(6)  At the request of any person holding a valid building moving permit issued by the city or any other government authority, if such permit is required, and upon at least 48 hours' notice, the grantee shall temporarily raise, lower or cut wires, as may be necessary to facilitate such move. The direct expense of such temporary changes, including standby time, shall be paid by the permit holder, and the grantee shall have the authority to require payment in advance. 
(7)  A grantee shall have the authority to trim trees on public property at its own expense as may be necessary to protect the wires and facilities of the grantee, subject to the regulation, supervision and/or direction of the city or other local governmental authority, including prior notification of the city arborist. 
(g)  Construction schedule and reports. 
(1)  Upon accepting a franchise, a grantee shall, within 60 days, apply or otherwise file the documents required to obtain all necessary federal, state, and local licenses, permits and authorizations required for the conduct of business, and the construction and installation of the facilities of the grantee. The grantee shall submit monthly reports to the cable television administrator on progress in this respect until all such licenses, permits and authorizations are secured. 
(2)  A grantee shall commence construction of the cable system within one year after acceptance of a franchise. The grantee shall complete construction of the system and shall offer and be capable of delivering cable television service to all occupied dwelling units in the franchise area and all public service outlets in the city within three years of initiation of construction. For the purposes of this section, construction shall be deemed to have commenced when the first aerial strand cable has been attached to a pole, or the first underground trench has been opened. The failure of a grantee to secure the necessary federal, state and local licenses, permits and authorizations required for the conduct of business shall, in no way, relieve the grantee from the obligations of this section. Failure to observe the construction schedule in this subsection (g) shall be, in addition to the other rights of the city, grounds for the city to terminate or revoke the franchise. 
(3)  Franchise applications shall include a timetable showing the percentage of occupied dwelling units within the service area that will be capable of receiving cable television service at the end of each year following the beginning of construction. Said timetable shall be incorporated into the franchise and shall be enforceable as to the grantee under the provisions of this article. 
(4)  Within three months after accepting the franchise, a grantee shall furnish the city a construction schedule and map setting forth target dates consistent with subsection (g)(2) and (3) of this section, for commencement of service to subscribers and the areas to be served. The schedule and map shall be updated whenever substantial changes become necessary. 
(5)  Every three months after the start of construction, a grantee shall furnish the city a report on progress of construction until complete. The report shall include a map that clearly defines the areas wherein regular subscriber service is available. 
(h)  Protection of privacy. 
(1)  A grantee shall not permit the transmission of nor shall a grantee receive any signal, aural, visual or digital, including polling channel selection, from any subscriber's premises without first obtaining written permission of the subscriber. This provision is not intended to prohibit the use or transmission of signals useful only for the control or measurement of system performance. 
(2)  A grantee shall not permit the installation of any special terminal equipment in any subscriber's premises that will permit transmission from subscriber's premises of two-way services utilizing aural, visual or digital signals, without first obtaining written permission of the subscriber. 
(Code 1982, § 7-26; Ord. No. 984, 10-13-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982) 
Sec. 10-65. - Other requirements and specifications. 
(a)  Limits on grantee's recourse. 
(1)  Except as expressly provided in this article and the franchise, a grantee shall have no recourse against the city for any loss, expense or damage resulting from the terms and conditions of this article or the franchise, or because of the city's enforcement, nor the city's failure to have the authority to grant the franchise. A grantee shall expressly agree that upon its acceptance of the franchise, it does so relying upon its own investigation and understanding of the power and authority of the city to grant said franchise. 
(2)  A grantee, by accepting the franchise, shall acknowledge that the grantee has not been induced to accept same by any promise, oral or written, by or on behalf of the city or by any third person regarding any term or condition of this article or the franchise not expressed therein. A grantee shall further pledge that no promise or inducement, oral or written, has been made to any city employee or official regarding receipt of the cable television franchise; and the grantee will not hire any individual employed fulltime by the city or a consultant employed by the city to assist the city in the administration of this article. Such proscription of employment shall extend for one year following the granting of the franchise unless the council consents to such employment at an earlier time. 
(3)  A grantee shall further acknowledge by acceptance of a franchise that the grantee has carefully read the terms and conditions of this article and the franchise and accepts, without reservation, the obligations imposed by the terms and conditions. 
(4)  Any decision of the council concerning the selection of one or more grantees and the awarding of one or more franchises is final. 
(b)  Special license. The city reserves the right to issue a license, easement or other permit to anyone other than a grantee to permit that person to traverse any portion of a grantee's franchise area within the city in order to provide service outside the city. Such license or easement, absent a grant or a franchise in accordance with this article, shall not authorize nor permit said person to provide a cable television service of any nature to any home or place of business within the city, nor to render any service or connect any subscriber within the city to the grantee's cable television system. 
(c)  Franchise validity. A grantee shall agree, by the acceptance of a franchise, to accept the validity of the terms and conditions of this article and the franchise in their entirety and that it will not, at any time, proceed against the city in any claim or proceeding challenging any term or provision of this article or the franchise as unreasonable, arbitrary or void, or that the city did not have the authority to impose such term or condition. 
(d)  Failure to enforce franchise. A grantee shall not be excused from complying with any of the terms and conditions of this article or the franchise by any failure of the city, upon any one or more occasions, to insist upon the grantee's performance or to seek the grantee's compliance with any one or more of such terms or conditions. 
(e)  Rights reserved to the city. The city hereby expressly reserves the following rights: 
(1)  To exercise its governmental powers, now or hereafter, to the full extent that such powers may be vested in or granted to the city. 
(2)  To adopt, in addition to the provisions contained herein and in the franchise and in any existing applicable ordinances, such additional regulations as it shall find necessary in the exercise of its police power. 
(f)  Employment requirement. A grantee shall not refuse to hire, nor discharge from employment, nor discriminate against any person regarding compensation, terms, conditions or privileges of employment because of age, sex, race, color, creed, or national origin. A grantee shall take affirmative action to ensure that employees are treated, during employment, without regard to their age, sex, race, color, creed or national origin. This condition includes, but is not limited to, the following: recruitment, advertising, employment interviews, employment, rates of pay, upgrading, transfer, demotion, layoff and termination. 
(g)  Time essence of agreement. Whenever this article or the franchise sets forth any time for any act to be performed by or on the behalf of a grantee, such time shall be deemed of the essence and the grantee's failure to perform within the time allotted shall, in all cases, be sufficient grounds for the city to invoke the remedies available under the terms and conditions of this article and the franchise. 
(h)  Acceptance. 
(1)  A franchise and its terms and conditions shall be accepted by a grantee by written instrument filed with the city manager within 30 days after the granting of the franchise. In its acceptance, the grantee shall declare that it has carefully read the terms and conditions of this article and the franchise and accepts all of the terms and conditions imposed by this article and the franchise and agrees to abide by same. 
(2)  Acceptance of a franchise by a grantee shall operate as a waiver by the grantee of any claim to operate a cable television system within the city as against the regulatory power of the city because of the previous operation of the same, whether by franchise or otherwise. 
(i)  Liquidated damages. Notwithstanding any other remedy provided for in this article, or otherwise available under law, the city shall have the power to recover monetary amounts from a grantee under certain conditions, such monetary amounts being in the nature of liquidated damages. By accepting a franchise, a grantee automatically agrees that these conditions will cause damages to the city and that the monetary amounts are established because it is difficult to ascertain the exact amount of the damages: The damages resulting to the city include, but are not limited to, loss of franchise fees that would have otherwise been paid to or would have become due the city, and administrative costs incurred by the city. The conditions for and amounts of such damages are listed as follows: 
(1)  For failure to submit plans indicating expected dates of installation of various parts of the system: $100.00 per day. 
(2)  For failure to commence operations in accordance with this article and/or franchise: $200.00 per day. 
(3)  For failure to complete construction and installation of the system within the required time limits: $300.00 per day. 
(4)  For failure to supply data requested by the city in accordance with the requirements of the franchise and this article such data pertaining to installation, construction, customers, franchise or financial reports, or rate review: $50.00 per day. 
(5)  For failure to otherwise provide service to a subscriber in accordance with the requirements of this article: $10.00 per day per subscriber affected, but not to exceed $50.00 per subscriber per month, and further not to exceed $1,000.00 per day in the aggregate. This amount shall be reduced by any refunds of subscriber fees made to subscribers affected by the failure, etc., to provide service. 
(j)  Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to attach or affix, or to cause to be attached or affixed, any equipment or devices which allows access or use of the cable television service without payment to the grantee for same. 
(k)  Penalties. 
(1)  The following acts shall be deemed class 1 misdemeanors under this article and each day of a continuing offense is a separate offense: 
a.  Willful failure, refusal or neglect by a grantee to construct, operate, or maintain its cable television system in accordance with the terms of this article or the franchise granted pursuant to this article. 
b.  Transmission or reception by a grantee of a signal from a subscriber's premises in violation of section 10-64(h). 
c.  The attaching or affixing, or causing to be attached or affixed, any equipment or device as described in subsection (j) of this section. The attaching of or affixing of each unit of such equipment or device shall constitute a separate offense. 
(2)  The violation of any other provision of this article shall be subject to such other penalties as shall be prescribed by law or ordinance. Each day of a continuing offense is a separate offense. 
(l)  Severability. If any section of this article or the franchise, or any portion thereof, is held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction or administrative agency, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof, except as otherwise provided for herein. 
(m)  Financial disclosure by applicants. 
(1)  Every request for a proposal shall require, and every cable franchise application shall contain, a complete and detailed listing, under oath, of the following information: 
a.  The names and positions with the city of all city officers and employees known to the applicant to have any interest in the entity making application, and the extent of such interest. 
b.  The names and last known addresses of all persons who have acted as attorney, broker, consultant, or agent of the applying entity with respect to the application. 
c.  The names and last known addresses of all persons who own or control any interest in the applying entity; in the case of a partnership or joint venture or syndicate, the names and last known addresses of all partners or participants; in the case of a corporation having fewer than 200 stockholders, the names and last known addresses of all stockholders. 
d.  The names and last known addresses of all holders of debt of the applying entity, other than stockholders or suppliers of goods and services paid on current account, in excess of $5,000.00 or one percent of the total outstanding indebtedness of the entity, whichever is lesser. 
e.  The name and position of each city officer or employee to whom, or to whose immediate family, the applying entity or any person described in subsection (m)(1)c of this section has made any gift or donation of $100.00 or more within three years preceding the filing of the application, the name of the donor and the amount or value of the gift or donation. As to elected city officials, this requirement includes disclosure of donations to their principal campaign committees and authorized committees as defined by 2 USC 431, and campaign committees formed pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 24.1-251 et seq. 
(2)  The city council, in its discretion, shall eliminate from consideration any applicant for the award of a cable television franchise within the city who is not in compliance with the provisions of the disclosure requirements of this article. 
(n)  Financial disclosure by officers and employees. Within 30 days after receipt of notification that application for a franchise has been received by the city and again within 30 days after notification of the adoption of an ordinance granting a cable television franchise, each city officer and employee shall file with the clerk to the city council a complete and detailed statement, under oath, to the best of their information, knowledge and belief, after a duly diligent search, containing the following information: 
(1)  The name of each entity which has applied for a franchise in which the city officer or employee, a member of his immediate family or any of his business associates, has any interest; the amount, nature, and extent of the interest; and the name of the person possessing such interest. 
(2)  The name of any partner, participant, stockholder, officer, or employee, or any member of the immediate family of any of them, of any applying entity, who has made any gift or donation of $100.00 or more to the officer or employee or to a member of such person's immediate family within three years prior to the filing of the entity's franchise application, and the name of the recipient and amount or value of the gift or donation. 
(o)  Interconnection of cable television system. 
(1)  Interconnection generally. 
a.  The company shall interconnect origination, access and institutional channels of the cable system with any or all other systems upon the directive of the city. Interconnection of systems may be done by direct cable connection, microwave link, satellite or other appropriate method. 
b.  Any connection whatsoever of the company's cable communications system with any other kind of system, including but not limited to a cable communications system, shall not relieve the company of any of its obligations under this article. 
(2)  Interconnection procedures. Upon receiving the directive of the city to interconnect, the company shall immediately initiate negotiations with the other affected system or systems in order that costs may be shared equally for both construction and operation of the interconnection link. 
(3)  Relief. The company may be granted reasonable extensions of time to interconnect or the city may rescind its order to interconnect upon petition by the company to the city. The city shall grant such request if it finds that the company has negotiated in good faith and has failed to obtain an approval from the system of the proposed interconnection; or that the cost of the interconnection would cause an unreasonable or unacceptable increase in subscriber rates. 
(4)  Cooperation required. The company shall cooperate with any interconnection corporation, regulatory interconnection authority or city, county, state and federal regulatory agency which may be hereafter established for the purpose of regulating, financing or otherwise providing for the interconnection of cable systems beyond the boundaries of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 7-27; Ord. No. 984, 10-13-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982) 
Secs. 10-66-10-88. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - AWARD OF FRANCHISE 

Sec. 10-89. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1939, § 4, adopted July 27, 2015, repealed § 10-89, entitled "Media General Cable of Fairfax County, Inc" which derived from: Code 1982, § 7-28; and Ord. No. 1053, adopted June 13, 1983. See cable franchise agreement on file with the city. 
Sec. 10-90. - Verizon Virginia, Inc. franchise. 
    At a meeting of the city counsel held in council chambers of City Hall on Monday, January 23, 2006, the council, after having first given notice of its intention to do so, in a manner prescribed by law, adopted the ordinance from which this article is derived awarding a cable franchise to Verizon Virginia, Inc., for the city in accordance with chapter 10 of this Code, said ordinance reading in its entirety as follows: 
    BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF FALLS CHURCH, VIRGINIA THAT: 
1.  The city council has received an application from Verizon Virginia, Inc., dated January 3, 2006, seeking a cable franchise in the City of Falls Church and after a review of the application and the holding of a public hearing, finds that the public welfare will be enhanced and the public interest will served by granting the requested cable franchise. 
2.  The city council has determined that the application of Verizon Virginia Inc., and the public hearing demonstrate that Verizon Virginia, Inc., has the resources and technical ability to construct and operate a cable system in the City of Falls Church in accordance with the terms of the "Cable Franchise Agreement By and Between the City of Falls Church, Virginia, and Verizon Virginia, Inc.," and chapter 10 of the Falls Church City Code. The city council has further determined that the cable franchise with Verizon Virginia, Inc., will have minimal effects on property rights and public convenience. 
3.  The city council has determined that grant of the franchise agreement will include the following terms and conditions that, amongst others, will be of benefit to the City of Falls Church and its residents: 
a.  A franchise acceptance fee of $100,000.00; 
b.  An advance against the PEG Grants of $66,474.00 for the purpose of extending the city's institutional network from city hall through the library to the property yard, and from city hall through court services to the Aurora House, and for the wiring of service outlets for each classroom in Thomas Jefferson and Mount Daniel Elementary Schools; 
c.  Provision of up to 19 PEG channels, including two channels dedicated for use by the City of Falls Church; 
d.  Provision of cable outlets and digital cable service to government facilities; 
e.  A franchise fee of five percent of annual Gross Revenue from the provision of cable services by Verizon Virginia, Inc., in the City of Falls Church; 
f.  PEG Grants of three percent of annual gross revenue (less the franchise fee) from the provision of cable services by Verizon Virginia, Inc., in the City of Falls Church; and, 
g.  Customer service standards. 
4.  Pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2108, the city council hereby accepts, approves, grants, and awards to Verizon Virginia Inc., a nonexclusive cable franchise to provide cable service to the city. The duration for this grant shall be 15 years. The cable franchise agreement is incorporated into this ordinance. 
5.  The provisions of this franchise shall be liberally construed to effectuate their objectives. In the event of a conflict between the cable law and this agreement, this agreement shall prevail. 
6.  The grant of the cable franchise to Verizon Virginia, Inc., is subject to the city's receipt of: (i) the acceptance of the franchise, as set forth in exhibit G to the cable franchise agreement, signed by an authorized representative of Verizon Virginia Inc.; (ii) the acceptance fee of $100,000.00; (iii) the advance against the PEG Grants of $66,474.00; (iv) certificates of insurance for each insurance policy required by section 10 of the cable franchise agreement; (v) the performance bond required by section 13 of the cable franchise agreement; and (vi) the letter of credit required by section 13 of the cable franchise agreement. 
7.  If Verizon Virginia, Inc., satisfies each and every condition of paragraph 7 above on or before February 22, 2006, then the cable franchise shall take effect on February 22, 2006. 
8.  If Verizon Virginia, Inc., does not satisfy each and every condition set forth in paragraph 7 above on or before February 22, 2006, then it is not authorized to provide cable service under the cable franchise agreement unless and until all such conditions are fulfilled. 
    BE IT FURTHER ORDAINED, that the cable franchise must be accepted by Verizon Virginia, Inc., by the delivery of the written acceptance of such cable franchise. 
    BE IT FURTHER ORDAINED, that the city manager shall have the right to make minor changes or amendments to the cable franchise agreement prior to it being signed by the City of Falls Church, if the city manager first obtains Verizon, Virginia Inc.'s prior written consent to such minor changes or amendments. 
    The ordinance shall become effective as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 1783, 1-23-2006) 
Chapter 12 - EMERGENCY SERVICES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 12-1-12-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SECURITY ALARM SYSTEMS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Police, ch. 32. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate installation and maintenance of alarms, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-911. 

Sec. 12-21. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article and the public policy of the city to regulate the use and operation of security alarm systems in commercial and residential premises whose activation results in an alarm or signal to which the city police are expected to respond. It is also the purpose of this article to regulate the use of security alarm systems and thereby reduce the number of false alarms and protect the health, safety, welfare and property of the residents of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 22-54; Ord. No. 929) 
Sec. 12-22. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Audible alarm means a device located at, or on, the protected premises, which generates an audible signal when activated at the protected premises, thus indicating a breach of security. 
    Automatic dialing device means a device at the protected premises location which is interconnected to that location's telephone line and is programmed to select a telephone number which terminates at the police department and transmits a prerecorded voice message or code which signals the existence of criminal activity or other emergency at the protected premises. 
    Bank means a financial institution which is required by federal law or regulation to maintain an alarm system or other device for notification to the police department of criminal or emergency activity. 
    Central station means a commercial company whose business is monitoring and receiving alarm signals from protected premises and performing contracted services for alarm users, including transmission of these alarm signals to the alarm board of the police department. 
    Chief of police means the chief law enforcement official of the city or such official's designee. 
    False alarm means any signal request or similar event, the purpose of which is to alert and/or summon police department assistance, but which is not in response to actual or threatened emergency or criminal activity. The term "false alarm" includes any communication, either directly or indirectly, to the police department either by a central station, intermediary or signal device which is in response to a signal or warning issued intentionally or accidentally; negligently or accidentally activated signals; signals which are the result of faulty, malfunctioning or improperly installed or maintained equipment; and signals which are purposely, but improperly, activated to alert and/or summon the police department. The term "false alarm" shall not include signals activated by unusually severe weather conditions or other natural causes. 
    Protected premises means the premises upon which a security alarm system is located. 
    Security alarm system means any assembly of equipment or devices designed to detect and signal a breach of security at the protected premises or to signal an attempted burglary, robbery or other criminal activity or emergency at the protected premises. The term "security alarm system" may include a system connected to a central station or any other system which directly signals the police department. 
    User means any person, at a private residence or commercial establishment, using a security alarm system and/or performing contractual service with respect to monitoring such a system, regardless of ownership of the premises on which the security alarm system is located. 
(Code 1982, § 22-55; Ord. No. 929) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 12-23. - Intentional false alarms prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly, intentionally and without just cause activate a security alarm to notify the police department in situations where there is no actual or threatened emergency or criminal activity for which the security alarm is designed. 
(Code 1982, § 22-56; Ord. No. 929) 
Sec. 12-24. - Automatic dialing device. 
    It shall be unlawful for any user to install or operate an automatic dialing device which is programmed to transmit a prerecorded message or a code signal directly to the police department or to any central station or other telephone number where the intent is to transmit an alarm or signal to the police department. 
(Code 1982, § 22-57; Ord. No. 929) 
Sec. 12-25. - Audible alarms; posting of notice. 
    Every person maintaining or using an audible alarm shall provide the chief of police a current notice containing the names and telephone numbers of the persons to be notified for rendering repairs, service and securing the protected premises during any hour of the day or night when the audible alarm may be activated. Failure for any person maintaining an audible alarm to respond, within a reasonable time, not to exceed two hours, to his place of business after being summoned by the police department shall be deemed a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1982, § 22-58; Ord. No. 929) 
Sec. 12-26. - Responsibilities of user. 
    The user or the user's designee shall be responsible for: 
(1)  Installation and hookup of the alarm. 
(2)  The maintenance and testing of the security alarm system. 
(3)  A continuous training program for employees and other persons who may have occasion to activate the security alarm system. The training shall emphasize the proper setting, activation and resetting of alarms. 
(4)  A service charge of $30.00 shall be assessed for each false alarm which results in a response by the police department. 
(5)  The chief of police will be responsible for billing the user for the service charge. Such service charge will be paid to the treasurer of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 22-61; Ord. No. 929) 
Sec. 12-27. - False alarms. 
    A service charge of $30.00 shall be assessed for each false alarm to any protected premises. Such service charge shall be billed to the owner or person responsible for the protected premises. After review of the reason or cause of any first false alarm, the chief of police may waive the service charge. 
(Code 1982, § 22-66; Ord. No. 929) 
Sec. 12-28. - Exceptions. 
    The penalty provisions of this article shall not apply to residential premises until such time as those premises shall incur three instances of false alarms within a three-month period, but in any event shall comply with the provisions of section 12-26. 
(Code 1982, § 22-67; Ord. No. 929) 
Chapter 14 - ENVIRONMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1-14-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AIR POLLUTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of city to regulate the emission of smoke, etc., § 2.04(l). 
State Law reference- Air pollution, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1300 et seq. 

Sec. 14-20. - Purposes. 
    Pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1321, as amended, there is hereby established in the city an air pollution control program for the purpose of preserving, protecting and improving the air resources of the city. To the maximum extent possible, such air pollution control program shall be conducted in cooperation with similar programs of other local jurisdictions and of the state and federal governments. In the administration and enforcement of this article due regard shall be taken for all of the facts and circumstances bearing upon the reasonableness of the activity involved and the regulations proposed to control it, including: 
(1)  The character and degree of injury to, or interference with safety, health or the reasonable use of property which is caused or threatened to be caused. 
(2)  The social and economic value of the activity involved. 
(3)  The suitability or unsuitability of such activity to the area in which it is located. 
(4)  The practicability, both scientific and economic, of reducing or eliminating the discharge resulting from such activity. 
(Code 1973, § 3-2; Code 1982, § 3-2; Ord. No. 613) 
Sec. 14-21. - Department. 
    Wherever the word "department" appears in this article it shall be deemed to refer to the office of the city manager. 
(Code 1982, § 3-3; Ord. No. 613, § 3-3) 
Sec. 14-22. - Air pollution control officer position created. 
    There is hereby created the position of air pollution control officer. 
(Code 1973, § 3-3; Code 1982, § 3-4; Ord. No. 613) 
Sec. 14-23. - Board. 
    Wherever the word "board" appears in this article, it shall be deemed to refer to the office of the city manager. 
(Code 1982, § 3-5; Ord. No. 613, § 3-3.2) 
Sec. 14-24. - Powers of department. 
    In addition to any other powers vested in it by law, the department shall: 
(1)  Conduct studies, investigations and research relating to air pollution and its prevention, abatement and control. 
(2)  Issue such orders as may be necessary to effectuate the purposes of this article and enforce the same by all appropriate administrative and judicial proceedings. 
(3)  Hold hearings relating to any aspect of or matter in the administration of this article. 
(4)  Secure necessary scientific, technical, administrative and operational services, including laboratory facilities, by contract or otherwise. 
(5)  Prepare and develop a comprehensive plan or plans for the prevention, abatement and control of air pollution. 
(6)  Advise, consult and cooperate with other local governmental units, agencies of the state, industries, interstate or interlocal agencies, and the federal government, and with interested persons or groups. 
(7)  Review those matters having a bearing upon air pollution referred by other agencies, such as planning, zoning, building and fire departments, and make reports, including recommendations, to the referring agencies with respect thereto. 
(8)  Collect and disseminate information and conduct educational and training programs relating to air pollution. 
(9)  Encourage voluntary cooperation by persons or affected groups to achieve the purposes of this article. 
(10)  Administer grants or other funds or gifts from public and private agencies, including the state and federal governments, for the purpose of carrying out any of the functions of this article. 
(11)  Do any and all acts which may be necessary for the successful prosecution of the policy of this article and such other acts as may be specifically enumerated herein. 
(Code 1973, § 3-4; Code 1982, § 3-6; Ord. No. 613) 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 14-25. - Reporting of information. 
    Owners engaged in operations which may result in air pollution shall, if so required, file with the department reports containing information as to: 
(1)  Location and description of source; 
(2)  Rate, duration and composition of contaminant emission; and 
(3)  Such other information related to air pollution as the department may require. 
(Code 1973, § 3-5; Code 1982, § 3-7; Ord. No. 613) 
Sec. 14-26. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Whenever the department has reason to believe that a violation of any provision of this article or a rule or regulation issued pursuant thereto has occurred, it may cause written notice to be served upon the alleged violator or violators. The notice shall specify the provision of the ordinance, rule or regulation alleged to be violated and the facts alleged to constitute a violation thereof, and may order that the necessary corrective action be taken within a reasonable time. Any such order shall become final unless, no later than five days after the date such order is served, the owner named therein requests in writing a hearing before the department. In lieu of such order the department may require that the alleged violator appear before the department for a hearing at a time and place specified in the notice, to answer the charge complained of, or the department may initiate appropriate action for the recovery of a penalty pursuant to section 14-30. 
(b)  Whenever it is necessary for the purposes of this article, the board or any member, agent or employee when duly authorized by the board may at reasonable times enter any establishment or upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of obtaining information or conducting surveys or investigations. 
(c)  After such hearing the department shall affirm, modify or rescind its order or issue an appropriate order or orders for the prevention, abatement, or control of the air pollution involved. Such order shall prescribe the date by which the violation shall cease and may prescribe timetables for necessary action in preventing, abating, or controlling the air pollution. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall prevent the department from making efforts to obtain voluntary compliance through warning, conference or any other appropriate means. 
(Code 1982, § 3-10; Ord. No. 613) 
State Law reference- State law as to search warrants generally, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-52 et seq.; circumstances when search without warrant is lawful, Code of Virginia, § 19.2-59. 
Sec. 14-27. - Hearings and judicial review. 
(a)  Any owner aggrieved by any final order of the department may have review thereof by petition to the circuit court of Arlington County. 
(b)  At all times during the investigation, permit administration or enforcement proceedings, the department or the owner may request the intervention of the state air pollution control board which itself by regulation has retained power to take corrective action, and to afford a hearing for aggrieved owners. 
(Code 1982, § 3-11; Ord. No. 613) 
Sec. 14-28. - Confidentiality of records. 
    Any records or other information which relate to processes or production unique to the owner or operator, or which would tend to affect adversely the competitive position of such owner or operator shall be only for the confidential use of the department and other departments, agencies and officers of the city unless such owner or operator shall expressly agree to their publication or availability to the general public. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the use of such records or information by any department, agency or officer of the city in compiling or publishing analyses or summaries relating to the general condition of the outdoor atmosphere; provided, that such analyses or summaries do not reveal any information otherwise confidential under this section. 
(Code 1982, § 3-12; Ord. No. 613) 
Sec. 14-29. - Adoption by reference of state regulations and standards. 
    The regulations and standards in Regulations for the Control and Abatement of Air Pollution, AQCR VII, Virginia Air Quality Control Region VII, is hereby adopted by reference and is incorporated into this Code as if set out at length herein. Three copies of such regulations, together with a copy of the air pollution control ordinance attached to each such copy, shall be filed and maintained in the office of the city clerk. Whenever the words "state air pollution control board or executive secretary" are used in section IV of such state regulations, those words shall mean "Department, the office of the city manager." 
(Code 1982, § 3-13; Ord. No. 613, § 3-11) 
Sec. 14-30. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any owner who violates any provision of this article, or any rule or regulation in force pursuant thereto shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50.00, nor more than $1,000.00 for each violation. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Action pursuant to section 14-29 shall not be a bar to enforcement of this article, rules and regulations in force pursuant thereto, and orders made pursuant to this article, by injunction or other appropriate remedy, and the department shall have the power to institute and maintain in the name of the city any and all such enforcement proceedings. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to abridge, limit or otherwise impair the right of any person to damages or other relief on account of injuries to persons or property and to maintain any action or other appropriate proceeding. 
(Code 1982, § 3-14; Ord. No. 613) 
Secs. 14-31-14-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOISE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 4; buildings, ch. 6; motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 26; miscellaneous offenses, ch. 28; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 36. 
State Law reference- Noise from shooting ranges, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-917; regulation of motorcycle, moped, etc., noise, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-919; aircraft noise, Code of Virginia, §§ 5.1-157, 15.2-2295; exhaust systems, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1049. 

Sec. 14-49. - Policy of city. 
    Whereas, at certain levels, sounds are detrimental to the health and welfare of the citizenry, it is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to prohibit excessive and annoying sound from all sources subject to its police power. 
(Code 1982, § 21-1; Ord. No. 982, 9-14-1981) 
Sec. 14-50. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Construction means any or all activity necessary or incidental to the erection, demolition, assembling, altering, installing or equipping of buildings, public or private highways, roads, railroads, premises, parks, utility lines including such lines in already constructed tunnels, or other property, including land clearing, grading, excavating and filling. 
    Continuous sound denotes a sound the intensity of which remains essentially constant during a given period of time. Continuous sound shall be measured by the slow response setting of a sound level meter. 
    Daytime denotes the local time of day between the hours of 7.00 a.m. and 9.00 p.m. on weekdays and between the hours of 9.00 a.m. and 9.00 p.m. on Saturdays, Sundays and local legal holidays. 
    dBA (decibel A-weighted) means sound pressure level as measured on the "A" scale of a sound level meter manufactured in accordance with the specifications of the American National Standards Institute, Inc. (ANSI), Type 2, ANSI-S1.4(1971), calibrated within two hours of being used for measurement. Unless otherwise noted, measurements shall be made in the slow response mode of the meter. 
    Decibel (dB) is a unit of sound pressure, equal to 20 times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals (20 micronewtons per square meter). 
    Emergency means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate action. 
    Emergency signal device means any audible warning device, such as a gong, whistle or siren or any air horn or any similar device. 
    Emergency work means work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity, or work required to protect persons or property from immediate exposure to danger, including work performed by public service companies when emergency inspection, repair of facilities, or restoration of services is required for the immediate health, safety, or welfare of the community. 
    Impulsive sound means sound having the following qualities: 
(1)  The peak of the sound level, as measured with an impulse sound level meter S1.4-1971, is maintained for less than one second; 
(2)  Such time is short compared to the occurrence rate; 
(3)  The onset is abrupt; and 
(4)  The decay is rapid. 
    Mobile source denotes any moving sound source on a public right-of-way. 
    Motor vehicle means every land vehicle which is self-propelled or designed for self-propulsion. This definition includes motorcycles. 
    Motorcycle means every motor vehicle designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, and any four wheeled vehicle weighing less than 500 pounds and equipped with an engine of less than six horsepower. 
    Nighttime denotes those times excluded from the definition of the term "daytime." 
    Noise means any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans. 
    Noise disturbance denotes any sound which: 
(1)  Endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals; 
(2)  Annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities; 
(3)  Endangers or injures personal or real property; or 
(4)  Exceeds the applicable maximum permissible sound levels as they appear in the table in section 14-52. 
    Octave band analyzer means an instrument capable of measuring individual octave band levels of a sound by means of a bandpass filter attached to a sound level meter. They shall meet the specifications of the ANSI S1.4-1971, S1.6-1967 and S1.11-1966 for the class II filter. 
    Person means any individual, corporation, cooperative, partnership firm, association, trust, estate, public or private institution, group, agency, political subdivision of this state or any legal successor, representative, agent or agency of the foregoing. 
    Public right-of-way means any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, alley or public space which is owned or controlled by a public governmental entity. 
    Real property boundary means an imaginary line along the ground surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one person from that owned by another person, but the term "real property" does not include intra-building real property divisions. 
    Small power equipment means any motorized or engine-powered device, including but not limited to lawn mowers, lawn and garden tools, riding tractors and power saws, excluding other motor vehicles. 
    Sound means vibratory disturbance, including an oscillation, in the pressure and/or density of a liquid or gas or in the particulate displacement of a solid or liquid. Such disturbance takes place at a rate between approximately 20 and 20,000 hertz (cycles per second); and the physiological perception of such a vibration of displacement. 
    Sound level shall be as measured with the A-weighting network on a sound level meter unless otherwise specified. 
    Sound level meter means the instrument, meeting the requirements of ANSI S1.4-1971 type II rating, used for making sound level measurements. 
    Sound pressure level is the intensity in decibels (dB) of a sound. 
    Stationary source denotes any sound source operating or occurring on any public or private property, not including a public right-of-way. 
    Weekday means any day Monday through Friday which is not a legal holiday in Falls Church, Virginia. 
    Zoning district refers to the scheme of land use classification contained in chapter 48, pertaining to zoning, or similar classifications contained in zoning ordinances in adjoining jurisdictions. For the purposes of this article: 
(1)  Industrial district includes zones designated in chapter 48 as M-1. 
(2)  Commercial district includes zones designated in chapter 48 as B-1, B-2, B-3, T-1, T-2, and OD. 
(3)  Residential district includes zones designated in chapter 48 as R-1A, R-1B, R C, RTH, RM and CD. 
(Code 1982, § 21-2; Ord. No. 982, 9-14-1981) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-51. - Prohibited acts. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, and in addition thereto, it shall be unlawful for any person within the city to willfully make or continue, or cause to be made or continued, any sound of such character, intensity and duration which disturbs the peace or quiet or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitivity within the city. 
(1)  Animals. No person within the city shall keep or maintain, or permit the keeping of, upon any premises owned, occupied or controlled by such person, any animal otherwise permitted to be kept which, by any sound, shall cause a noise disturbance. 
(2)  Construction of buildings and projects. It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to operate equipment or perform any outside construction, demolition, alteration or repair work on buildings, structures or projects or to operate any equipment, including but not limited to, any pile driver, pneumatic hammer, derrick, hoist or other construction device during the nighttime, or during the daytime in such a manner to cause a noise disturbance. No permit shall be required in order to perform emergency work, as defined in this article. 
(3)  Hawkers and peddlers. It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to sell or promote anything by outcry within any area of the city. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the selling by outcry of merchandise, food, and beverages at permitted or licensed sporting events, parades, fairs, circuses and other similar permitted or licensed public entertainment events. 
(4)  Horns, signaling devices, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to make any sound from any horn, bell or signaling device from any motor vehicle on any street, alley, roadway, private or public way in the city, or any stationary source, except as a danger warning. Emergency signal devices and church bells are exempt from this section. 
(5)  Loading and unloading, commercial. Loading, unloading, opening, closing of commercial vehicles or other handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials, garbage cans, or similar objects in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary is prohibited. 
(6)  Loudspeakers, public address systems. The following are prohibited: 
a.  Using or operating for any noncommercial purpose any loudspeaker, public address system, or similar device, such that the sound creates a noise disturbance across a real property boundary within or adjacent to any residentially-zoned district, or within 100 yards of any school during school hours. 
b.  Using or operating for any commercial purpose any loudspeaker, public address system, or similar device: 
1.  Such that the sound creates a noise disturbance across a real property boundary or within 100 yards of any school during school hours; or 
2.  Between the hours of 8:00 p.m., and 10:00 a.m., the following day on a public right-of-way or public space. 
(7)  Machinery, power equipment, fans and air conditioning. It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to operate any air conditioning, refrigerator, heat pump, fans, swimming pool equipment or other equipment, regardless of location, in such a manner as to create a noise disturbance across a real property boundary. 
(8)  Small power equipment. It shall be unlawful to operate or permit the operation of any powered saw, drill, sander, grinder, lawn or garden tool, lawn mower, or similar device between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. the following day on weekends and local legal holidays, and 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day on weekdays, so as to cause a noise disturbance across a real property boundary, and it is prohibited. 
(9)  Public places adjacent to institutions of learning, libraries, hospitals and churches. It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to create any sound: on any street, sidewalk or public place adjacent to any library, institution of learning or church while the same is in use; or adjacent to any hospital which sound reasonably interferes with the workings of such institution or which disturbs or annoys patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets, sidewalks or public place indicating the presence of an institution of learning, library, church or hospital. 
(10)  Radios, television sets and similar devices. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, television set or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as to create a noise disturbance. 
(11)  Refuse collection vehicles and equipment. The collection of trash or refuse with a refuse vehicle or by the use of any type of motorized equipment during the nighttime is prohibited. The phrase "vehicle and equipment" includes, but is not limited to, trash compactors, gasoline powered blowers used also to collect clippings, leaves or trash, vacuum equipment, and sweeping machines. 
(12)  Engine repairs and testing. It shall be unlawful for any person to repair, rebuild or test any engine so as to create a noise disturbance. 
(13)  Parked or standing motor vehicles. It shall be unlawful to operate the auxiliary engine of a motor vehicle for more than ten minutes within any given hour when the vehicle is parked, or is standing for other than traffic reasons, so as to create a noise disturbance. 
(14)  Operation of motor driven vehicles. It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle other than an authorized emergency vehicle or a vehicle moving under special permit, which creates a noise disturbance. 
(15)  Yelling, shouting, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person to yell, shout, talk loudly, whistle or sing on any public street or private property in the city at anytime, so as to cause a noise disturbance. This section shall not apply to any person who is participating in a duly permitted or licensed event or who has been duly authorized to engage in such conduct. 
(Code 1982, § 21-3; Ord. No. 982, 9-14-1981; Ord. No. 1268, 6-12-1989) 
Sec. 14-52. - Maximum permissible sound pressure levels. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cause a sound from a stationary source which exceeds any sound level as set forth in the applicable column in the following table entitled "Maximum Permissible Sound Levels" when measured at any point within any other property affected by the sound. Measurement shall be made by a duly authorized individual who is knowledgeable in the proper use of the measurement equipment. Measurement shall be made at slow response, A-weighting, except in the case of impulsive sound which shall be measured with an impulsive sound level meter, ANSI S1.4-1971. Octave band measurements, where noted, shall be made with an octave band analyzer. When a noise source can be identified and its noise measured in more than one zoning district, the most restrictive limits shall apply. 
Maximum Permissible Sound Levels From Stationary Sources 
Zoning 
District Time of 
Day Continuous Sound 
(dBA) Impulsive Sound 
(dB) Continuous Octave Band Center Frequency (Hz) dB M-1 All 31.5 85 63 84 70 110 125 79 250 74 500 68 1000 62 2000 57 4000 53 8000 50 T-2 All 31.5 80 O-D 63 79 B-1 125 74 B-2 65 90 250 69 B-3 500 63 T-1 1000 57 2000 52 4000 48 8000 45 R-1A Daytime 31.5 75 R-1B 63 74 R-TH 125 69 R C 60 80 250 64 R M 500 58 C D 1000 52 2000 47 4000 43 8000 40 R-1A Nighttime 31.5 70 R-1B 63 69 R-TH 125 64 R C 55 75 250 59 R M 500 53 C D 1000 47 2000 42 4000 38 8000 35  
(Code 1982, § 21-4) 
Sec. 14-53. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Whenever the city manager or an agent of the city manager determines that any noise source fails to meet the requirement set forth in this article or in applicable regulations issued pursuant thereto, the city manager may obtain a warrant or summons for the prosecution of such violation. In addition, if the agent is a duly qualified law enforcement officer of the city, the city manager may issue a summons to, or arrest, without a warrant, any person who, in the presence of the officer, violates this article. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to restrict the right of any person to secure a summons or warrant for a violation of this article through a duly authorized magistrate. 
(b)  Furthermore, the city manager or an agent of the city manager may issue a notice of violation setting forth the alleged failures and advising the owner, occupant, operator or agent that such failures must be corrected. Such notice shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  Set forth the alleged violations of this article or of applicable regulations issued pursuant thereto; 
(3)  Describe the premises where the violations are alleged to exist and/or other identifications of the noise source; 
(4)  Set forth a reasonable time within which any violation alleged is required to be corrected; 
(5)  Be served upon the owner, occupant or operator of the noise source, or upon the agent of any of the foregoing, by: 
a.  Personally delivering the same to such person; 
b.  Mailing the same to such person by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the last known place of residence of such person; or 
c.  Posting same in or about the premises described in the notice, if service under subsection (b)(5)a of this section cannot be effected. 
At the end of the period of time allowed for correction of any violation alleged, the city manager shall reinspect the noise source described in the notice. 
(Code 1982, § 21-5; Ord. No. 982, 9-14-1981; Ord. No. 1268, 6-12-1989) 
Sec. 14-54. - Variance. 
(a)  Any person responsible for any noise source may apply to the city manager for a variance or partial variance from the provisions of this article. The application shall be accompanied by such information and data as the city manager may require. The city manager may grant such variance or partial variance if such manager finds that: 
(1)  The potential danger to the community is outweighed by the benefit to the public interest during the period of variance; 
(2)  Compliance with the provision of this article from which variance is sought would produce serious hardship without equal or greater benefits to the public. 
(b)  No variance or partial variance issued pursuant to this section shall be granted for a period to exceed one year, but any such variance or partial variance may be renewed for like periods if after being duly considered at a hearing held by the city manager, he finds that renewal is justified under subsection (a) of this section. No renewal shall be granted except on application. Any such application shall be made at least 60 days prior to the expiration of the variance or partial variance. Any renewal granted pursuant to this subsection shall be on the same grounds and subject to the same limitations and requirements as provided in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  A variance, partial variance or renewal thereof shall not be a right of the applicant or holder thereof but shall be in the discretion of the city manager. 
(Code 1982, § 21-6; Ord. No. 982, 9-14-1981) 
Sec. 14-55. - Emergencies. 
    An exemption from the provisions of this article is automatically granted for noise caused in the performance of emergency work. Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit law enforcement, ambulance, fire or other emergency personnel to make excessive noise in the performance of their duties when such noise is clearly unnecessary. 
(Code 1982, § 21-7; Ord. No. 982, 9-14-1981) 
Sec. 14-56. - Noise suppression devices. 
(a)  No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the removal, disconnection or disabling of any noise suppression system or device which has been installed on any noise source: 
(1)  In accordance with federal or state laws or regulations; 
(2)  As a requirement for obtaining a permit to construct, modify, or install such noise source. 
(b)  No person shall defeat the purpose of any noise suppression system or device by installing or modifying therein or thereon any part or component which does not meet the minimum design specifications for that system or device. 
(c)  No noise source shall be operated with its noise suppression system or device removed or otherwise rendered inoperable or in disrepair. 
(Code 1982, § 21-8; Ord. No. 982, 9-14-1981) 
Sec. 14-57. - Penalties; violations deemed nuisances. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished in accordance with subsection 28-1(1). Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(b)  As an additional remedy, the operation or maintenance of devices, instruments, vehicles or machinery in violation of any provision of this article, which operation or maintenance cause discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitiveness or which endangers the comfort, repose, health or peace of residents in the area, shall be deemed, and is declared to be a public nuisance and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1982, § 21-9; Ord. No. 982, 9-14-1981) 
Secs. 14-58-14-87. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1915, adopted Mar. 24, 2014, deleted art. IV, §§ 14-88-14-99, entitled "Erosion and Sediment Control", which derived from: Code 1982, §§ 9-1-9-12; Ord. No. 718; Ord. No. 997, adopted Feb. 8, 1982; Ord. No. 1412, adopted Sept. 14, 1992; and Ord. No. 1530, adopted Nov. 27, 1995. See ch. 35 for similar provisions. 

Secs. 14-88-14-126. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OUTDOOR LIGHTING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings, ch. 6; condominiums, § 6-48 et seq.; housing, ch. 22; outdoor advertising, § 28-89; utilities, ch. 42; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 36; subdivisions, ch 38; underground utilities, § 42-231 et seq.; zoning, ch. 48. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate outdoor lighting in certain areas, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-920. 

Sec. 14-127. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Average illumination intensity means the average of meter readings in footcandles at grade level at several points, all of which shall be the average of all points in the area of projected lighting pattern. 
    Glare means the sensation produced by brightness within the visual field that is sufficiently greater than the luminance to which the eyes are adapted to cause annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility. 
    Glare, direct, means glare resulting from high brightness of insufficiently shielded light sources in the field of view emanating or reflecting from areas of high brightness. 
    Glare, disability, means glare which reduces visual performance and visibility and which is often accompanied by discomfort. 
    Glare, reflected, means glare resulting from spectacular reflections of high brightness in polished or glossy surfaces in the field of view. It is usually associated with reflections within a visual task of areas in close proximity to the region being viewed. 
    Grade level means the average natural topographical elevation or average elevation established either by earth grading or hard-surfacing at which the major portion of the adjacent site area lies; except, that no specially constructed or graded area, ornamental or protective earthwork or raised landscape areas shall be determinant of ground level. 
    Height. The height of a light source shall be the measured vertical distance between the light source and the grade level. The height of a light structure shall be the vertical distance between the uppermost extremity of any light structure, pole, supporting member or structural or nonstructural trim and the grade level. 
    Light source means a single artificial point source of luminescence that emits measurable radiant energy within the visible spectrum. 
    Measurement of intensity. Where the average intensity of artificial illumination is determinable, it shall be measured in footcandles vertically or horizontally corrected for the angle of incident from grade level. 
    Spillage means any light flux or diffusion, glare or other artificial light emission onto any adjoining property above a defined maximum intensity as specified in section 14-131. 
(Code 1973, § 25-1; Code 1982, § 23-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-128. - Purpose and intent of article. 
    It is the purpose and intent of this article to prevent the creation of nuisance caused by unnecessary intensity of artificial illumination of property and buildings, to promote the safety and general welfare of the public by the regulation of glare producing sources of light and to ensure the required minimum illumination to facilitate enforcement of law. 
(Code 1973, § 25-2; Code 1982, § 23-2) 
Sec. 14-129. - Zoning districts where required; exception; compliance with article. 
    Outdoor lighting shall be required in all zoning districts with the exception of R-1A, R-1B, R-TH and shall meet the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 25-3; Code 1982, § 23-3) 
Sec. 14-130. - Permits. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of a permit for the installation of exterior light sources, a plan and elevation to scale shall be prepared in duplicate and submitted to the zoning administrator. Such drawing shall depict the proposed number, specific locations, intensity, projected lighting patterns, style of fixtures and type of illumination of all light sources. The plans submitted in compliance hereto shall not be deemed sufficient to fulfill the requirements of the building code, but are in addition thereto. All plans and elevations shall be prepared to show conformity with this article and shall be certified by a registered engineer, registered electrical contractor, architect or other such licensed person qualified to make such certification. 
(b)  Approval of an application for an outdoor lighting permit by the planning commission shall be required whenever it: 
(1)  Is in conjunction with a site plan or PUD plan application submitted under the zoning regulations. 
(2)  Is for an area of greater than one acre, 43,560 square feet. 
(3)  Is proposed for an installation of greater than 25 fixtures. 
(4)  Includes common lighting proposed for two or more establishments of different ownership. 
(5)  Is requested for an outdoor recreation or assembly area as governed by section 14-140. 
(c)  Any and all exterior artificial light sources requiring a permit, and not having specific special regulations, shall be governed by the provisions of this article. 
(d)  No zoning application or permit shall be required for the installation of any exterior light sources permitted in residential districts R-1A, R-1B and R-TH, except as specified in section 14-135. This subsection shall not in any way impair the validity of the requirements of the building code. 
(e)  No application or permit shall be required for warning lights to be erected in conjunction with construction, excavation, maintenance, repair, etc., as required by sections 36-12 and 36-70. All exterior light sources installed, erected or maintained under this subsection shall be subject to section 14-129. 
(f)  All installations shall conform where applicable to chapters 6 and 36, as certified by the division of inspections and zoning administrator. 
(g)  No permit shall be required of the city or the state or of any public utility corporation when performing contractual arrangements for the city or state for the installation of any light source, except as provided for in chapter 42, and subject to the provisions of section 14-131. 
(h)  When a public utility has contracted for the installation of outdoor lighting with a private concern, a lighting permit is required and the application filed with the zoning administrator. The public utility is exempt from all the provisions of chapter 6. 
(i)  Prior to the approval of a certificate of occupancy for any establishment having previously permitted exterior light sources requiring a permit under this article, an application shall be submitted in the same form as that required for new light sources. Approval of a certificate of occupancy shall be contingent upon approval of an outdoor light permit. 
(Code 1973, § 25-4; Code 1982, § 23-4) 
Cross reference- Business, professional, occupational licenses, § 40-456 et seq. 
Sec. 14-131. - Spillage control. 
(a)  All light sources installed, erected or maintained in any district shall be shielded or directed so as to confine the area of diffusion to the property which it is intended to illuminate. No light source shall be maintained in any manner or located where it creates a nuisance to the users of adjoining properties, nor shall any light source remain erected which would create a traffic hazard. Spillage of light exceeding 0.1-1.0 footcandles measured at any point seven feet beyond a property line shall be prohibited, unless otherwise specified in this article. 
(b)  Whenever a contiguous property is compatibly illuminated and is in business or commercial use, subsection (a) of this section may be waived. 
(Code 1973, § 25-5; Code 1982, § 23-5) 
Sec. 14-132. - Prohibited installations. 
    The following shall be prohibited throughout all districts and in conjunction with all uses within the city unless otherwise provided: 
(1)  Any artificial light source exceeding 45 feet in height above grade level. 
(2)  Any permanent festoon lighting or any light source suspended from wires, cables, tubes or ropes that are subject to noticeable movements from wind or weather related conditions. 
(3)  Any artificial light source which creates glare observable within the normal range of vision from any public walk, thoroughfare or contiguous property under normal weather conditions. 
(4)  Bare fluorescent tubes, neon tubes, incandescent bulbs or unprotected gas lamps. 
(5)  Display of intermittent lights or any flashing, blinking or moving lights, or beacon or search lights except as required by state or federal law. 
(6)  Any artificial light source or supporting structure installed over any street or side-walk, except as otherwise provided by section 36-5. 
(Code 1973, § 25-6; Code 1982, § 23-6; Ord. No. 1948, 2-8-2016) 
Sec. 14-133. - Sources deemed accessory uses. 
    Any exterior light source and accompanying structural support shall be deemed an accessory use in all zoning districts. 
(Code 1973, § 25-7; Code 1982, § 23-7) 
Sec. 14-134. - Existing systems. 
    This article shall also apply to existing systems. 
(Code 1973, § 25-8; Code 1982, § 23-8) 
Sec. 14-135. - R-1A district. 
    Exterior light sources shall not be permitted in an R-1A one-family residence district, with the exception of the following: 
(1)  No artificial light source shall create a nuisance observable within the normal range of vision from a public walk or thoroughfare or contiguous property. 
(2)  Floodlighting of single-, double- or triple-cluster type shall be limited to 150 watts per light source, to be so directed or shielded to confine the area of illumination to the immediate property. The number of floodlights shall not exceed five per residence property. 
(3)  Porch, portico and doorway light sources shall be so directed or shielded to confine the area of light to the entranceway. 
(4)  Festive lighting of a temporary nature shall be erected no more than three days before and shall be removed no later than three days after the activity or event. When the festive lighting denotes celebration of a recognized national, legal or religious celebration, these periods shall be extended to cover such time as is customarily appropriate to the celebration, but in no instance to exceed a total time lapse of 30 days. 
(5)  All exterior light sources shall also be regulated by the provisions of section 14-132. 
(Code 1973, § 25-10; Code 1982, § 23-10) 
Sec. 14-136. - R-1B district. 
    Exterior light sources shall not be permitted in an R-1B one family residence district, except for those permitted in and regulated by the R-1A district provisions. 
(Code 1973, § 25-11; Code 1982, § 23-11) 
Sec. 14-137. - R-TH townhouse district. 
    Exterior light sources shall not be permitted in an R-TH townhouse district, with the exception of the following: 
(1)  Any exterior light sources permitted in and regulated by the R-1B district provisions. 
(2)  Lighting of any common green space provided in compliance with shall be properly shielded as required in section 14-131. 
(Code 1973, § 25-12; Code 1982, § 23-12) 
Sec. 14-138. - R-M general residence district. 
    Exterior light sources shall not be permitted in an R-M general residence district with the exception of the following: 
(1)  The average intensity of illumination of off-street parking areas shall not exceed 5.0 footcandles. 
(2)  Such lighting of yards, walkways, gardens and entranceways as required for the safety and well-being of the tenants may be provided but shall not exceed an average illumination of 5.0 footcandles. 
(3)  No light source extending above any parking area, street, alley, driveway or other area intended for the use of motor vehicles shall be less than 16 feet in height unless the structural support is surrounded at grade level by a six-inch concrete header curb at a minimum radial distance of four feet, in which instance a light source may be a minimum height of eight feet above the traveled surface. Where this lower minimum is utilized there shall be no projections, arms, davits or other supporting structures nor any light source extending to within three feet of any vehicular traffic lane, aisle or driveway. Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit driveway lighting, properly screened to prevent glare and spillage, and not exceeding a height of 24 inches, from being erected provided it is protected by a six-inch concrete header curb and is at least three feet from any traffic lane, parking aisle or driveway. 
(4)  Festive or temporary lighting shall be governed by the provisions of section 14-135(4). 
(Code 1973, § 25-13; Code 1982, § 23-13) 
Sec. 14-139. - T-1 transitional district. 
    Exterior light sources shall not be permitted in a T-1 transitional district, except for those permitted in and regulated by the R-M district provisions. 
(Code 1973, § 25-14; Code 1982, § 23-14) 
Sec. 14-140. - Other districts and uses. 
    All zoning districts and uses not otherwise provided for shall be regulated by the following: 
(1)  Side and rear service yards. 
a.  Side and rear yards of all buildings shall be lighted during the period from one-half hour before sunset to one-half hour after sunrise. Such light sources shall be shielded and mounted on the walls of the building in the immediate area of each service or exit door and at a height not less than 16 feet above grade level. No light source required by this subsection shall be erected at a height greater than the roof, cornice line or 45 feet, whichever is the lesser. 
b.  Wall-mounted floodlights or spotlights installed to provide general illumination of the service area shall be prohibited unless installed in such a manner as to prevent glare from the light source being visible from any adjacent property. 
c.  Illumination in the vicinity of each service or exit door shall be a minimum average of 5.0 footcandles. The maximum illumination at grade level shall not exceed 10.0 footcandles. 
(2)  Parking areas. 
a.  Average intensity of illumination of parking areas shall be limited to 10.0 footcandles. In all other respects parking areas shall be regulated by section 14-131 and section 14-138(3). 
b.  No light source shall be mounted at a height greater than 45 feet nor shall any portion of the lighting structure exceed that height. 
c.  Freestanding structures shall be mounted on or in concrete bases of sufficient size and strength to adequately support the structures and fixtures without the use of guy wires. 
d.  The illumination level of entrances into off-street parking areas and exits onto public thoroughfares shall not exceed 10.0 footcandles. 
(3)  Automobile service stations. 
a.  Artificial illumination of pump islands shall not exceed a maximum level of illumination of 20 footcandles, with light sources shielded and directed downward. All structures and fixtures for the purpose of illuminating pump islands shall be located thereon. 
b.  In general service areas the maximum illumination at grade level shall not exceed 10.0 footcandles; provided, that fixtures for such illumination are shielded and directed downward in such manner to prevent the source of light from being visible within the normal angle of vision from any public walk or thoroughfare. 
c.  The illumination level of entrances and exits from and onto public thoroughfares shall be governed by subsection (2)d of this section. 
(4)  Outdoor sales areas. 
a.  All lighting sources shall be contained within shielding devices directed in such a manner to prevent the source of light from being visible within the normal angle of vision from any public walk or thoroughfare. 
b.  The maximum average illuminating intensity at grade level shall not exceed 10.0 footcandles average of area. 
c.  Whenever the movement of on-site vehicles is inherent in the arrangement of display, the provisions of section 14-138(3) shall apply. 
(5)  Canopy lighting. Artificial illumination of sidewalk areas beneath canopies, where intended for use by the general public, shall be limited to a maximum of 5.0 footcandles directly under the canopy at grade level. 
(6)  Building illumination. 
a.  Nothing in this article shall prohibit the artificial illumination of building facades, statues, monuments and foundations or other such ornamental structures; provided, that such illumination is achieved by the use of shielded lamps or fixtures which shall direct illumination only onto the subject to be illuminated. 
b.  Light sources for such illumination shall be mounted at sufficient height to prevent the source of light from being visible within the normal angle of vision and so positioned to prevent the source of light from being visible from any public walk or thoroughfare. The height of the light source shall not exceed 45 feet or one-half the actual building height, whichever is the lesser, except when the light source is directed downward to the base of the structure and is situated wholly within an overhanging roofline projection or decorative parapet wall enclosure constructed of materials compatible with the building facade. 
c.  Whenever such light source is mounted on or within six feet of the grade level, it shall be effectively screened by dense evergreens or other decorative means to prevent the source of light from being visible from any public walk or thoroughfare. 
(7)  Sign illumination. All signs illuminated in any manner shall conform to the restriction, limitations and prohibitions of both the general provisions of this article and such other regulations in chapter 48, article VI, pertaining to signs. 
(8)  Festive or temporary lighting. 
a.  All temporary or festive lighting shall be subject to the general provisions of this article as well as any special regulations by the district in which it is located. In addition, all festive and temporary lighting shall conform to section 14-135(4). 
b.  All lighting erected in conjunction with any carnival or outdoor assembly shall comply with section 6-41. 
(9)  Outdoor recreation or assembly. 
a.  Artificial illumination of any outdoor recreation or assembly area or facility shall conform to the provisions of section 14-131 and the general prohibitions of section 14-132, except subsection (1) of such section. 
b.  The height limit of section 14-132(1) shall apply to all outdoor recreation or assembly areas or facilities except when this limitation is considered inappropriate because of the nature of the existing or intended use of such areas or facilities, or because of considerations of safety. In such instance an application may be made to the planning commission for permission to erect such lighting at a height suitable to the special nature of the use, area, or facility. The planning commission may approve such application with any stipulations they deem necessary and make such a condition to the granting of the permit subject to the general requirements of section 14-130. Violation of stipulations shall be grounds for revocation of such permit. 
(Code 1973, § 25-15; Code 1982, § 23-15) 
Sec. 14-141. - Appeals. 
(a)  Except for instances relating to projecting light sources or supporting structures located or proposed to be located on or over public property, any person who has been ordered by the zoning administrator to incur an expense for the alteration or removal of light sources or supporting structures, or any person whose application for a permit for a light source or supporting structure has been refused, may appeal to the board of zoning appeals by serving written notice to the zoning administrator and electrical inspector. Such appeal may be transmitted to the board of zoning appeals. Upon the filing of a notice of appeal the electrical inspector shall take no further action with regard to the light source or supporting structure involved until the final decision of either board has been rendered, unless the electrical inspector or zoning administrator finds that the light source or supporting structure involved, by reason of its condition, presents an immediate and serious danger to the public, in which instance the electrical inspector shall proceed immediately. 
(b)  The board of zoning appeals, pursuant to the same powers and authority and in accordance with the same procedures of sections 48-172 and 48-173, may only grant variances of siting height and light sources. 
(Code 1973, § 25-16; Code 1982, § 23-16) 
Sec. 14-142. - Enforcement of article. 
(a)  The zoning administrator shall make inspections and tests necessary to obtain compliance with the provisions of this article, and shall have absolute right of entry upon any premises for inspection between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on normal working days. In all cases the inspector shall present proper identification to and request entry from the owner or occupant of the premises. If entry is refused, the inspector showing reasonable cause to believe the existence of a violation shall apply to the bailing justice or municipal court for a warrant authorizing entry. 
(b)  The zoning administrator shall revoke any outdoor lighting permit which violates any provision of this article or of this Code, or which has been secured by subterfuge, or is void, or which has been issued by mistake, misunderstanding or error by the city. 
(c)  All rights and privileges required under the provisions of this article or any amendments thereto are mere licenses revocable at any time by the zoning administrator, and all such permits shall contain this provision. 
(d)  Every light source or supporting structure unlawfully placed upon or projecting within at least three feet from a public right-of-way or unlawfully on public property or declared to be hazardous or unsafe by the zoning administrator is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(e)  The zoning administrator shall issue a violation notice and order in writing for violation of this article. A violation notice may be issued without an order to comply or may order compliance and grant a time limit for compliance. 
(f)  The notice and order shall be deemed to give actual notice, if given in either or all the following manners: 
(1)  By handling in person either to the owner or occupant of the premises on which the light source is located, the owner of the light source, the person responsible for the light source or the permittee; and the time for compliance with the order shall start from the date of notice. 
(2)  Registered mail, return receipt requested, addressed to either or all of the persons described in subsection (f)(1) of this section to addresses shown on the commissioner of the revenue's current records or as shown on the permit; and the time for compliance with the order shall start on the date of receipt of delivery. 
(3)  By posting on the light source or on the supporting structure or on the premises; and time for compliance shall start on the date of posting. 
(Code 1973, § 25-17; Code 1982, § 23-17) 
Sec. 14-143. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished in accordance with section 1-12. 
(b)  Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(Code 1973, § 25-18; Code 1982, § 23-18) 
Secs. 14-144-14-163. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1872, adopted Mar. 12, 2012, deleted art. VI, § 16-164, entitled "Regulation of Growth of Weeds and Brush" which derived from: Code 1982, § 35-4; Ord. No. 811; and Ord. No. 1513, adopted May 22, 1995. 

Sec. 14-164. - Reserved. 
Chapter 15 - FEES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 15-1. - General fees. 
(a)  Fees for photo copies will be determined by the city clerk and updated annually. The current fee is: 
(1)  Black and white copies at $0.25 per page. 
(2)  Color copies at $0.50 per page. 
(b)  An insufficient funds charge (returned check) will be determined by the treasurer. The current fee is: 
(1)  The cost for a returned check shall be $35.00. 
(Ord. No. 1858, § 4), 4-25-2011) 
Sec. 15-2. - Mobile food service fees. 
    The annual fee for a mobile food service permit will be $250.00. 
(Ord. No. 1913, 12-9-2013; Ord. No. 1922, 4-28-2014) 
Editor's note- At the request of the city, § 15-2 has been added back to the City Code which was inadvertently deleted by Ord. No. 1922. 
Secs. 15-3-15-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEPARTMENT OF DEVELOPMENT SERVICES 

Sec. 15-20. - General department of development services fee information. 
    The following shall apply to permits and activities performed by the department of development services: 
(1)  Nonemergency work without a permit shall be charged an investigation fee of $55.00. Applicant must apply for a permit within one week or a further fee of $330.00 will be charged. Approved permits for work without a permit must be picked up within two weeks of approval, or a fee of $330.00 will be charged. 
(2)  The minimum fee for any permit shall be $55.00. 
(3)  All permits shall have the required state levy collected. 
(4)  A reinspection fee of $55.00 shall be charged for rejected work or work found not ready to be inspected. 
(5)  Fees must be collected prior to any permit being issued. For any projects that exceed 15,000 square feet in finished floor area, a nonrefundable down payment equal to the estimated plan review fee shall be collected at time of submission. 
(6)  Inspection may be conducted after hours at an applicant's request and with the consent of the building official. Such inspections will incur an additional charge of $110.00 per hour, billed in half-hour increments, or portion thereof, with a minimum of one hour. 
(7)  Appeals to the local board of building and fire prevention code appeals shall be charged $550.00 
(8)  When a notice of violation or notice of unsafe structure is issued to a commercial property, the violator shall pay $110.00 for each month, or portion thereof, the violation remains outstanding. 
(9)  Amendment to a permit: Any amendment to a permit shall be subject to additional costs based on the fee schedule. 
(10)  Extension of time: Upon written application by the permitee and prior to expiration of the permit, the building official or his designee may extend the time limit of the permit for a period of six months in accordance with the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code and the Code of the City of Falls Church at no additional fee. Extensions for permits already expired may also be requested. A fee of $55.00 will be charged if the extension is granted. 
(11)  Outside agency reviews: At the discretion of the building official, plans may be sent to an outside agency for additional plan review. In such cases the applicant shall pay a plan review fee of ten percent of the square footage charge (reduced from the normal 30 percent) plus the full cost of the outside agency review. 
(12)  Refunds: In cases where the permit is revoked or the project is withdrawn or abandoned, the base permit fee, not including any plan review or third-party fees, shall be refunded provided the permittee's written request to the city building official has been received within the life of the permit. Refund shall be issued only after a final inspection to confirm the noncompletion of the project and that any area involved has been left in a satisfactory condition. The amount refunded shall be proportional to the remaining work, as determined by the building official. 
(13)  All transactions paid by credit or debit card shall be subject to an additional charge as established by the city treasurer. This fee shall be clearly posted at the permits counter. 
(14)  Any application for a building safety permit requiring review of plans shall have a plan review fee added to the permit fee. This plan review fee shall be 30 percent of the permit fee or $100.00, whichever is greater. The building official may waive all or part of this fee for plan reviews of a minor nature. 
(15)  Technology and office automation and integration fee: Each permit issued shall have added to its base approved fee a ten percent technology and office automation, integration fee, to be dedicated exclusively to fund the purchase, upgrade and maintenance of equipment, electronics, software, peripherals and associated equipment, and employed by the department of development services. Exception: Certificates of occupancy shall be exempt. 
(16)  Administrative fee: Each DDS permit and application taken in by DDS shall have added to its base approved fee a ten percent administrative fee to be dedicated to fund staff who perform administrative services in the department of development services associated with development project coordination and intake, project review, evaluation and implementation; administration and enforcement of the zoning ordinance; and permit processing and inspection. Exception: Certificates of occupancy shall be exempt. 
(17)  Waiver of certain fees: Where a business has been operating at a location for a year or more (as determined by issuance of a certificate of occupancy) and relocates due to redevelopment, the fees enumerated in sections 15-21 through 15-27 shall be waived where each of the following conditions apply: 1) the business owner is a lessor on the property being redeveloped and such lease has been in effect for one year or more; 2) the business owner's lease is subject to termination or non-renewal due to the redevelopment of the leased property; 3) the property of the leasehold is subject to an application for a special exception under City Code section 48-90 that the city has formally accepted for review; 4) the business is relocating to another location in the city, as evidenced by a new lease; and 5) the business owner submits an application for a fee waiver on a form provided by the department of development services. Eligibility to apply for a waiver of fees by a business owner meeting these conditions shall be retroactive to January 1, 2015, and refunds shall be paid to businesses eligible for the waiver who have paid fees after January 1, 2015. 
(Ord. No. 1858, § 4), 4-25-2011; Ord. No. 1901, 7-22-2013; Ord. No. 1922, 4-28-2014; Ord. No. 1943, 12-14-2015; Ord. No. 1958, 6-13-2016) 
Sec. 15-21. - Building permits. 
    The following applies to fees for building permits as noted in the table below: 
(1)  Square footage calculation includes basement and roof areas, in addition to all floors in between. 
(2)  Amusement ride permits are not subject to a minimum permit fee. Ride must be ready for inspection during normal business hours prior to the event. Alternatively, the ride may be inspected by a properly-licensed third-party inspector, who shall provide the results to the city in writing within seven days of any such inspection. If a properly-licensed third-party inspector carries out the inspection of an amusement ride, the permit fee shall be reduced by 50 percent. At the discretion of the building official, the city may inspect the ride outside of normal business hours. In this case, the permit fee is not reduced and the normal charges for after-hours inspection will be added to the permit fee. 
(3)  In addition, a permit for the demolition of a building or structure shall require posting of a cash escrow bond in the amount of $1.00 per square foot of building to be demolished, with a minimum of $1,000.00. Said escrow shall be released to the permit holder upon satisfactory completion of the work and the certification by the building inspector that the premises have been made safe and sanitary. 
(4)  Additionally, for new single-family dwellings, the charge of $0.55 per square foot applies to the foundation and any decking. For new commercial and multifamily construction, the charge of $0.65 per square foot applies to the foundation and any decking. For temporary trailers, a $550.00 cash bond shall be posted with the city to ensure removal and cleanup. 
(5)  In addition to the permit fee, NEIS will charge the permit recipient directly for necessary construction and maintenance elevator inspections. 
(6)  The actual cost to the city of plan review by an outside agency shall be added to the permit fee in the event of any such review by an outside agency. 
APPLICATION   Fees Appeal (LBC/LFPC Board) $550.00 BUILDING PERMITS Amusement Devices (per devise) SEE (2) above $25.00 Crane (Each) $110.00 Demolition of Existing Structure (Per 1,000 Square Feet of floor area or Portion) SEE (3) above $10.00 Elevators, Escalators, Man Lifts (Each) SEE (4) above $220.00   Repairs SEE (5) above $55.00   Temporary Certificate SEE (5) above $55.00 Low Voltage Door Locking System (Per Door) $10.00 Modular Buildings and Trailers (Per Unit) SEE (4) above $55.00 New single-family dwellings, additions to single-family dwellings, including garages, decks, porches, sheds and swimming pools (Per Square Foot) SEE (1) above $0.55 New Commercial and Multifamily Buildings (Per Square Foot) SEE (1) above $0.65 Single-family Alterations and Repairs, SEE (1) above $0.55 Commercial and Multifamily Alterations and Tenant Fit-Outs (SEE (1) above $0.65 Other (Charged Per Estimated Inspection Required) $50.00 Sheeting and Shoring, Retaining Walls (Per Square Foot of Wall Area) $0.75 Sump Pump (Each) $55.00 Swimming Pool (Per Square Foot of Water Area) $0.75 Systems Furniture and Mercantile Shelving (Per Floor) $55.00  
(Ord. No. 1858, § 4), 4-25-2011; Ord. No. 1922, 4-28-2014; Ord. No. 1958, 6-13-2016) 
Sec. 15-22. - Electrical permits. 
    The following applies to fees for electrical permits as noted in the table below. 
(1)  Includes, but is not limited to, stoves, ovens, humidifiers, filters, and any other fixture on hardwired to a circuit. 
(2)  Includes, but is not limited to, outlets, light switches, and lighting fixtures. 
(3)  This inspection is required every five years for any building with an electric service of 1,000 amps or greater. This program is new with this fee schedule. Buildings for which a record of an inspection within the last five years cannot be proven will have six months to have the inspection conducted. 
ELECTRICAL PERMITS   Fees Circuits (Each) $5.00 Distribution Panels (Each)   0-600 Amps $55.00   > 600 Amps $110.00 Electrical Heating and Heat Pump Backup Heat (Per KW) $10.00 Fixed Appliances (Hardwired) (Each) SEE (1) above $15.00 Fixtures and Receptacles (Each) SEE (2) above $5.00 Generators (Per KW) $10.00 Motors (Each)   = 1/4 horsepower (see Fixtures) $5.00   > 1/4 horsepower (Per HP) $10.00 Preventive Maintenance Inspection for Switchgear > 1,000 Amps SEE (3) above   If During Regular Business Hours (8:00 a.m.-5:00 p.m.) $110.00   If Outside Regular Business Hours $330.00 Public Pool Inspection (Annual) $110.00 Outdoor Signs (Per Unit) $30.00 Other (Charged Per Estimated Inspection Required) 
Automatic Transfer Switch: Charged as a Panel $55.00 Receptacles > 20 Amps (Each) $10.00 Service Entrance (New, Replacement, Temporary)   0-600 Amps $55.00   >600 Amps $165.00 Transformers (Each) $55.00  
(Ord. No. 1858, § 4), 4-25-2011; Ord. No. 1922, 4-28-2014) 
Sec. 15-23. - Fire system permits. 
    The following applies to fees for fire system permits as noted in the table below: 
(1)  Includes, but is not limited to, pull stations, gongs, bells, strobes, flow switches, tamper switches, smoke detectors, heat detectors, and door locks. 
(2)  The actual cost to the city of plan review by an outside agency shall be added to the permit fee. 
FIRE SYSTEM PERMITS   Fees Base Fee (Any Fire Alarm/Sprinkler Permit) $165.00 Fire Alarm Device (Each) SEE (1) above $10.00 Fire Alarm Panel (Each) $110.00 Review by an Outside Agency SEE (2) above Cost Sprinkler System Fire Pump (Each) $110.00 Sprinkler System Heads (Each) $5.00 Sprinkler System Stand Pipe (Per Floor) $15.00  
(Ord. No. 1858, § 4), 4-25-2011; Ord. No. 1922, 4-28-2014) 
Sec. 15-24. - Fuel gas and oil permits. 
    The following applies to fees for fuel gas and oil permits as noted in the table below: 
FUEL GAS AND OIL PERMITS   Fees Automatic Gas Valve (Each) $30.00 Boilers (Hot Water, Low-Pressure Steam, Power, Miniature) (Per 100,000 BTU Per Hour) $30.00 Fuel-Fired Furnaces (Per 100,000 BTU Per Hour) $30.00 Fuel-Fired Space and Unit Heaters (Per 100,000 BTU Per Hour) $30.00 Gas Appliance or Regulator (Each) $20.00 Install, Extend or Relocate Gas Line $55.00 New Service or Manifold (Each) $55.00 Oil Tanks - New or Abandoned (Each) $55.00 Other (Charged Per Estimated Inspection Required) $55.00  
(Ord. No. 1858, § 4), 4-25-2011; Ord. No. 1922, 4-28-2014) 
Sec. 15-25. - Mechanical permits. 
    The following applies to fees for mechanical permits as noted in the table below: 
MECHANICAL PERMITS   Fees Air Conditioners and Heat Pumps (Per Ton) $25.00 Air Handler or Furnace (Each) $30.00 Cooling Tower (Each) $55.00 Exhaust System (Per Riser) $55.00 Fan Coil Units and VAV Boxes (Each) $20.00 Hood (Each) $110.00 Other (Charged Per Estimated Inspection Required) $55.00 Refrigeration Units (Per Ton) $35.00 Spray Paint Booth (Each) $110.00 Ventilation System Risers (Per Riser, Per Floor) $55.00  
(Ord. No. 1858, § 4), 4-25-2011; Ord. No. 1922, 4-28-2014) 
Sec. 15-26. - Plumbing permits. 
    The following applies to fees for plumbing permits as noted in the table below: 
PLUMBING PERMITS   Fees Building Drain or Vent - Install, Repair, or Relocate (Per Riser, Per Floor) $55.00 Building Sewer - Install, Repair, Relocate, Cap Off $55.00 Fixture, Drain, Circulating Pump, Backflow Preventor, Pressure Reducing Valve, Water Heater and Similar $15.00 Other (Charged Per Estimated Inspection Required) $55.00 Sewage Ejector Pump (Each) $55.00 Water Pipe - New, Repair or Replace (Per Floor) $55.00 Water Service - New, Replace or Repair $55.00  
(Ord. No. 1858, § 4), 4-25-2011; Ord. No. 1922, 4-28-2014) 
Sec. 15-27. - Certificate of occupancy permits. 
    The following applies to fees for certification of occupancy permits as noted in the table below: 
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY PERMITS   Fees Temporary event $55.00 Final for a residential building $200.00 Final Core and Shell for a commercial building $500.00 Flat Fee by Use   Occupancy permit associated with a Minor Home Occupation $100.00   Automobile Dealership Sales Used, New $500.00   Automobile Dealership Change in Ownership $500.00   Automobile Financing Title, Loan Original Application or Change in Ownership $500.00   Payday Loan, Pawn Shop $500.00   Single-person business, when operating within an existing business $100.00   All other business uses $200.00 Temporary Certificates of Occupancy will be charged the same fee as will be due for the final Certificate. This fee is payable each month the temporary Certificate remains in effect. The Director of Development Services may waive all or part of the Certificate of Occupancy fee for businesses relocating within the same building and when the project involves no other permits and/ or when an existing business in the same location changes its operating or trade name.  
(Ord. No. 1858, § 4), 4-25-2011; Ord. No. 1901, 7-22-2013; Ord. No. 1922, 4-28-2014) 
Sec. 15-28. - Development applications-Planning. 
    The following applies to fees for development applications-Planning, as noted in the table below: 
(1)  The base building permit fee, not including plan review changes, is one-half the usual fee if subject to HARB review. 
DEVELOPMENT APPLICATIONS-PLANNING   Fees Administrative Approvals/Reviews(Uses not otherwise listed) $330.00 Amendment to Approved Development Plan, Special Exception, Voluntary Concessions OR Development Conditions   Minor: Interior change to built project or only one discipline review required and is handled administratively; (Minor) 
$1,100.00   Major: Project not yet built which requires two or more disciplines or requires Planning Commission action) (Major) 
$2,750.00 Amendment to Approved Site Plan   Administrative Review $1,100.00   Planning Commission Review  o Minor: One discipline review required and is handled administratively (Minor) 
$1,650.00  o Major: Project not yet built which requires two or more disciplines or requires Planning Commission action (Major) 
$2,750.00 Comprehensive Plan Land Use Map Amendments   Future Land Use Map $1,650.00 +   Per 1000 Square Feet of Land Area or Fraction $55.00 Extensions to Expirations of Approvals (with the following conditions: Permitted by City/State Code and No Changes are Proposed to the Plan/Application) $1,650.00 Historic Architectural Review Board  o Permit Review (Includes Board Review, Newspaper Advertisement and Property Owner Notification) $110.00   Appeal to City Council   Verbatim Transcript of Meeting Minutes Cost Notification of Public Hearing   Additional Newspaper Advertisement $385.00   Additional Property Owner Notification $330.00   Additional Property Posting $55.00 Parking or Loading Space in Public Street, Right-of Way, Alley or Property Plan Review $1,100.00 
Per space Resubmissions $55.00 Application fees cover original submission and first resubmittal (in response to staff comments on original submission.) All additional submittals require payment of an additional fee at the time of filing Site Plan 
(Site Plan Not Required for Single-Family Residential Lot) $3,850.00+   Residential Per Dwelling Unit or Hotel Room $55.00+   Per 1,000 Gross Square Feet Commercial Floor Area, or Fraction $55.00+   Per Quarter Acre, or Fraction $110.00 Reactivation Fee (if dormant 6 months up to 12 months after approval; 12 months and one day dormancy requires new application filing) $1,100.00 Site Plan Waiver(s) $275.00 (Landscaping, Site Plan Submission Requirements, Commercial Drive within 100' for an R-District, and/or Parking Reductions) Per waiver Special Exception (all disciplines) $5,500.00   Reactivation Fee (if dormant 6 months up to 12 months after approval; 12 months and one day dormancy requires new application filing) $1,100.00 Subdivision   Preliminary and Final $1,650.00+  o Single-Family Detached/Lot $55.00  o Single-Family Attached/Lot $55.00  o Commercial and All Others/Lot $55.00  o Consolidation of Two or More Lots (Commercial or Residential), and With No Other Subdivision of Subject Land Proposed) $550.00  o Lot Line Adjustment (Requires Building Permit) Permit) Permit) $550.00 Traffic Calming Request No Fee  
(Ord. No. 1858, § 4), 4-25-2011; Ord. No. 1922, 4-28-2014) 
Sec. 15-29. - Development applications-Zoning. 
    The following applies to fees for development applications-Zoning, as noted in the table below: 
DEVELOPMENT APPLICATIONS-ZONING   Fees Appeal $300.00 Architectural Advisory Board (AAB)   Official Referral, First Meeting $50.00  o Each Additional Meeting Required $330.00   Courtesy Review:  o Site Plans, Development Plans, and Comprehensive Sign Plans, First Meeting $220.00  o Each Additional Meeting $110.00  o Signs, Facade Changes (w/o Site Plan, Other) $110.00  o Each Additional Meeting $55.00 Permits, Zoning:   Fence $55.00   Temporary Stand/Sales Facility $90.00 
Per permit Resubmissions $55.00 [Application fees cover original submission and first resubmittal (in response to staff comments on the original submission). All additional submittals require payment of an additional fee at the time of filing.] Signs (In Addition to Below, Other Fees May Apply) (See AAB Fees, Above)   Temporary Sign $165.00   Permanent Sign $145.00  o Each Additional sign in same application $25.00 Sign Recovery $30.00   Signs in the public rights-of-way or within 30' of a public road centerline are illegal and will be removed by the City. Signs that have been removed by the City will be held for 10 business days and may be recovered (by the owner) for a fee. Signs will be discarded after 10 business days Per sign Special Use Permit (New or Renewal)   Home Day Care/Permit $220.00   In-Home Education Services/Permit $220.00   Nonresidential/Permit $1,650.00   Residential/Permit $550.00 Variances (Per Code Section)   Single-Family Residential $550.00   Commercial and All Other $1,650.00+   Each Additional Code Section $550.00 Zoning Compliance Letter $350.00 Written Zoning Determination Letter $400.00 Automobile Dealership Zoning Approval Evaluation for DMV $500.00 Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning)   Zoning Map: Conditional Rezoning $3,850.00+  o Per 1,000 Square Feet of Land or Fraction $110.00   Zoning Map: All Other $3,300.00  o Per 1,000 Square Feet of Land or Fraction $110.00 Zoning Ordinance Text Amendment $1,650.00  
(Ord. No. 1858, § 4), 4-25-2011; Ord. No. 1901, 7-22-2013; Ord. No. 1922, 4-28-2014) 
Secs. 15-30-15-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS 

Sec. 15-35. - General department of public works fee information. 
    The following shall apply to permits and activities performed by the department of public works: 
(1)  Technology, office automation and integration fee: Each permit issued shall have added to its base approved fee a ten percent technology and office automation and integration fee to be dedicated exclusively to fund the purchase, upgrade, and maintenance of equipment, electronics, software, peripherals, and associated equipment employed by the department in the administration of permits. 
(Ord. No. 1958, 6-13-2016) 
Sec. 15-36. - Public works applications-Engineering. 
    The following applies to fees for public works applications-Engineering as noted in the table below: 
PUBLIC WORKS APPLICATIONS-ENGINEERING   Fees Stormwater Management Permits (not applicable where a Development Review fee is paid)   Water Quality Impact Assessment (WQIA)  o Minor (< 1/2 Acre disturbed area in RPA) $400.00  o Major (> = 1/2 Acre disturbed area) $800.00   Stormwater Management Review Team (SMRT) Meeting  o First Meeting $150.00  o Additional Meetings $100.00 each   Virginia Stormwater Management Permit (VSMP) See 35-23(b)   Stormwater System Connection Permit $200/connection   Geothermal well $200.00/well   Each resubmittal, after the first, of any Stormwater Management Permit (One resubmittal is covered by original fee) 50% of the fee amount for the initial application except, for VSMP resubmittal, see 35-23(b) Stormwater Management Violations   Illicit Discharges  o Private Resident $500.00/day  o Contractor or Commercial Property (including Apartment Management or Condominium) $1,000.00/day Erosion and Sediment Control (E&S)   Erosion and Sediment Control Violations $500.00/day 
(max. $10,000.00) Right-of-Way (ROW) Permits (applicable to driveway aprons, sidewalks, retaining walls, utility work, lane closures, and use of City ROW; includes reviews, inspections, and bond management - does not include stormwater connection)   ROW Permit - Standard $250.00   ROW Permit - Lane Closure Only $125.00   ROW Permit - Block Party Free   ROW Permit - PODS or Dumpster Placement (45 days) $125.00   ROW Permit - Sidewalk Cafe Free  o Resubmittal or request for Extension of ROW Permit 50% of fee amount for the initial permit   ROW Violations - Fines plus actual cost of any repairs or maintenance of traffic performed by the City  o Working without a Permit in ROW $600.00  o ROW Violations of Conditions 1 st Offense $300.00  o ROW Violations of Conditions 2 nd Offense $600.00  o ROW Violations of Conditions 3 rd or more Offense $1,000.00 Development Reviews (Includes Engineering & Urban Forestry reviews and inspections for: Stormwater, Erosion & Sediment Control, VSMP Permit, WQIA, 1 st SMRT Meeting, and bond management)   Single-Family House Lots (Grading Plans  o Minor (< 1/2 Acre disturbed area) $1,600.00  o Major (> = 1/2 Acre disturbed area) $2,800.00   Agreement in Lieu of Plan $1,600.00   Commercial or Multifamily Site Plans  o Minor (< 1/2 Acre disturbed area) $5,000.00  o Major (> = 1/2 Acre disturbed area) $10,000.00   Site Plan Amendment (requiring DPW review & comment) $500.00   Resubmittal of Development Plan (One resubmittal is covered by original fee) 50% of the fee amount for initial application Traffic Impact Analysis 
(Based on advanced scope design and not to exceed $7,000.00) Actual cost Right-of-Way Vacation $600.00  
(Ord. No. 1858, § 4), 4-25-2011; Ord. No. 1901, 7-22-2013; Ord. No. 1958, 6-13-2016) 
Sec. 15-37. - Public works applications-Urban forestry. 
    The following applies to fees for public works applications-Urban forestry as noted in the table below: 
PUBLIC WORKS APPLICATIONS-URBAN FORESTRY   Fees Urban Forestry Permits   Tree Removal Permits (Not applicable where development review fee is paid)  o Commercial or Multifamily Property $50.00  o Single-Family Dwelling   - Tree within RPA $25.00   - Specimen Tree Free   Modification of Site Plan Changing Landscaping (After site has been established and occupied)  o Minor (up to 4 trees or < 1/2 acre modified) $100.00  o Major (5 or more trees or > = 1/2 acre modified) $200.00   Tree Contractor Annual Permit $25.00   Resubmittal of Urban Forestry Permit (One resubmittal is covered by original fee) 50% of the fee amount for the initial permit Urban Forestry Violations   Damage to Public Trees, per inch of Diameter at Breast Height (DBH) $250.00/inch   Damage to Public Landscaping or Irrigation $300.00 + 
Cost of repair   Tree Removal on private property without required Permit $1,000.00/tree   Violations of Landscape Conservation Plan (in addition to mitigation and/or replacement costs per City Code)  o 1 st Offense $500.00  o 2 nd Offense $1,000.00  o 3 rd & Subsequent Offenses $2,500.00   Destruction of Tree to be Preserved, per inch of Diameter at Breast Height (DBH) $100.00/inch  
(Ord. No. 1858, § 4), 4-25-2011; Ord. No. 1901, 7-22-2013; Ord. No. 1958, 6-13-2016) 
Secs. 15-38-15-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY 

Sec. 15-46. - Fire prevention-General. 
(a)  In accordance with the Fire Prevention Code (City Code chapter 18, state law reference-Fire protection, Code of Virginia, § 27-1 et seq.), operational permits are required for those items listed in Table 107.2 which includes activities involving the handling, storage or use of substances, materials or devices regulated by the fire prevention code. 
(b)  In addition, operational permits are required for those occupancies conducting processes which produce conditions hazardous to life or property; and establishing and operating certain types of occupancies such as a place of assembly/education, and special amusement building or carnival/fair. 
(Ord. No. 1858, § 4), 4-25-2011) 
Sec. 15-47. - Fire prevention permits. 
(a)  Note a: All inspection fees where applicable are based on an hourly rate of $130.00. The minimum charge is $65.00. After the first half hour, the fee charge is $32.50 per quarter hour. 
(b)  Note b: Plans review and inspection fees may be waived if the fee is included as part of a fee that includes all agencies, such as special events. 
(c)  Note c: Hourly inspection rate doubles in the event of continued noncompliance. 
    The fire marshal requires an inspection for those occupancies identified in the table below prior to the issuing a fire prevention code permit. Operational permits issued by the city fire marshal are known as "fire prevention code permits" (FPCP). An FPCP is required for each process, installation, storage, occupancy or use as follows along with associated fees: 
  Code
Ref. Table 107.2
Fire Prevention Fees and Detailed
Permit Requirements Flat
Fee Hour
Fee Section 1 - Detailed Operational Permit Requirements 1 108.1.1 Aerosol Products, Level 2 or 3: Manufacture, Store, or Handle an Aggregate Quantity in Excess of 500 Pounds Net Weight $85.00 n/a 2 108.1.1 Special Amusement Buildings $85.00 n/a 3 108.1.1 Aviation Facilities (Group H or S Occupancies): Aircraft Servicing or Repair and Aircraft Fuel Servicing Vehicles $85.00 n/a 4 108.1.1 Carnivals, Fairs, Festivals, and Outdoor Public Assemblages (30-Day Permit) $85.00 n/a 5 108.1.1 Battery Systems: Install Stationary Lead-Acid Battery Systems Having a Liquid Capacity of More Than 50 Gallons $85.00 n/a 6 108.1.1 Cellulose Nitrate (Pyroxylin Plastic): Assembly or Manufacturing of Articles Involving Any Amount $85.00 n/a 7 108.1.1 Cellulose Nitrate (Pyroxylin Plastic): Storage or Handling More Than 25 pounds $85.00 n/a 8 108.1.1 Cellulose Nitrate Film: Store, Handle, or Use in a Group A Occupancy $85.00 n/a 9 108.1.1 Combustible Dust-Producing Operations $85.00 n/a 10 108.1.1 Combustible Fibers: Storage and Handling of Greater Than 100 Cubic Feet Exception: Agricultural Storage $85.00 n/a 11 108.1.1 Compressed Gas - Corrosive: Storage, Use, or Handling, in Excess of 200 Cubic Feet at Normal Temperature and Pressure 
Exception: Vehicles Equipped For and Using Compressed Gas as a Fuel for Propelling the Vehicle $85.00 n/a 12 108.1.1 Compressed Gas - Flammable: Storage, Use, or Handling, in Excess of 200 Cubic Feet at Normal Temperature and Pressure 
Exceptions: 1. Vehicles Equipped For and Using Compressed Gas as a Fuel for Propelling the Vehicle. 2. Cryogenic Fluids and Liquefied Petroleum Gases $85.00 n/a 13 108.1.1 Compressed Gas - Toxic or Highly Toxic: Storage, Use, or Handling, Any Amount $85.00 n/a 14 108.1.1 Compressed Gas - Inert or Simple Asphyxiant: Storage, Use, or Handling in Excess of 6,000 Cubic Feet at Normal Temperature and Pressure. Exception: Vehicles Equipped For and Using Compressed Gas as a Fuel for Propelling the Vehicle $85.00 n/a 15 108.1.1 Compressed Gas - Oxidizing (Including Oxygen): Storage, Use, or Handling, in Excess of 504 Cubic Feet at Normal Temperature and Pressure, Exception: Vehicles Equipped For and Using Compressed Gas as a Fuel for Propelling the Vehicle $85.00 n/a 16 108.1.1 Compressed Gas - Pyrophoric: Storage, Use, and Handling of Any Amount $85.00 $130.00 17 108.1.1 Cryogenic Fluids - Flammable: Produce, Store, Transport On-Site, Use, Handle, or Dispense More Than 1 Gallon Inside a Building or More Than 60 Gallons Outside a Building Exception: Operational Permits are not Required for Vehicles Equipped For and Using Cryogenic Fluids as a Fuel for Propelling the Vehicle or for Refrigerating the Lading $85.00 $130.00 18 108.1.1 Cryogenic Fluids - Inert: Produce, Store, Transport On-Site, Use, Handle, or Dispense More Than 60 Gallons Inside a Building or More Than 500 Gallons Outside a Building, Exception: Operational Permits are not Required for Vehicles Equipped For and Using Cryogenic Fluids as a Fuel for Propelling the Vehicle or for Refrigerating the Lading $85.00 n/a 19 108.1.1 Cryogenic Fluids - Oxidizing (Includes Oxygen): Produce, Store, Transport On-Site, Use, Handle, or Dispense More Than 10 Gallons Inside a Building or More Than 50 Gallons Outside a Building, Exception: Operational Permits are not Required for Vehicles Equipped For and Using Cryogenic Fluids as a Fuel for Propelling the Vehicle or for Refrigerating the Lading $85.00 n/a 20 108.1.1 Cryogenic Fluids - Physical or Health Hazard Not Otherwise Specified: Produce, Store, Transport On-Site, Use, Handle, or Dispense Any Amount Inside a Building or Any Amount Outside a Building, Exception: Operational Permits are not Required for Vehicles Equipped For and Using Cryogenic Fluids as a Fuel for Propelling the Vehicle or for Refrigerating the Lading $85.00 n/a 21 108.1.1 Commercial Kitchen Operation Requiring a Type I Hood n/a $130.00 22 108.1.1 Dry Cleaning - Any Type Plant Using Any Class of Solvent or Changing to a More Hazardous Cleaning Solvent Used in Existing Equipment $85.00 n/a 23 108.1.1 Explosives: Explosives Use, Each Site or Location (6 Month Permit) $85.00 n/a 24 108.1.1 Explosives: Transportation, Each Vehicle (6-Month Permit) $85.00 n/a 25 108.1.1 Explosives: Firm or Company License $85.00 n/a 26 108.1.1 Explosives: Storage and Display of Black Powder or Smokeless Propellant Indoors $85.00 n/a 27 108.1.1 Explosives: Approved Overnight Storage, Any Quantity (One-Day Permit) $500.00 n/a 28 108.1.1 Explosives: Laboratory Use (6-Month Permit) $85.00 n/a 29 108.1.1 Flammable Liquids - Class I: Store, Handle, or Use in Excess of 5 Gallons in a Building or in Excess of 10 Gallons Outside a Building, Exceptions: 1. Storage or Use in the Fuel Tank of a Motor Vehicle, Aircraft, Motorboat, Mobile Power Plant, or Mobile Heating Plant, Unless Such Storage, in the Opinion of the Fire Official, Would Cause an Unsafe Condition. 2. Storage or Use of Paints, Oils, Varnishes, or Similar Flammable Mixtures When Such Liquids are Stored for Maintenance, Painting, or Similar Purposes for a Period of Not More Than 30 Days $85.00 $130.00 30 108.1.1 Combustible Liquids: - Class II or IIIA: Store, Handle, or Use in Excess of 25 Gallons in a Building or in Excess of 60 Gallons Outside a Building 
Exception: Fuel Oil Used in Connection with Oil-burning Equipment $85.00 $130.00 31 108.1.1 Flammable/Combustible Liquid Tank - Underground Storage Only $85.00 $130.00 32 108.1.1 Flammable/Combustible Liquid Tank - Underground Storage Utilizing Dispensing Equipment $85.00 $130.00 33 108.1.1 Flammable/Combustible Liquid Tank - Above ground Storage Only $85.00 $130.00 34 108.1.1 Flammable/Combustible Liquid Tank - Above ground Storage Utilizing Dispensing Equipment $85.00 $130.00 35 108.1.1 Flammable/Combustible Liquids: Bulk Storage Facility - in Excess of 100,000 Gallons $500.00 $130.00 36 108.1.1 Flammable/Combustible Liquid Tank - Installation, Above or Below ground Tank (90-Day Permit) $85.00 $130.00 37 108.1.1 Flammable/Combustible Liquid Tank - Alter or Relocate an Existing Tank (90-Day Permit) $85.00 $130.00 38 108.1.1 Flammable/Combustible Liquid Tank - Place Temporarily Out of Service $85.00 $130.00 39 108.1.1 Flammable/Combustible Liquid Tank - Underground Abandonment (90-Day Permit) $85.00 $130.00 40 108.1.1 Flammable/Combustible Liquid Tank - Underground Removal (Commercial - 90-Day Permit) $85.00 $130.00 41 108.1.1 Flammable/Combustible Liquid Tank - Underground Removal (Residential - 90-Day Permit) $85.00 $130.00 42 108.1.1 Flammable/Combustible Liquid Tank - Above ground Removal (Commercial - 90-Day Permit) $85.00 $130.00 43 108.1.1 Flammable/Combustible Liquid Tank - Install Product Lines/Dispensing Equipment(90 Day-Permit) $85.00 $130.00 44 108.1.1 Flammable/Combustible Liquids: Manufacture, Process, Blend or Refine $85.00 $130.00 45 108.1.1 Flammable/Combustible Liquid Tank: Change the Contents Stored to a Greater Hazard $85.00 $130.00 46 108.1.1 Floor Finishing or Surfacing Exceeding 350 Square Feet Using Class I or Class II Liquids (30-Day Permit) $85.00 n/a 47 108.1.1 Fruit- and Crop-Ripening Facility or Process Using Ethylene Gas $85.00 n/a 48 108.1.1 Fumigation or Thermal Insecticidal Fogging or Maintaining a Room, Vault or Chamber in Which a Toxic or Flammable Fumigant is Used (15-Day Permit) $85.00 n/a 49 108.1.1 Corrosive Liquids: Store, Transport On-Site, Dispense, Use, or Handle in Excess of 55 Gallons $85.00 n/a 50 108.1.1 Corrosive Solids: Store, Transport On-Site, Dispense, Use, or Handle in Excess of 1,000 Pounds $85.00 n/a 51 108.1.1 Flammable Solids: Store, Transport On-Site, Dispense, Use, or Handle in Excess of 100 Pounds $85.00 n/a 52 108.1.1 Highly Toxic Liquids: Store, Transport On-Site, Dispense, Use, or Handle Any Amount $85.00 n/a 53 108.1.1 Highly Toxic Solids: Store, Transport On-Site, Dispense, Use, or Handle Any Amount $85.00 n/a 54 108.1.1 Oxidizing Liquids, Class 4: Store, Transport On-Site, Dispense, Use, or Handle Any Amount $85.00 n/a 55 108.1.1 Oxidizing Liquids, Class 3: Store, Transport On-Site, Dispense, Use, or Handle in Excess of 1 Gallon $85.00 n/a 56 108.1.1 Oxidizing Liquids, Class 2: Store, Transport On-Site, Dispense, Use, or Handle in Excess of 10 Gallons $85.00 n/a 57 108.1.1 Oxidizing Liquids, Class 1: Store, Transport On-Site, Dispense, Use, or Handle in Excess of 55 Gallons $85.00 n/a 58 108.1.1 Oxidizing Solids, Class 4: Store, Transport On-Site, Dispense, Use, or Handle Any Amount $85.00 n/a 59 108.1.1 Oxidizing Solids, Class 3: Store, Transport On-Site, Dispense, Use, or Handle in Excess of 10 Pounds $85.00 n/a 60 108.1.1 Oxidizing Solids, Class 2: Store, Transport On-Site, Dispense, Use, or Handle in Excess of 100 Pounds $85.00 n/a 61 108.1.1 Oxidizing Solids, Class 1: Store, Transport On-Site, Dispense, Use, or Handle in Excess of 500 Pounds $85.00 n/a 62 108.1.1 Organic Peroxides, Liquid, Class I: Store, Transport On-Site, Dispense, Use, or Handle Any Amount $85.00 n/a 63 108.1.1 Organic Peroxides, Liquid, Class II: Store, Transport On-Site, Dispense, Use, or Handle Any Amount $85.00 n/a 64 108.1.1 Organic Peroxides, Liquid, Class III: Store, Transport On-Site, Dispense, Use, or Handle in Excess of 1+ Gallon $85.00 n/a 65 108.1.1 Organic Peroxides, Liquid, Class IV: Store, Transport On-Site, Dispense, Use, or Handle in Excess of 2+ Gallons $85.00 n/a 66 108.1.1 Organic Peroxides, Solid, Class I: Store, Transport On-Site, Dispense, Use, or Handle Any Amount $85.00 n/a 67 108.1.1 Organic Peroxides, Solid, Class II: Store, Transport On-Site, Dispense, Use, or Handle Any Amount $85.00 n/a 68 108.1.1 Organic Peroxides, Solid, Class III: Store, Transport On-Site, Dispense, Use, or Handle in Excess of 10 Pounds $85.00 n/a 69 108.1.1 Organic Peroxides, Solid, Class IV: Store, Transport On-Site, Dispense, Use, or Handle in Excess of 20+ Pounds $85.00 n/a 70 108.1.1 Pyrophoric Material, Liquid: Store, Transport On-Site, Dispense, Use, or Handle Any Amount $85.00 n/a 71 108.1.1 Pyrophoric Material, Solid: Store, Transport On-Site, Dispense, Use, or Handle Any Amount $85.00 n/a 72 108.1.1 Hazardous Production Facilities (HPM): Store, Handle, or Use Hazardous Production Materials $85.00 n/a 73 108.1.1 High Piled Storage: Use a Building or a Portion Thereof as a High-piled Storage Area Exceeding 500 Square Feet $85.00 n/a 74 108.1.1 Hot Work and Welding: Public Exhibitions and Demonstrations (Each Exhibitor/Demo. - 10-Day Permit) $85.00 n/a 75 108.1.1 Hot Work and Welding: Small Scale Hot Work $85.00 n/a 76 108.1.1 Hot Work and Welding: Fixed-Site Hot Work Equipment (Example: Welding Booth) $85.00 n/a 77 108.1.1 Hot Work and Welding: Cutting or Welding, All Locations $85.00 n/a 78 108.1.1 Hot Work and Welding: Open Flame Device Roofing Operation (Each Site/Location - 90-Day Permit) $85.00 n/a 79 108.1.1 Hot Work and Welding: Paint Removal With a Torch or Open-Flame (Each Site/Location - 30-Day permit) $85.00 n/a 80 108.1.1 Industrial Ovens $85.00 n/a 81 108.1.1 Lumber Yards and Woodworking Plants: Storage or Processing of Lumber Exceeding 100,000 Board Feet $85.00 n/a 82 108.1.1 Liquid- or Gas-Fueled Vehicles: Display Inside Any Building (Each Event - 6-Month Permit) $85.00 n/a 83 108.1.1 LP-Gas: Storage and Use Inside Any Structure, Exception: Individual Containers with a 500-Gallon Water Capacity or Less Serving R-3 Occupancies $85.00 $130.00 84 108.1.1 LP-Gas: Storage and Use Outside, Portable Installation, per Event - Any Amount (Other Than Cylinder Exchange/Refill) $85.00 $130.00 85 108.1.1 LP-Gas: Storage and Use Outside, Stationary Installation, per Year - Any Amount (Other Than Cylinder Exchange/Refill) $85.00 $130.00 86 108.1.1 LP-Gas: Dispensing and Cylinder Refill Location $85.00 $130.00 87 108.1.1 LP-Gas: Retail Cylinder Exchange Location $85.00 $130.00 88 108.1.1 Combustible Storage: Storage Inside Any Building or Upon Any Premises - in Excess of 2,500 Cubic Feet $85.00 n/a 89 108.1.1 Open Burning: Bonfire (10-Day Permit) $85.00 n/a 90 108.1.1 Open Burning: Silvicultural/Controlled Burning (90-Day Permit) $85.00 n/a 91 108.1.1 Open Flame and Candles: Public Meetings/Gatherings in A and E Use Groups (Each Event) $85.00 n/a 92 108.1.1 Open Flame and Candles: Restaurants and Drinking Establishments, Assembly and Dining Areas $85.00 n/a 93 108.1.1 Organic Coatings: Manufacturing Operation Producing More Than 1+ Gallon/Day $85.00 n/a 94 108.1.1 Place of Assembly/Education - Occupant Load 51-500 $85.00 Note a 95 108.1.1 Place of Assembly/Education - Occupant Load 501 or Greater $170.00 Note a 96 108.1.1 Pyrotechnics and Fireworks: Retail Sales of Permissible Fireworks - Any Amount (45-Day Permit) $500.00 n/a 97 108.1.1 Pyrotechnics and Fireworks: Wholesale of Permissible Fireworks - Any Amount (45-Day Permit) $500.00 n/a 98 108.1.1 Pyrotechnics and Fireworks: Outdoor Fireworks Display (Aerial/Proximate Audience) (One-Day Permit) $500.00 n/a 99 108.1.1 Refrigeration Equipment and Systems Having a Refrigerant Circuit Containing More Than 220 Pounds of Group A1 or 30 Pounds of any other Group Refrigerant $85.00 n/a 100 108.1.1 Repair Garages and Service Stations: Automotive Repair Garage Only $85.00 n/a 101 108.1.1 Repair Garages and Service Stations: Automotive Service Station Only $85.00 n/a 102 108.1.1 Repair Garages and Service Stations: Automotive Repair Garage and Service Station $170.00 n/a 103 108.1.1 Repair Garages and Service Stations: LP-Gas Motor-Vehicle Fuel-Dispensing $85.00 n/a 104 108.1.1 Repair Garages and Service Stations: Compressed Natural Gas Motor-Vehicle Fuel-Dispensing $85.00 n/a 105 108.1.1 Repair Garages and Service Stations: Hydrogen Motor Fuel Dispensing and Generation Station $85.00 n/a 106 108.1.1 Repair Garages and Service Stations: Marine and Watercraft Service Station $85.00 n/a 107 108.1.1 Repair Garages and Service Stations: Unattended Vehicle Service Station $85.00 n/a 108 108.1.1 Rooftop Heliports $85.00 n/a 109 108.1.1 Spraying or Dipping Operations: Flammable/Combustible Spray Finishing Operation $85.00 n/a 110 108.1.1 Spraying or Dipping Operations: Flammable/Combustible Dip-Tank Operation $85.00 n/a 111 108.1.1 Spraying or Dipping Operations: Application of Combustible Powders/Spray/Fluidized $85.00 n/a 112 108.1.1 Spraying or Dipping Operations: Dual-Component Coatings With Organic Peroxides $85.00 n/a 113 108.1.1 Swimming Pool Chemical Dispensing Operation $85.00 n/a Temporary Membrane Structures and Tents (6-Month Permit) n/a Exceptions: 1. Tents used Exclusively for Recreational Camping Purposes 114 108.1.1 2. Tents and Air-supported Structures that Cover an Area of 900 Square Feet or Less, Including all Connecting Areas or Spaces with a Common Means of Egress and with an Occupant Load of 50 or Less Persons $85.00 n/a 115 108.1.1 Tire Rebuilding Plants $85.00 n/a 116 108.1.1 Tire Storage: Establish, Conduct, or Maintain Storage of Scrap Tires and Tire Byproducts that Exceeds 2,500 Cubic Feet of Total Volume of Scrap Tires and for Indoor Storage of Tires and Tire Byproducts $85.00 n/a 117 108.1.1 Toxic Materials Liquids - Store, Transport On-Site, Dispense, Use, or Handle in Excess of 10 Gallons $85.00 n/a 118 108.1.1 Toxic Materials Solids - Store, Transport On-Site, Dispense, Use, or Handle in Excess of 100 Pounds $85.00 n/a 119 108.1.1 Unstable (Reactive) Materials: Liquids, Class 1 - Store, Transport On-Site, Dispense, Use, or Handle in Excess of 10 Gallons $85.00 n/a 120 108.1.1 Unstable (Reactive) Materials: Liquids, Class 2 - Store, Transport On-Site, Dispense, Use, or Handle in Excess of 5 Gallons $85.00 n/a 121 108.1.1 Unstable (Reactive) Materials: Liquids, Class 3 - Store, Transport On-Site, Dispense, Use, or Handle Any Amount $85.00 n/a 122 108.1.1 Unstable (Reactive) Materials: Liquids, Class 4 - Store, Transport On-Site, Dispense, Use, or Handle Any Amount $85.00 n/a 123 108.1.1 Unstable (Reactive) Materials: Solids, Class 1 - Store, Transport On-Site, Dispense, Use, or Handle in Excess of 100 Pounds $85.00 n/a 124 108.1.1 Unstable (Reactive) Materials: Solids, Class 2 - Store, Transport On-Site, Dispense, Use, or Handle in Excess of 50 Pounds $85.00 n/a 125 108.1.1 Unstable (Reactive) Materials: Solids, Class 3 - Store, Transport On-Site, Dispense, Use, or Handle Any Amount $85.00 n/a 126 108.1.1 Unstable (Reactive) Materials: Solids, Class 4 - Store, Transport On-Site, Dispense, Use, or Handle Any Amount $85.00 n/a 127 108.1.1 Water-reactive Materials: Liquids, Class 1 - Store, Transport On-Site, Dispense, Use, or Handle in Excess of 55 Gallons $85.00 n/a 128 108.1.1 Water-reactive Materials: Liquids, Class 2 - Store, Transport On-Site, Dispense, Use, or Handle in Excess of 5 Gallons $85.00 n/a 129 108.1.1 Water-reactive Materials: Liquids, Class 3 - Store, Transport On-Site, Dispense, Use, or Handle Any Amount $85.00 n/a 130 108.1.1 Water-reactive Materials: Solids, Class 1 - Store, Transport On-Site, Dispense, Use, or Handle in Excess of 500 Pounds $85.00 n/a 131 108.1.1 Water-reactive Materials: Solids, Class 2 - Store, Transport On-Site, Dispense, Use, or Handle in Excess of 50 Pounds $85.00 n/a 132 108.1.1 Water-reactive Materials: Solids, Class 3 - Store, Transport On-Site, Dispense, Use, or Handle Any Amount $85.00 n/a 133 108.1.1 Waste Handling: Wrecking Yard or Junk Yard $85.00 n/a 134 108.1.1 Waste Handling: Waste Material Handling Facility $85.00 n/a 135 108.1.1 Wood Products: Storage of Chips, Hogged Material, Lumber, or Plywood in Excess of 200 Cubic Feet $85.00 n/a Section 2 - Plan Review Fees 136 404. 3.1 Fire Safety and Evacuation Plan Review Note b $130.00 137 2301.4 Fire Safety and Evacuation Plan Review: High-Piled Combustible Storage Areas in Excess of 500 Square Feet Note b $130.00 138 2701.5.1 Hazard Communication: Hazardous Material Management Plan Review Note b $130.00 139 2701.6.3 Hazardous Material Facility Closure Plan Review Note b $130.00 140 901.2 Fire Protection Systems Review Note b $130.00 141 408.1.1 Occupant Load: Plan Review Note b $130.00 142 403. 2 Special Event-Public Safety Plan Review, Indoor or Outdoor Assemblages (over 50 persons) Note b $130.00 143 3801.3 Site and Installation Plan Review: LP-gas Cylinder Exchange Program n/a $130.00 144 408.11 Covered Mall Annual Lease Plan Review $500.00 n/a Section 3 - Inspection Fees 145 107.12 Home Day Care Fire Inspections (including follow-up inspection) $35.00 n/a 146 901.6.3.1 Inspections and re-inspections of buildings with any fire protection system, including sprinklers, standpipes, alarm systems and hoods $130.00 147 403.2 Special Events: Indoor or Outdoor Assemblages (over 50 persons) $130.00 148 109.5 Inspections Resulting from Noncompliance Note c $260.00 149 907.20.6 Faulty or Nuisance Fire Alarm Inspections, Follow-ups and Re-inspections $130.00 150 Technical Inspections (Not Otherwise Specified) $130.00  
(Ord. No. 1858, § 4), 4-25-2011) 
Secs. 15-48-15-70. - Reserved. 
Chapter 16 - FINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Financial powers of city, § 2.02; budgets, § 6.01 et seq.; borrowing, § 7.01 et seq.; financial administration, § 8.01 et seq. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; director of finance, § 2-185 et seq.; taxation, ch. 40; business, professional, occupation licenses, § 40-456 et seq. 
State Law reference- Security for public deposits act, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4000 et seq.; contracts and purchases, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4300 et seq.; investment pool act, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4600 et seq.; public debt, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4900 et seq.; interest on obligations of local government, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-5000 et seq.; taxes and assessments, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1104; borrowing money, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1105; management of financial affairs, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1106; budgets, audits, reports, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2500 et seq.; public finance act, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2600 et seq.; taxation, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the city shall begin on July 1 and end on June 30 of each year. 
(Code 1973, § 9-1; Code 1982, § 10-1) 
Charter reference- Fiscal year, § 6.01. 
State Law reference- Fiscal year, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2500. 
Sec. 16-2. - Payment of taxes and other fees by checks, credit cards, debit cards and electronic funds. 
(a)  The treasurer is hereby authorized, pursuant to the Code of Virginia, § 2.2-614.1, as amended, to accept payment of local taxes and other fees, penalties and interest by the use of any commercially acceptable means, including, but not limited to, checks, credit cards, debit cards and electronic funds transfer and may add to any amount due a sum, not to exceed the amount charged to the city for acceptance of any payment by a means that incurs a charge to the city or the amount negotiated and agreed to in a contract with the city, whichever is less. The treasurer is authorized to investigate credit card entities and determine those that are responsible, efficient and capable of cooperating with the city for the collection of local taxes and other fees, and to establish a list of credit cards so determined that may be accepted for payment of local taxes and other fees, penalties and interest. 
(b)  If any credit card transaction tendered for payment of any tax or other fee, penalty and interest due is not paid by the bank or credit card company, the taxpayer for whom such credit card transaction was tendered shall remain liable for the payment of the tax or other fee, penalty and interest, the same as if such credit card transaction had not been tendered. 
(c)  A penalty of $50.00 shall be imposed for the uttering, publishing or passing of any check, draft or order for payment of taxes or any other sums due the city, which is subsequently returned for insufficient funds or because there is no account or the account has been closed, or because such check, draft or order was returned because of a stop-payment order placed in bad faith on the check, draft or order by the drawer. This penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty provided by law, except the penalty imposed by the Code of Virginia, § 58.1-12 shall not apply. 
(d)  The city manager will provide to the treasurer a list of fees eligible to be paid by credit card. 
(Code 1982, § 1-17; Ord. No. 1494, 10-11-1994; Ord. No. 1961, 8-8-2016) 
State Law reference- Authority to accept payment by commercially acceptable means, service charge, bad check charge, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-614.1; payment of tax by bad check, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-106. 
Sec. 16-3. - Fines and costs. 
(a)  Any person liable for any local account, who fails to pay the amount due by the due date, shall incur a penalty thereon in the amount of $10.00 or ten percent of the amount due, whichever shall be greater. Such penalty shall be added to the amount of the account due from such person. No penalty shall be imposed for the failure to pay any account if such failure was not in any way the fault of the debtor. Interest at the rate of ten percent annually shall be collected on the principal and penalty of all such accounts, from the first day following the day such account is due. 
(b)  Any city department may enter into an agreement with the city treasurer for the collection of such accounts. 
(Ord. No. 1961, 8-8-2016) 
State Law reference- Authority to impose late fees and penalties on city debt, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-105. 
Sec. 16-4. - Application of payment. 
    The treasurer shall not be required to apply all payments to the most delinquent account and may use discretion in applying payments where the taxpayer has entered into a bona fide payment agreement with the treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 1961, 8-8-2016) 
State Law reference- Authority to give the treasurer discretion in applying payments, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3913. 
Secs. 16-5-16-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PURCHASES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Virginia Procurement Act, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4300 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 16-23. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Construction means building, altering, repairing, improving or demolishing any structure, building or highway, and any draining, dredging, excavation, grading or similar work upon real property. 
    Goods means all material, equipment, supplies, printing and automated data processing hardware and software. 
    Governing body means the city council. 
    Nonprofessional services means any services not specifically identified as professional services as defined in this section. 
    Professional services means work performed by an independent contractor within the scope of the practice of accounting, architecture, land surveying, landscape architecture, law, dentistry, medicine, optometry, pharmacy, actuarial services, or professional engineering. 
    Public body means any legislative, executive or judicial agency, office, department, authority, post, commission, committee, institution, board, or political subdivision created by law to exercise some sovereign power or to perform some governmental duty, and empowered by law to undertake the activities described in this article. 
    Services means any work performed by an independent contractor, except for construction, which does not consist primarily of acquisition of equipment or materials, or the rental of equipment, materials and supplies. 
(Code 1982, § 10-4; Ord. No. 1524, 9-26-1995) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Definitions, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4301. 
Sec. 16-24. - Application. 
    This article applies to all contracts for goods, services, insurance and construction entered into by this city. All public bodies in the city, as defined in section 16-23, that are funded in whole or in part by the city, except the school board, are required to comply with the provisions of this article and purchase goods, services, insurance and construction through the central purchasing system established under this article. When the procurement involves the expenditure of federal assistance or contract funds, the procurement shall be conducted in accordance with any applicable mandatory federal law and regulation which is not reflected in this article. 
(Code 1982, § 10-3; Ord. No. 1524, 9-26-1995) 
Sec. 16-25. - City council approval of certain contracts. 
    No contract for professional services that exceeds $60,000.00 or any other contract that exceeds $100,000.00 shall be awarded without city council approval. 
(Ord. No. 1798, § 10-10, 11-27-2006) 
Secs. 16-26-16-53. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PURCHASING AGENT 

Sec. 16-54. - Establishment and appointment. 
    The purchasing system shall operate under the direction and supervision of the purchasing agent who shall be appointed by the director of finance, subject to the direction of the city manager or the designee of such purchasing agent. 
(Code 1982, § 10-5; Ord. No. 1524, 9-26-1995) 
Sec. 16-55. - Responsibilities. 
(a)  Authority. The purchasing agent shall serve as the principal public purchasing official for this city and shall be responsible for the procurement of goods, services, insurance and construction in accordance with this article, as well as for the management of the disposal of surplus supplies and equipment. 
(b)  Duties. In accordance with this article, and subject to the supervision and direction of the city manager or the city manager's designee, the purchasing agent shall: 
(1)  Contract for all goods, services, insurance and construction needed by this city; 
(2)  Sell, trade or otherwise dispose of surplus goods belonging to the city; 
(3)  Establish and maintain programs for specification development, contract administration, inspection, and acceptance, in cooperation with the city agency or public body that has requested the goods, service, insurance or construction; 
(4)  Prepare and update standard specifications; 
(5)  Inspect or require the using agency to inspect all deliveries of goods, services, or construction purchased through the purchasing agent to ensure conformance with the contract specifications; 
(6)  Procure for the city the highest quality goods, services, insurance and construction at the lowest cost; 
(7)  Endeavor to obtain maximum feasible competition for all purchases and sales; 
(8)  Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions, and new products; 
(9)  Secure for the city the benefits of research done in the field of purchasing by other governmental jurisdictions, national societies, national trade associations, and private businesses and organizations; 
(10)  Prepare and adopt standard purchase definitions and forms; 
(11)  Prepare, adopt, and maintain a contract file containing descriptions of commodities, prices and discounts of goods and services available for purchase under term contracts established by the purchasing agent; 
(12)  Maintain a current file of sources of goods, services, insurance and construction to be known as a bidder list on which vendors can request to be included; 
(13)  Ensure that sufficient money has been appropriated to cover the cost of all purchases or contracts; and 
(14)  Perform other functions and duties as required by this article, the city Charter, or as the city manager or the designee of the city manager may assign. 
(Code 1982, § 10-6; Ord. No. 1524, 9-26-1995) 
Sec. 16-56. - Delegation. 
    With the written approval of the city manager or the designee of the city manager, the purchasing agent may delegate the authority to purchase certain supplies, services, or construction items to other city employees or public bodies, if such delegation is deemed necessary for the effective procurement of those items. 
(Code 1982, § 10-7; Ord. No. 1524, 9-26-1995) 
Sec. 16-57. - Revisory authority. 
    The purchasing agent shall have the authority to disapprove any purchases to the quantity or quality of the commodity requested, and shall have the authority to change specifications. Decisions under this section may be appealed to the city manager. 
(Code 1982, § 10-8; Ord. No. 1524, 9-26-1995) 
Sec. 16-58. - Rules and regulations. 
    The purchasing agent may prepare and maintain a purchasing manual containing detailed rules and regulations consistent with this division and the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia governing the operation of the city purchasing system. Publication of this purchasing manual requires approval by the city manager, as will all subsequent amendments and reissuance. 
(Code 1982, § 10-9; Ord. No. 1524, 9-26-1995) 
Secs. 16-59-16-89. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COOPERATIVE PROCUREMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Cooperative procurement, Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4304. 

Sec. 16-90. - Conditions for use. 
(a)  The city may enter into a cooperative agreement, including those under Code of Virginia, § 2.2-4304, for the purpose of combining requirements to increase efficiency or reduce administrative expenses. 
(b)  All cooperative contracts entered into or used by the city shall be based on general procurement principles contained in this article or otherwise allowed by law. 
(c)  The city may participate in or purchase goods and services through contracts awarded by other governmental or regional bodies, such as the council of governments, when it is determined by the purchasing agent that such use is in the best interest of the city and the contract is based on competitive principles. 
(Code 1982, § 10-11; Ord. No. 1524, 9-26-1995; Ord. No. 1798, § 10-11, 11-27-2006) 
Secs. 16-91-16-108. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MISCELLANEOUS FEES AND FUNDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 16-109-16-129. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COURTHOUSE MAINTENANCE AND SECURITY FUNDS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Assessment for courthouse maintenance, Code of Virginia, § 17.1-281; assessment for courthouse security personnel, Code of Virginia, § 53.1-120. 

Sec. 16-130. - Courthouse maintenance fund. 
(a)  The city clerk of the General District Court shall collect, as part of the fees taxed as costs in each civil action, criminal or traffic case and in addition to any other costs, a sum of $2.00. 
(b)  The collected fees shall be transferred to the treasurer, who shall record them as revenue collected under this section. 
(c)  The city council or its designee may use the revenue collected under this section for any purpose allowed by state law relating to the courthouse, including but not limited to the construction, renovation, or maintenance of the courthouse, jail, or any courthouse-related facility and the payment of increases in the cost of heating, cooling, and electricity. 
(Code 1982, § 1-15(a); Ord. No. 1326, 8-27-1990; Ord. No. 1411, 7-27-1992; Ord. No. 1723, 7-22-2002; Ord. No. 1808, 6-25-2007) 
State Law reference- Assessment for courthouse maintenance, Code of Virginia, § 17.1-281. 
Sec. 16-131. - Courthouse security fee and jail processing fee. 
(a)  The city clerk of the General District Court shall collect a fee of $10.00 as part of the cost of each criminal or traffic case in the district court in which the defendant is convicted of a violation of any statute or ordinance. The collected fees shall be remitted to the treasurer, which fees shall be subject to appropriation by the city council for funding of courthouse security. 
(b)  The city clerk of the General District Court shall collect and remit to the treasurer of the city a processing fee of $25.00 on any individual admitted to jail following conviction of an offense that occurred within the city, which fee shall be used by the city sheriff's office to defray the cost of processing arrested persons. 
(Code 1982, § 1-15(b); Ord. No. 1326, 8-27-1990; Ord. No. 1411, 7-27-1992; Ord. No. 1723, 7-22-2002; Ord. No. 1808, 6-25-2007) 
State Law reference- Assessment for courthouse security personnel, Code of Virginia, § 53.1-120. 
Secs. 16-132-16-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RESERVE FUND FOR PERMANENT PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 16-161. - Established. 
    Pursuant to the Charter, § 6.21, there is hereby established a reserve fund for permanent public improvements into which the council may, from time to time, appropriate any portion of the general fund cash surplus not otherwise appropriated at the close of any fiscal year, and into which there shall be assigned that portion of the ad valorem tax on real estate and tangible personal property that shall be specified for permanent public improvements, and to which may be assigned such other funds as may be by law deemed proper. 
(Code 1973, § 9-2; Code 1982, § 10-2) 
Charter reference- Provision as to reserves for public improvements, § 6.21. 
Chapter 18 - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1856, adopted Apr. 11, 2011, amended ch. 18 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 18, entitled "Fire Prevention", § 18-1, pertained to the adoption and enforcement of the fire code. 
Charter reference- Power to make regulations for the preservation of the safety, health, peace, good order, comfort, convenience, morals and welfare of the city and its inhabitants, § 2.04. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings, ch. 6; condominiums, § 6-48 et seq.; fire prevention provisions relative to private schools, special schools and daycare facilities, § 8-687; health and sanitation, ch. 20; authority of fire department officials to direct traffic, § 26-12; carelessly damaging property by fire, § 28-68; false fire alarms, § 28-153; interference with fire department equipment, § 28-154; police, ch. 32; vegetation, ch. 44. 
State Law reference- Fire protection, Code of Virginia, § 27-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - CITY FIRE MARSHAL 

Sec. 18-1. - City fire marshal-Creation of office; appointments; powers and duties; compensation; term. 
    The office of city fire marshal is hereby established. The council may, upon recommendation of the city manager, appoint the city fire marshal, and assistant fire marshal(s). The term "fire marshal" as used in this chapter may include the local fire official and local arson investigator when appointed pursuant to this section. The fire marshal shall have such powers and duties as are prescribed by this chapter and as authorized by the Code of Virginia. The city fire marshal shall receive such annual salary as the city manager may allow. The city fire marshal shall not be appointed for a definite tenure, but shall continue contingent upon and subject to the personnel rules of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1856, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 18-2. - Oaths of office. 
    The city fire marshal and the assistant city fire marshal(s), before entering upon their duties, shall, respectively, take an oath, before any officer authorized to administer oaths, to faithfully discharge the duties of their respective offices. 
(Ord. No. 1856, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 18-3. - Notification of fire department. 
    In any building, structure or premises subject to inspection under any provision of this chapter, when a fire or evidence of there having been a fire is discovered, even though it has apparently been extinguished, it shall be immediately reported to the local emergency communications center - 911. This shall be the duty of the owner, manager, or person in control (as defined herein) of such building, structure or premises at the time of discovery. This requirement shall not be construed to forbid or otherwise restrict the owner, manager, or person in control of said building, structure or premises from using all diligence necessary to extinguish such fire prior to the arrival of the fire department. 
(Ord. No. 1856, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 18-4. - Investigation of fires. 
    The city fire marshal shall investigate, or cause to be investigated, every fire or explosion occurring within the city that is of a suspicious nature or which involves the loss of life, causes injury to persons or causes destruction of or damage to property. Such investigation shall be made at the time of the fire or at a subsequent time, depending on the nature and circumstances of the fire. The city fire marshal shall also investigate, or cause to be investigated, the possession or manufacture of explosive devices, substances, and fire bombs within the city, attempts or threats to commit such offenses, and false alarms relating to such offenses or to fires or explosions. The city fire marshal shall take charge immediately of the physical evidence and, in order to preserve any physical evidence relating to the cause or origin of such fire or explosion, take means to prevent access by any person or persons to such building, structure or premises until such evidence has been properly processed. The City of Falls Church Police Department, upon request of the city fire marshal, shall assist in the investigation as needed. The results of any such investigation shall be forwarded by the fire marshal to the commonwealth's attorney for proper disposition. 
(Ord. No. 1856, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 18-5. - Powers of arrest. 
(a)  The city fire marshal and the assistant city fire marshal(s), permitted under Code of Virginia, tit. 27 (1950, as amended), shall have the same police powers as a member of the City of Falls Church Police Department in the investigation and prosecution of all offenses involving fires, arson, fire bombings, bombings, attempts or threats to commit such offenses, false alarms relating to such offenses, possession and manufacture of explosive devices, substances, and fire bombs, the storage, use and transportation of hazardous materials and hazardous waste, environmental crimes, and any other offenses involving fire or fire safety or the calling, causing to dispatch, or summonsing of fire or rescue equipment without just cause, in violation of the Code of Virginia (1950, as amended) or the Code of the City of Falls Church, and other criminal or civil offenses arising out of, or incidental to the investigation of the enumerated offenses. 
(b)  The county fire marshal, assistant fire marshal(s) and authorized deputy fire marshal(s) or designee(s) shall have the authority to exercise all those powers described in Code of Virginia, §§ 27-34.2 and 27-34.2:1 (1950, as amended). 
(c)  The police powers granted in this section shall not be exercised by any fire marshal until such person has met the requirements of Code of Virginia, §§ 27-34.2 and 27-34.2:1 (1950, as amended) and has been designated by the city fire marshal to exercise such powers. 
(Ord. No. 1856, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 18-6. - Summoning or dispatching the city fire marshal. 
    The fire department officer-in-charge of any fire or explosion within the City of Falls Church shall immediately summon or cause to be dispatched the city fire marshal to the scene to investigate the circumstances involved. 
(Ord. No. 1856, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 18-7. - Effect of repeal of chapter; revival. 
    Neither the adoption of this chapter, nor the repeal hereby of the prior fire codes or ordinances shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of this chapter, which violations were committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any permit, fees or penalty at the effective date due and unpaid under such ordinance, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such code relating to the collection of any such permit, fees or penalty or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance, and all rights and obligations thereof appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. Any repeal of the fire prevention code shall not be construed as reviving such former ordinance, clause or provision, unless expressly provided therein. 
(Ord. No. 1856, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 18-8. - Penalty and continuing violation. 
(a)  Any person, owner, firm, entity or corporation who violates any sections of this chapter, fails to comply with any provisions of the City of Falls Church Fire Prevention Code or of the Virginia State-wide Fire Prevention Code, or violates or fails to comply with any order made thereunder, or who fails to comply with such an order within the time fixed therein, shall separately, for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a violation of this chapter and upon conviction, be punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor in accordance with Virginia law, including by imprisonment for not more than 12 months and/or a fine of not more than $2,500.00. Each day that a violation continues after service of notice, as provided for in the Virginia State-wide Fire Prevention Code, shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)  The imposition of the criminal penalties herein prescribed, shall not preclude the city from enforcing any administrative remedies set forth elsewhere in this chapter or the Code of the City of Falls Church, Virginia, as amended or preclude the city from instituting appropriate civil action, including but not limited to injunction, to restrain, correct or otherwise abate a violation of this chapter. The suspension or revocation of any license, permit, certificate or other privilege conferred by the city shall not be regarded as a penalty. 
(Ord. No. 1856, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 18-9. - Fines and costs. 
    The city fire marshal shall recover or impose fees and penalties for fire department response to the location of a false, faulty or nuisance alarm. As used herein, the term "false alarm" also means a faulty or nuisance alarm. 
(Ord. No. 1856, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 18-10. - Authority to adopt, set, and modify fees by city council. 
    The city manager, in consultation with the city fire marshal, shall recommend and the city council shall adopt a schedule of fees to be paid for each application, permit, inspection/re-inspection, testing and other specified acts required by this chapter. Any fee authorized or referenced herein, other than fees for false alarm response, shall be established in this manner. 
(Ord. No. 1856, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 18-11. - Unlawful or prohibited acts include causing, permitting, concealing. 
    Whenever in this chapter any act or omission is made unlawful or prohibited, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission. 
(Ord. No. 1856, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 18-12. - Damage or injury to fire department vehicles, equipment or personnel. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, deface, attempt, or conspire to damage or deface any fire department vehicle or equipment at anytime, or to injure, or attempt or conspire to injure any fire department personnel while such personnel are in performance of their departmental duties. 
(Ord. No. 1856, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 18-13. - Unlawful boarding or tampering with fire department vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, without proper authorization from the officer in charge of the vehicle, to attempt or to cling to, attach oneself to, climb upon or into, board or swing upon any fire department vehicle whether such vehicle is in motion or at rest, or to sound any warning device thereon, or to manipulate, tamper with, remove or destroy any lever, valve, switch, starting device, brake, pump or any equipment, protective clothing, tool or any part of such fire department vehicle and/or property. 
(Ord. No. 1856, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 18-14. - Impersonation and solicitation by use of the City of Falls Church Fire Marshal name. 
    It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to use a badge, uniform, or any other credentials so as to gain access to any building, marine vessel, vehicle or premises or to otherwise falsely identify himself as the fire marshal, code official, fire official, or fire code official or his/her designated representative. The use of the name of the City of Falls Church Fire Marshal for any purpose of solicitation or to imply that any solicited funds will be used for the City of Falls Church is prohibited and shall be subject to the penalties of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1856, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 18-15. - Unlawful to cross fire line. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cross or to remain within designated fire lines or barricades, which have been established to prevent public access to the scene of fires, wrecks, explosions, crimes and/or emergency situations where life, limb or property may be endangered. 
(Ord. No. 1856, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 18-16. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 

Sec. 18-17. - City of Falls Church Fire Prevention Code. 
    The regulations set forth herein shall be known as the City of Falls Church Fire Prevention Code, and shall be herein referred to as such or as this code [chapter]. 
(Ord. No. 1856, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 18-18. - Enforcement of the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code and the City of Falls Church Fire Prevention Code. 
    The City of Falls Church shall enforce the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code promulgated by the Board of Housing and Community Development of the Commonwealth of Virginia pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 27-98. The provisions of the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code and the additional regulations to this code adopted by the city shall be enforced by the city fire marshal, and, under the authority of the city fire marshal, the assistant fire marshal(s). The city fire marshal and assistant fire marshals shall have all of the powers of the local fire official set forth in Code of Virginia, tit. 27, and all of the powers of the fire official and the enforcing agency set forth in the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code and the additional regulations to this code adopted by the city. In the absence of the city fire marshal, assistants, and/or mutual aide by another jurisdiction, concurrent authority is granted to the Fire Marshal of Arlington County under Code of Virginia, § 27-36 and is appointed with the powers and duties of an assistant fire marshal to investigate fires and to enforce the City of Falls Church Fire Prevention Code. 
(Ord. No. 1856, 4-11-2011) 
Sec. 18-19. - Incorporation amendments, additions and deletions to the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code as City of Falls Church Fire Prevention Code. 
(a)  The City of Falls Church shall enforce the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code promulgated by the Board of Housing and Community Development of the Commonwealth of Virginia pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 27-98 (1950, as amended). All future editions of the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code as promulgated by the Virginia Board of Housing and Community Development are hereby automatically adopted and incorporated into this Code. 
(b)  The 2009 edition of the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code, referred to herein as such or as "SFPC" is hereby amended and changed pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 27-97 in the following respects: 
SFPC.103.1.2. Appendices. The following revisions are made to this section. IFC Appendices A shall be deleted and replaced with Appendix A, Fire Watch. The following appendices are hereby incorporated herein as fully enforceable provisions of this code and relabeled as follows: 
Appendix A - Requirements For a Fire Watch 
Appendix B - Flow Requirements for Buildings ( IFC Appendix B) 
Appendix C - Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution (IFC Appendix C) 
Appendix D - Fire Apparatus Access Roads (IFC Appendix D) 
Appendix E - Hazard Categories (IFC Appendix E) 
Appendix F - Hazard Ranking (IFC Appendix F) 
Appendix G - Cryogenic Fluids (IFC Appendix G) 
SFPC-106.3.2. Inspection by others. Add the following 106.3.2. 
The City Manager may designate such other persons through inter-jurisdictional agreements, to make fire safety inspections and/or surveys. Such persons shall use the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code and this code as the basis for such inspections. 
SFPC-106. Duties and powers of the fire official. After 106.7, add the following 106.8, 106.9, 106.9.1, 106.9.2, 106.9.3. 
SFPC-106.8. Cost recovery. Add Subsection as follows: 106.8 
Fees will be charged and collected from the proper individual(s) or entities by the City of Falls Church in order to defray the cost of code enforcement and appeals under the SFPC. The fees will be assessed for permits in Sections 107.2 and 108. In addition, fees shall be assessed for conducting inspections and reviewing third party fire protection systems test results, monitoring the removal of hazardous materials and storage containers, for responding to and/or inspecting false, faulty, or nuisance alarms, and other fire prevention services that provide safety against conditions hazardous to life or property as well as cost recovery from the owner or person in control for impound, towing, recovery and/or disposal as appropriate. All service fees established by the City Fire Marshal shall be first submitted to the City Council for approval. An amendment to this Ordinance is not required to change any fee, cost recovery, or permit. 
SFPC-106.9. Notification. Add Subsection as follows: 106.9 
The City Fire Marshal shall be notified of all incidents involving fire, explosion/s, misfires, and/or spills, leaks, discharges, or other releases of materials as described in SFPC Chapter 27. 
SFPC-106.9.1. Responsibility and Reports. Add Subsection as follows: 106.9.1 
It shall be the responsibility of the Fire Department officer-in-charge, or his/her designee, to file with their Fire Chief, in such form as he/she shall prescribe, a report of every fire, explosion, or incident to which fire department apparatus or equipment responds into the City of Falls Church. These reports shall be provided to the City Fire Marshal upon request. 
SFPC-106.9.2. Summonsing or dispatching the Fire Marshal. Add Subsection as follows: 106.9.2 
The fire department officer-in-charge of any fire or explosion within the City of Falls Church shall immediately summon or cause to be dispatched the City Fire Marshal to the scene to investigate the circumstances involved where such circumstances require investigation. 
SFPC-106.9.3. Notification of fire department. In any building, structure, or premises subject to inspection under any provision of this code, when a fire or evidence of there having been a fire is discovered, even though it has apparently been extinguished, it shall be immediately reported to the City of Falls Church Emergency Communications Center. This shall be the duty of the owner, manager, or person in control (as defined herein) of such building, structure, or premises at the time of discovery. This requirement shall not be construed to forbid or otherwise restrict the owner, manager, or person in control of said building, structure, or premises from using all diligence necessary to extinguish such fire prior to the arrival of the Fire Department. 
SFPC-107.2.1. Permit classes. Add Subsection as follows: 107.2.1. 
Permits classes required by this code or by the SFPC shall be set forth in Table 107.2. No permit required by this code shall be valid until the prescribed fee, as approved from time to time by the City Council of the City of Falls Church, Virginia, has been paid to the Treasurer, of City of Falls Church, Virginia. 
Table 107.2. Fire Prevention Code Permit Requirement. Refer to City of Falls Church Code, Chapter 15, Article IV. Fees for each of the categories listed therein shall be established pursuant to Sec. 18-10 of the City code. 
SFPC-107.4.1 Duration of permit. Add Subsection as follows: 107.4.1 
SFPC-107.4.1 Duration of permit. Duration of permit. Permits shall remain in effect for 12 months from the date issued unless otherwise specified by Table 107.2 or unless suspended or revoked in accordance with the code. 
SFPC-108.3.8. Certificate of Occupancy. Add Subsection as follows: 108.3.8 
SFPC-108.3.8. Certificate of Occupancy. An operational permit shall be contingent on a valid certificate of occupancy and/or use permit issued by the City of Falls Church Building Official and/or the Zoning Administrator. 
SFPC-108.4. (6) Revocation. Delete and substitute as follows: 
SFPC-108.4. (6) Revocation. 6. The permitee failed, refused or neglected to comply with orders or notices duly served in accordance with the provisions of this code or any other code or City ordinance within the time provided herein. 
SFPC-108.4. Revocation. Add to the end of the Subsection as follows: 
SFPC-108.4. Revocation. 8. The certificate of occupancy and/or use permit has been revoked or suspended. 9. The building has been deemed unsafe, uninhabitable, or presents a hazardous condition to occupants. 
SFPC - 109. Inspection. Add the following 109.4, 109.5. 
SFPC - 109.4. Approvals. Add Subsection as follows: 109.4. 
Approvals made as the result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval or ratification of a violation of the provisions of this code or of any other City or state ordinances, laws, or regulations. Inspections or permits by any other entity or department presuming to give authority to violate, modify, or cancel provisions of this code shall not be valid and are void. Any modification to this code must be by written variance or modification issued by the City Fire Marshal. 
SFPC-109.5. Follow-up inspection/s from noncompliance. Add Subsection as follows: 109.5. 
Where follow-up inspections are required as a result of noncompliance with this Code, fees shall be assessed as listed under Table 107.2 and paid in full. 
SFPC-109.6 Inspections performed outside business hours. Add Subsection as follows: 109.6. 
Inspections performed outside business hours. Inspections may be performed outside business hours at the sole discretion of the fire official. Fees for these inspections shall be assessed at twice the rate listed under Table 107.2. Fees shall be assessed in 30 minute increments. 
SFPC-110.2.1. Maintenance; Responsibility. Add Subsection as follows: 110.2.1. 
A person, firm, owner, person in control (as defined herein) or corporation in charge of or responsible for any building, structure, premises, vehicle, device, other property, substance, material, gas, liquid, chemical, or condition, place, material, or substance regulated either by this code or by an ordinance under the Fire Marshal's jurisdiction shall be responsible for compliance with all such code and ordinance provisions and regulations relating thereto. 
SFPC-110.5.1. Evacuation; Imminent threat to human health or safety or to property. Add Subsection as follows: 110.5.1. 
If the fire official determines, in his/her professional judgment, that a violation/s creates an imminent threat to human health or safety or to property, the fire official may cause to restrain, correct, or abate such violation and institute appropriate legal proceeding to collect the full cost of such response from the owner, the tenant, or other person in control (as defined herein) of the premises. 
SFPC-112.1. Local Board of Fire Prevention Code Appeals (BFPCA). Delete and substitute as follows: 

SFPC-112.1. Local Board of Fire Prevention Code Appeals (BFPCA). Any person or entity cited for violation, when aggrieved by a decision or interpretation by the Fire Marshal made under the provisions of either the City of Falls Church Fire Prevention Code or the Virginia Statewide Fire Prevention Code, may appeal to the local board of appeals upon the grounds and in the manner set forth in the SFPC. The City of Falls Church Local Board of Building Code Appeals (BBCA) will serve under this provision and be established as the Local Board of Building and Fire Prevention Code Appeals (BBFPCA). An appeal case decided by the Local Board shall be final unless appealed to the State Building Code Technical Review Board (TRB). 
SFPC-301.2. Permits. Delete and substitute as follows. 
Permits shall be required as set forth in Section 107.2 for the activities or uses regulated by Sections 303.10, 307.2, 308.2, and 315. 
SFPC-303.10. Permit required. Add the following 303.10 
SFPC-303.10. Permit required. Prior to the use of an asphalt (tar) kettle to install or repair a portion of a structure, a permit shall be secured from the code official. A permit shall be obtained from the fire code official in accordance with Section 107.2 prior to the commencement of work. 
SFPC-307.1. General. Add the following 307.1.2. 
SFPC-307.1.2. Burning of leaves and yard waste. The open burning of leaves and yard waste is prohibited. 
SFPC-307.2. Permit required. This section and 307.2.1 are incorporated in full with the following revision. 
SFPC-307.2. Permit required. A permit is required for bonfires or other controlled burning approved by the code official. This permit requirement does not apply to recreational fires used solely for the cooking of food for human consumption. A permit shall be obtained from the fire code official in accordance with Section 107.2 prior to kindling a fire for recognized silvicultural, range or wildlife management practices, prevention or control of disease or pests, or a bonfire. Application for such approval shall only be made by, and permits issued to, the owner of the land upon which the fire is to be kindled. 
SFPC-307.4.2. Recreational fires. Add the following 307.4.2.1. 
SFPC-307.4.2.1. Allowable fuels. Only seasoned dry firewood or similar clean burning materials shall be permitted as fuel for outdoor warming fires, and recreational fires. Land clearing waste, leaves, yard waste, rubbish, or refuse shall not be used as fuel. 
SFPC-307.5. Attendance. Add the following 307.5.1. 
SFPC-307.5.1. Endangering other persons or property. No person shall kindle, authorize to be kindled or maintain any permitted fire in such a manner that could endanger the person or property of another. 
SFPC-307. Open burning, recreational fires and outdoor warming fires. After 307.5, add the following 307.6. 
SFPC-307.6. Prohibited conduct. Any person who carelessly or negligently sets fire to, burns, or causes to be burned any property, either real or personal, whether the property of himself or of another, shall be subject to the penalties of this code. 
SFPC-308.1.4. Open-flame cooking devices. Delete and substitute as follows. 
SFPC-308.1.4. Open-flame cooking devices. Charcoal burners and other open-flame cooking devices shall not be operated on combustible balconies, rooftops, decks of any building or within fifteen (15) feet of combustible construction. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Detached one- and two-family dwellings. 
2.  Where balconies and decks are protected by an automatic sprinkler system. 
3.  LP-gas cooking devices having LP-gas container with a water capacity not greater than 2 1/2 pounds [nominal 1 pound (0.454kg) LP-gas capacity]. 
SFPC-308.1.4.1. Open-flame cooking devices. Add the following 308.1.4.1. 
SFPC-308.1.4.1Notification of tenants. The person in control or management agent of multi-family residential occupancies which have balconies, patios, balconies, terraces, and/ or decks shall notify their tenants in writing of the prohibitions outlined in Section 308.1.4 this code when the tenant or occupant initially occupies the building, renews a lease, and periodically thereafter as may be necessary to ensure compliance. 
SFPC-316.3.1 Obstacles. Add the following 316.3.1. 
SFPC-316.3.1 Obstacles. No accumulation or concentration of materials or objects shall be placed and/or located inside a structure, dwelling or unit in such a manner or circumstance that, in the professional opinion of the fire official, an obstacle or hindrance to fire and emergency personnel or to fire fighting and/or EMS operations is created. 
SFPC-401. General. After 401.8 add the following 401.9 
SFPC-401.9. Posting of signage and instructions. The owner, lessee, or management agent of buildings shall post signs where, in the professional judgment of the fire official, such signs are deemed to be effective in minimizing the danger to persons and property in case of fire and fostering to the effective response of emergency personnel. 
SFPC-402.1 Definition. Add the following words, terms, and meanings. 
HIGH-RISE - Buildings with one (1) or more occupied floor/s located seventy-five (75) feet or more above the lowest level of fire department access. 
SPECIAL EVENT - An event in the community that is focused on a specific purpose such as a street fair, celebration, grand opening, or other significant occasion. 
SFPC-403.1.2. Permit required. Add the following 403.1.2 
SFPC-403.1.2. Permit required. A permit shall be required for all events, both indoor and outdoor, that in the professional judgment of the code official requires inspection by the Fire Marshal to ensure that all fire and life safety concerns are met. A permit shall be obtained from the fire code official in accordance with Section 107.2 prior to the event. 
SFPC-501.2. Permits. Delete and substitute as follows. 
SFPC-501.2. Permits. A permit shall be required as set forth in Sections 107.2 and 108. 
SFPC-503.2.1. Dimensions. Delete and substitute as follows. 
SFPC-503.2.1. Dimensions. Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed width of not less than 20 feet (6096 mm), exclusive of shoulders, except for approved gates in accordance with Section 503.6, and an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 15 feet. 
SFPC-503.3.1 Marking Specifications. Add the following 503.3.1. 
SFPC-503.3.1 Marking Specifications. The property owner or designee shall supply and install signs and other required markings to delineate fire lanes as directed by the code official. These signs and markings shall be installed and maintained by the owner in a manner approved by the code official. 
Fire lanes shall conform to the following specifications: 
1.  Approved fire lane signs must meet the following specifications: 
(a)  Metal construction, dimensions twelve (12) inches wide by fifteen (18) inches high. 
(b)  Red letters on a reflective white background with three-eighths (3/8) inch red trim strip around the entire outer edge of the sign. 
(c)  Wording and lettering size as follows, spacing between words to be uniform: 
NO PARKING [two (2) inches, capitalized] OR [one (1) inch, capitalized] STANDING [two (2) inches, capitalized] "FIRE LANE" [two and a half (2 1/2) inches, capitalized] ? ? [arrows as appropriate in one (1) inch thick graphic depiction]  
(d)  Other signs or markings as approved by the fire official. 
2.  Signs shall be posted at intervals and at a height above the finished grade as directed by the fire official. 
3.  Curbing shall be painted and maintained as solid yellow within the limits of the fire lane. 
4.  Signs and markings shall be maintained in accordance with Section 503.3. 
SFPC-503.3.2. Location. Add the following 503.3.2. 
SFPC-503.3.2. Location. Signs or markings shall be placed as follows: 
1.  Where fire lanes run through parking areas where there is no adjacent curbing and posting of an approved metal sign is not practical, "NO PARKING FIRE LANE" may be required to be painted on the pavement in letters at least two (2) feet high. 
2.  Signs shall be posted at intervals of seventy-five (75) feet with the bottom of the sign no less than seven (7) feet from the ground unless otherwise directed by the code official. The signs shall be installed so that the front of the sign is at an angle of thirty (30) to forty-five (45) degrees to the curb, facing toward the direction from which traffic would normally be approaching. 
3.  All curbs or paved spaces designated as fire lanes shall be indicated by yellow (highway grade) paint as approved by the fire code official. In areas without curbing, a 6 inch wide yellow stripe shall be applied to the edge of the pavement. The property owner or designee shall repaint whenever the paint begins to fade or when directed by the fire code official. 
SFPC-503.6. Security Gates. Delete and substitute first sentence only. 
SFPC-503.6. Security Gates. The installation of security gates across a fire apparatus access road shall be approved by the fire code official. 
SFPC-503.7.1. Existing signs. Add the following 503.7.1. 
SFPC-503.7.1. Existing signs. It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure, tamper with, remove, destroy or impair the usefulness of any posted fire lane sign installed under the provisions of this code without the permission of the fire official. 
SFPC-504.2.1. Labeling of Required Fire Exits. Add the following 504.2.1. 
SFPC-504.2.1. Labeling of Required Fire Exits. All exterior fire exits which, in the opinion of the fire official, are subject to blocking from the exterior shall be labeled with (4) inch letters and contrasting background "FIRE EXIT - DO NOT BLOCK." In situations in which the exit serves a specific identified stairway, the stairway shall also be identified with labeling on the associated exterior door. 
SFPC-505.1. Address numbers. Delete and substitute as follows. 
SFPC-505.1. Address numbers. Every owner of a dwelling unit or building shall display the City assigned street address identification on each front entrance to the dwelling unit or building. These numbers shall be in Arabic numerals or Roman alphabet letters. Numbers or letters shall be a minimum of four (4) inches (102 mm) high with a minimum stroke with of 0.5 inches mm). The assigned street address identification shall be displayed in a manner so as to be visible and distinguishable from the curb line or pavement edge of the opposite side of the street on which the dwelling unit or building is located. If a dwelling unit or building is located on a parcel of land whose street frontage is at the end of a street such that there is no opposite side of the street, the street address identification number shall be clearly visible and distinguishable from a distance of thirty (30) feet into the street from the curb line or pavement edge of the street adjacent to the property line on which the dwelling unit or building is situated. In the event the location of the dwelling unit or building or other factors preclude compliance with the above requirements, an additional address identification number shall be displayed on, or in the vicinity of, the dwelling unit or building in such a manner as to be visible and distinguishable as provided above. Every exterior rear and side door of a structure containing (2) or more occupancies, such as a strip shopping center, shall have same address requirements as the front of the structure. Street address identification shall be maintained in a clean and plainly legible condition at all times and replaced or repaired when necessary to ensure clear visibility. Vegetation or ornamentation shall not obscure the street address identification. 
SFPC-506.1. Where required. Add the following sentence. 
SFPC-506.1. Where required. ...New installations of key boxes shall be with an attached hinged lid only. Secondary locations may be required by the fire official based upon the size of the structure and response needs. 
SFPC-506.1.2. Key Box Content Requirements. Add the following 506.1.2. 
SFPC-506.1.2. Key Box Content Requirements. In buildings with fire command centers, the person in control shall provide fifteen (15) sets of common keys, which shall be located in a key box in the fire control room. The keys are required for access to building services and systems regulated by Section 601 of this code; and to all storage, trash, and mechanical, electrical rooms, roof access doors, and doors to other secured areas. In all other buildings without fire command centers, the person in control shall provide up to eight (8) sets of keys to be located in a key box. The eight sets of keys, which shall be placed in an interior location of the building as approved by the fire official. Individual keys shall be clearly labeled as to function and each set of keys shall be individually tagged in a manner approved by the fire official. The number of sets of keys will be determined by the fire official. 
SFPC-508.2. Procedure Manual and Contact List. Add the following 508.2. 
SFPC-508.2. Procedure Manual and Contact List. All buildings equipped with a fire command center shall contain an Operations Procedure Manual. The contents of the manual shall be approved by the fire official. The manual shall be placed in the fire command center in a manner and location approved by the fire official. The owner or person in control shall maintain the manual and update it whenever necessary. This includes an Emergency Contact List of persons responsible to maintain systems on a 24/7 basis. 
SFPC-601.2. Permits. Delete and substitute as follows. 
SFPC-601.2. Permits. Permits shall be obtained for refrigeration systems, battery systems, and kitchen hood as set forth in Section 107.2. 
SFPC-901.3. Permits. Delete and substitute as follows. 
SFPC-901.3. Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in Sections 107.2 and 108. 
SFPC-901.6. Inspection, testing, maintenance. Add the following 901.6.2, 901.6.3, 901.6.3.1, 901.6.4 
SFPC-901.6.2. Records. This section is incorporated in full with the following revision. Add the following sentence at the beginning of the section: 
SFPC-901.6.2. Records. A complete written record of each required test of any fire protection system shall be forwarded to the code official within thirty (30) calendar days of completion of said test." Records of all system inspections, tests and maintenance required by the referenced standards shall be maintained on the premises for a minimum of three (3) years and shall be copied to the fire code official upon request. * * * Subsection 901.6.2.1 is retained and incorporated in full without revision. 
SFPC-901.6.3. Periodic retests. Periodic inspections and tests of all fire protection systems shall be tested in accordance with the respective NFPA standards and other codes as required under this Chapter. The test may be witnessed by the fire official. The fire official may collect fees from the building owner or tenant for the witnessing of tests required under this section. 
SFPC-901.6.3.1. Testing and inspection/reinspection fees. Fees for witnessing the testing and for inspection/reinspection of existing fire protection equipment and systems shall be assessed. Fees shall be based on the hours reserved by the Fire Marshal to perform the inspection/reinspection, witnessing third party tests and/or reviewing third party test results. The Fire Marshal must be notified of a cancellation of a scheduled inspection/reinspection or site visit. 
SFPC-901.6.4. Notification. The code official or his/her designee shall be notified before any routine test, repair, alteration or change to any fire protection system, regardless of whether such system is required by the building code, this code or other law or ordinance. 
SFPC-901.7. Systems out of service. Add the following 901.7.7, 901.7.7.1. 
SFPC-901.7.7 Contact information. All premises or buildings without on-site property management shall have property emergency contact information posted in an area as approved by the fire official. 
SFPC-901.7.7.1 Response. Within ninety (90) minutes of being notified, the owner or the designated agent of the owner of such a premises shall be on-site to meet or assist fire officials. 
SFPC-907.2.9.3 Responsibilities of owner, agent or tenants for smoke alarms. Add the following 907.2.9.3. 
SFPC-907.2.9.3 Responsibilities of owner, agent or tenants for smoke alarms. The owner or management agent of a dwelling unit which is rented or leased in a residential building containing one (1) or more dwelling units, shall furnish the tenant at the beginning of each tenancy, at each renewal or extension of a tenancy or at least annually, with written certification that all smoke alarms required are present, have been inspected and are operational and in good working order. The person in control shall be responsible for interim testing, maintenance and reasonable care of the smoke detector, including installation of batteries if required. In accordance with Section 55-248.16 of the Code of Virginia (1950, as amended), the owner or management agent shall repair any inoperative or malfunctioning smoke detector. Such service, repair or replacement and/or restoration of the detector to normal operative condition shall occur immediately upon receipt of written notice from a tenant or others that a smoke detector is in need of repair, inoperative or otherwise not properly functioning. 
SFPC-907.7.5.2. Post monitoring contact information. Add the following 907.7.5.2. 
SFPC-907.7.5.2. Post monitoring contact information. The name, telephone number, and account number of the current central station monitoring company shall be posted and maintained at the fire alarm control panel. If the fire alarm system is not monitored, that fact shall be posted with contact information for building management. 
SFPC-907.9.6. False, faulty or nuisance alarms. Add the following 907.9.6. 
SFPC-907.9.6. False, faulty or nuisance alarms. Whenever false, faulty, or nuisance fire alarm activations occur in any occupancy and exceed three (3) activations in a (90) day period, the fire official may require the owner or occupant to conduct a witnessed test of the fire protection system causing the false, faulty, or nuisance alarm; testing shall be in accordance with 901.6. 
SFPC-912. Fire Department Connections. Substitute throughout Section 912. 
SFPC-912. Fire Department Connections. Where the title "fire chief" appears throughout section, remove and replace with "fire official." 
SFPC-912.2.2. Existing buildings. Delete and substitute as follows. 
SFPC-912.2.2. Existing buildings. On existing buildings, the fire department connection shall be indicated by an approved sign and location, mounted above the connection. Additional signage may be required in circumstances when the connection is not visible from the approach of fire apparatus. Such signs shall have white letters "FDC" at least 6 inches high on a red reflective background. Additional words indicating building address or system elements of the FDC may be required by the fire official. 
SFPC-912.2.3. New buildings or upgrades to existing systems. Add the following 912.2.3. 
SFPC-912.2.3. New buildings or upgrades to existing systems. In addition to the requirements in 912.2.2, all new buildings and structures with a Fire Department Connection shall be equipped with a red strobe light (non-audible) located above the FDC connection. Location shall be with the FDC sign approved by the fire official. Strobe shall activate anytime the building enters into "alarm" status. This requirement will also apply when upgrades occur to existing systems as approved by the building official. 
SFPC-1004.1. Design occupant load. Add the following 1004.1.2, 1004.1.3. 
SFPC-1004.1.2. Accountability. A person responsible for controlling the occupancy capacity shall develop a system to manage the occupancy capacity and avoid overcrowding as approved by the code official. This system shall be implemented outside the main entrance and consist of a mechanism to count persons as they enter the structure. Counting and/or ingress shall not restrict occupant egress. There shall be no overcrowding. 
SFPC-1004.1.3. Disclosure of number of occupants. The number of occupants, supported by the counting mechanism described above, shall be disclosed to the fire official at any time upon request. 
SFPC-1101.3. Permits. Delete and substitute as follows. 
SFPC-1101.3. Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in Sections 107.2 and 108. 
SFPC-1201.2. Permits required. Delete, rename, and substitute as follows 
SFPC-1201.2. Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in Sections 107.2 and 108. 
SFPC-1301.2. Permits. Delete and substitute as follows. 
SFPC-1301.2. Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in Sections 107.2 and 108. 
SFPC-1501.3. Permits. Delete and substitute as follows. 
SFPC-1501.3. Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in Sections 107.2 and 108. 
SFPC-1601.2. Permits. Delete and substitute as follows. 
SFPC-1601.2. Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in Sections 107.2 and 108. 
SFPC-1701.2. Permits. Delete and substitute as follows. 
SFPC-1701.2. Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in Sections 107.2 and 108. 
SFPC-1801.5. Permits. Delete and substitute as follows. 
SFPC-1801.5. Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in Sections 107.2 and 108. 
SFPC-1901.2. Permits. Delete and substitute as follows. 
SFPC-1901.2. Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in Sections 107.2 and 108. 
SFPC-2001.2. Permits. Delete and substitute as follows. 
SFPC-2001.2. Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in Sections 107.2 and 108. 
SFPC-2101.2. Permits. Delete and substitute as follows. 
SFPC-2101.2. Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in Sections 107.2 and 108. 
SFPC-2201.2. Permits. Delete and substitute as follows. 
SFPC-2201.2. Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in Sections 107.2 and 108. 
SFPC-2301.2. Permits. Delete and substitute as follows. 
SFPC-2301.2. Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in Sections 107.2 and 108. 
SFPC-2403.4. Permits. Delete and substitute as follows. 
SFPC-2403.4. Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in Sections 107.2 and 108. 
SFPC-2501.2. Permit required. Delete, rename, and substitute as follows. 
SFPC-2501.2. Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in Sections 107.2 and 108. 
SFPC-2601.2. Permits. Delete and substitute as follows. 
SFPC-2601.2. Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in Sections 107.2 and 108. 
SFPC-2701.5. Permits. Delete and substitute as follows. 
SFPC-2701.5. Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in Sections 107.2 and 108. 
SFPC-2705.5. Hazardous materials transportation. Add the following 2705.5. 
SFPC-2705.5. Hazardous materials transportation. Hazardous materials transportation vehicles operating or housed within the City of Falls Church shall be maintained in accordance with the federal regulations contained in 49 Code of Federal Regulations (49 CFR) and the Code of Virginia (1950, as amended). Any duly sworn law enforcement officer of Virginia, including the Fire Marshal, may halt any hazardous materials transportation vehicle that is observed to have a condition or characteristic that suggests, in the professional judgment of the officer or code official, that there exists a violation of City, state, or federal regulations governing the transportation of hazardous materials. The vehicle may be detained long enough to determine if the permits required for transporting hazardous materials have been obtained, if the cargo is secure, and if the observed condition, or characteristic, presents an immediate threat of a transportation related spill and/or a catastrophic event. The hazardous materials transportation vehicle may resume operation if it is found to be in good repair and free of leaks, in accordance with the SFPC and its referenced standards. If that finding is not made, the vehicle shall be detained until the proper repairs or adjustments are made where it is situated, or it is removed to a safe location, as determined by the code official, and repaired or adjusted, whichever is appropriate. Upon refusal of the operator or owner of the vehicle to make the repairs or adjustments required by the code official, the vehicle shall be impounded by the code official until all necessary repairs are made and all accrued impound and towing fees are remitted by the owner to the Treasurer, City of Falls Church. 
SFPC-2705.5.1. Portable fire extinguisher. Add the following 2705.5.1. 
SFPC-2705.5.1. Portable fire extinguisher. Any vehicle required to have a DOT HAZMAT placard shall be equipped with a portable fire extinguisher complying with Section 906 and having a minimum rating of 2-A:20-B:C. During the unloading of the tank vehicle, the portable fire extinguisher shall be out of the carrying device on the vehicle and shall be fifteen (15) feet or more from the unloading valves. 
SFPC-2801.2. Permit Required. Delete, rename, and substitute as follows. 
SFPC-2801.2. Permit. Permits shall be required as set forth in Sections 107.2 and 108. 
SFPC-2901.3. Permits. Delete and substitute as follows. 
SFPC-2901.3. Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in Sections 107.2 and 108. 
SFPC-3001.2. Permits. Delete and substitute as follows. 
SFPC-3001.2. Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in Sections 107.2 and 108. 
SFPC-3101.2. Permits. Delete and substitute as follows. 
SFPC-3101.2. Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in Sections 107.2 and 108. 
SFPC-3201.2. Permits. Delete and substitute as follows. 
SFPC-3201.2. Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in Sections 107.2 and 108. 
SFPC-3301.1.3 Fireworks. Delete and substitute as follows. 
SFPC-3301.1.3 Fireworks. The possession, manufacture, storage, sale, handling, display, and use of fireworks within the City of Falls Church is prohibited. The fire official or designee shall seize, take, remove or cause to be removed at the expense of the owner, all fireworks offered for sale, stored or held in violation of this code. 
Exception: For public and private displays as permitted by the fire official where a permit is obtained prior to any display in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
SFPC-3301.2 Permits Required. Delete and substitute as follows. 
SFPC-3301.2 Permits Required. Permits shall be obtained from the Code Official in accordance with Table 107.2 for all blasting operations, firework aerial displays, pyrotechnic events before an audience, the transportation, manufacture, possession, use, storage of explosives and fireworks and the operation of a terminal for handling explosive material and the delivery to or receipt from a carrier at a terminal between sunset and sunrise. An application for the display of aerial fireworks shall be completed and submitted to the fire official 45 days before the scheduled event. The application for aerial fireworks display shall include the following: 
1)  A copy of insurance policy with the City of Falls Church named as a co-insured. 
2)  A site plan with the layout of the discharge site, spectator site, viewing area, parking area, fallout area and distances for each; distances to all tents, buildings and structures. 
3)  Provide a complete list of aerial fireworks to be displayed. 
4)  Provide type and amount of fire protection. 
5)  The type of physical barrier that will be installed around display site and number of monitors that will be used during performance. 
6)  Identify the type of security and number of monitors that will be on-site during the display. 
7)  Provide the shooter/operator's name, address, social security number, and date of birth. 
8)  Provide fireworks display company address and emergency contact numbers. 
9)  Provide emergency contact information including the owner of the property name and number, third shooter/operator (within one hour of travel), and hazardous material transport company responsible for transportation and security. 
10)  Method of storage and location that display fireworks are to be stored. 
11)  Provide copy of certification as a Certified Blaster/Pyrotechnician approved by the Commonwealth of Virginia State Fire Marshal's Office. 
3301.2.2 Sale and Retail Display. Delete and substitute as follows. 
3301.2.2 Sale and Retail Display. The sale and retail display of fireworks, explosives or any explosive materials is prohibited within the City of Falls Church. 
SFPC-3301.2.4. Financial responsibility. Delete, rename, and substitute as follows. 
SFPC-3301.2.4. Financial responsibility. Before a permit is issued for the storage, transportation, disposal, or use of explosives, blasting agents or fireworks, the applicant shall file with the fire official a certificate of insurance which shows that the applicant has liability insurance in the amount of at least five million ($5,000,000) dollars combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage. The certificate of insurance shall show the City of Falls Church as a co-insured on the policy. This insurance policy shall be available for the payment of any damage arising from the acts or omissions of the applicant, his agents, or his employees in connection with the storage, transportation, disposal, or use of explosives or blasting agents. The applicant shall ensure that the insurance policy is in effect at the time of the commencement of the operations or activities authorized by the permit, and remains continuously in effect until such operations or activities are completed. 
SFPC-3302.1. Definitions. Add the following words, terms, and meanings. 
APPROVED - Approved by the City Fire Official. 
BLASTING - The process of moving, heaving, breaking, or shattering soils or rocks, or doing other work such as the demolition of structures or research and testing that generates seismic waves through the use of energetic materials in chemical reactions, explosions, or other detonations or deflagrations. 
FLYROCK - Any dirt, mud, stone, fragmented rock, or other material that is displaced from the blast area in an uncontrolled or unplanned manner by the effects of a blast. 
SFPC-3303.2.1. Transaction Record. Add the following 3303.2.1. 
SFPC-3303.2.1. Transaction Record. Daily records shall be kept of the amount of explosives received from a supplier and the amount delivered to the magazine. A daily record shall be kept of the amount of explosives removed from the magazine for daily use and the amount returned to the magazine. This record will be kept within the magazine so that, on inspection of the magazine, an inventory for all explosives can be made. The inventory shall be separated as to the different types of explosives stored and used. Forms for these records shall be approved by the fire official. 
SFPC-3304.5.2.3 Type 2 magazines. Add the following 3304.5.2.3. 
SFPC-3304.5.2.3 Type 2 magazines. Type 2 magazines may be used for temporary storage of explosives at the site of blasting operations where the amount constitutes not more than one day's supply for use is current operations. All explosives not used in the day's operation shall be returned to a Type 1 magazine at the end of the work day for overnight storage. In no case shall a Type 2 magazine be used for overnight storage unless approved by the Fire official. Type 2 magazines shall be allowed only in the I/Industrial Zone. 
SFPC-3307.3.1. Pre-blast surveys. Add the following 3307.3.1. 
SFPC-3307.3.1. Pre-blast surveys. A pre-blast survey shall be performed on each structure located within a minimum of one hundred and fifty (150) feet and any well located within a minimum of two hundred and fifty (250) feet of the blast site. Written confirmation that the pre-blast survey has been done shall be maintained by the blasting contractor. Requests for access to structures for pre-blast surveys shall be made by certified mail to the last known address of the owner(s) of any structures located within the pre-blast survey areas as defined herein. If permitted by the owner(s), said pre-blast surveys shall be conducted to determine the pre-blast conditions of these structures. A minimum of 14 days notice shall be provided for the scheduling of the pre-blast survey. Documentation consisting of a written acknowledgement that the survey has been performed or declined by the property owner and a map depicting the above referenced 150 and 250 feet radius, shall be provided to the Fire Official at the time of the Explosive Use Site Permit Inspection meeting. 
SFPC-3307.3.2. Pre-blast notification. Add the following 3307.3.2. 
SFPC-3307.3.2. Pre-blast notification. Pre-blast notification. Add Subsection as follows: 3307.3.2 Pre-blast notification. All structures located within a minimum of 300 feet of the blast site shall be notified of the scheduled blasting 10 days prior to blasting and no blasting shall occur until such notice has been given. 
SFPC-3308.11. Retail display and sale. Add the following 3308.11. 
SFPC-3308.11. Retail display and sale. The retail display or sale of fireworks is prohibited. 
SFPC-3308.12. Seizure and destruction of certain fireworks. Add the following 3308.12. 
SFPC-3308.12. Seizure and destruction of certain fireworks. Any Fire Marshal or law enforcement officer encountering fireworks in violation of this code may seize such fireworks and may hold such until final disposition of any criminal procedures related to the violation. If any person is judgment of conviction be entered against such person for violations of this code, then the court shall order destruction of such articles upon expiration of the time allowed for appeal for such conviction. 
SFPC-3308.12.1. Destruction of other seized fireworks. Add the following 3308.12.1. 
SFPC-3308.12.1. Destruction of other seized fireworks. Where no criminal proceedings can be instituted due to lack of knowledge as to who owns or is responsible for the fireworks, the fireworks in question shall be destroyed after thirty (30) days. 
SFPC-3401.4. Permits. Delete and substitute as follows. 
SFPC-3401.4. Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in Sections 107.2 and 108. 
SFPC-3402.1. Definitions. Add the following definition: 
Subsurface structure: A subsurface structure shall include, but not be limited to, structures such as subway stations, railroad tunnels including rail rapid transit tunnels, and highway tunnels. 
SFPC-3404.2.7.10. Leak Reporting. Delete, rename, and substitute as follows. Subsection 3404.2.7.10.1 is retained and incorporated in full without revision. 
SFPC-3404.2.7.10. Spills, leaks, discharges and other releases. A consistent or accidental loss of liquid, or other indication of a leak from a tank system, shall be reported immediately to the fire department, the fire code official and other authorities having jurisdiction. When a spill, leak, discharge, or other release occurs, or when a spill, leak, discharge, or other release is discovered, the owner, tenant, driver or other person in control of the premises or delivery system if applicable, shall be fully responsible for the containment and cleanup of the flammable or combustible liquid/s, the containment of the vapors released there from, and for the disposal of waste. The cost of such containment, cleanup and waste disposal and any other related activities shall be at the sole expense of the owner or his/her authorized agent. The cleanup, containment and disposal shall be to the satisfaction of the fire code official. 
SFPC-3404.2.7.10.2. Attendant. Add the following 3404.2.7.10.2. 
SFPC-3404.2.7.10.2. Attendant. Each motor fuel-dispensing facility open to the public shall have an attendant on duty familiar with the location and operation of all pump controls, emergency shutoff devices and operation of safety equipment. The attendant shall observe and monitor the receipt, transfer, dispensing, and loading of such liquids. The attendant shall be knowledgeable about such laws, ordinances, requirements, and facility emergency plans, including such requirements concerning fire safety, emergency response, and spill or leak notification. At all times while on duty, the attendant shall be mentally and physically capable of immediately: taking all necessary, appropriate, and required action to detect and prevent a fire, explosion, spill, or leak and the ability to communicate emergency requests. 
SFPC-3404.2.11.2. Location. Add the following 3404.2.11.2 - 4 
SFPC-3404.2.11.2 - Location. #4 - Underground storage tanks for Class I flammable liquids or Class II or III combustible liquids and related piping shall not be permitted directly over a subsurface structure, or within 25 feet measured horizontally from the outside wall of such subsurface structure. Underground storage tanks and related piping for Class I flammable liquids or Class II or III combustible liquids located in an area between 25 and 100 feet measured horizontally from the outside wall of a subsurface structure, where the tops of such tanks and piping are not 2 feet or more below the lowest point of excavation, shall be installed in a cast-in-place, liquid tight, reinforced concrete vault, with walls, top and bottom, which are a minimum of 6 inches thick, and large enough to hold and retain the entire contents of the tank. Access shall be provided in the vault top for inspection, monitoring, and servicing of the vault and tank. 
SPFC-3404.2.11.2.1. Service stations in proximity of subsurface structures: Add the following 3404.2.11.2.1 
SPFC-3404.2.11.2.1. Service stations dispensing Class I flammable liquids or Class II or III combustible liquids that are located within the distance of 25 to 100 feet measured horizontally from the outside wall of a subsurface structure shall comply with the following: 
1.  Dispensing pumps for Class I flammable liquids or Class II or III combustible liquids shall not be located less than 25 feet from the nearest subsurface structure opening (measured from the pump to the nearest point of any subsurface structure opening). 
2.  The finished grade around pump islands and the surrounding surface shall be graded in a manner to divert possible spills away from any opening of any subsurface structure. 
3.  Appropriate continuous drains across driveway ramps, and/or curbs of at least 6 inches in height shall separate the service station properties from adjacent subsurface structure properties. 
4.  There shall be no connection (such as venting or drainage) between any storage tank or related piping for Class I flammable liquids or Class II or III combustible liquids and any subsurface structure. 
SFPC-3304.2.12.3. Recordkeeping. Add the following 3404.2.12.3 
SFPC-3304.2.12.3. Recordkeeping. All records of testing, and test results collectively shall be kept, in writing, in a logbook and in inventory records. All records shall be made available for inspection by the code official at anytime upon reasonable request. All records shall be retained for two (2) years. This period may be extended upon order of the code official. 
SFPC-3310. Transportation. Add the following section in its entirety. 
SFPC-3310.1 Prohibited transportation. Explosive materials shall not be carried or transported on a public conveyance or vehicle carrying passengers for hire. 
SFPC-3310.2 Vehicle design. Vehicles transporting explosive materials shall be strong enough to carry the load and shall be in good and safe mechanical condition. The floors shall be tight and have no exposed spark producing surface on the inside of the body. Where explosive materials are transported on a vehicle with an open body, the explosive material shall be stored in a portable magazine or closed container securely fastened to the vehicle body. 
SFPC-3310.3 Vehicle restrictions. Vehicles containing explosive materials shall not be taken into a garage or repair shop for repair or storage. 
SFPC-3310.4 Vehicle contents. Only those dangerous articles authorized to be loaded with explosive materials in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be carried in the body of a vehicle transporting explosive materials. 
SFPC-3310.5 Vehicle inspections. The person to whom a permit has been issued to transport explosive materials over the streets and highways of the city shall inspect each vehicle used for such purposes daily, to ensure that: 
1.  Fire extinguishers are filled and in working order. 
2.  All electrical wiring is completely protected and securely fashioned to prevent short circuiting. 
3.  The motor, chassis, oil pan and body undersides are reasonably clean and free of excess grease and oil. 
4.  Both the fuel tank and fuel line are secure and free from leaks. 
5.  The brakes, lights, windshield wipers, horn and steering mechanism are functioning properly. 
6.  The tires are property inflated, have proper tread depth and are free of defects. 
7.  The vehicle is otherwise in proper operating condition and acceptable for transporting explosive materials. 
8.  The operator shall maintain all inspection reports in vehicle at all times. 
SFPC-33010.6 Prior Inspection. Vehicles routinely transporting explosive materials within the city shall be inspected by the fire official prior to entering the city limits. Inspection shall occur at six month intervals. The fire official shall issue a fire prevention permit to all approved vehicles. 
SFPC-3310.7 Vehicle signs. Vehicles transporting any quantity of explosive materials shall display all placards, signs lettering or numbering in accordance with DOTn 49 CFR listed in Chapter 47. 
SFPC-3310.8 Separation of detonators and explosives. Detonators shall not be transported in the same vehicle with Class A or Class B explosive materials or blasting agents, except as permitted by DOTn 49 CFR listed in Chapter 47. 
SFPC-3310.9 Vehicle routing. The route followed by vehicles transporting explosive materials shall not pass through congested areas or heavy traffic, except as permitted by the fire official. A transportation plan identifying the route of travel shall be submitted to the fire official for review and approval. 
SFPC-3310.10 Portable fire extinguishers. Every vehicle transporting explosive materials shall be equipped with portable fire extinguishers capable of being readily accessed, filled and ready for immediate discharge. 
SFPC-3310.10.1 Small trucks. At least two portable fire extinguishers with a minimum 2-A:40-B:C rating shall be provided on trucks with a gross vehicle weight of 14,000 lbs. (6356 kg) or greater. 
SFPC-3310.11 Operating precautions. No person shall carry matches or any other flame producing device, or carry unauthorized firearms or cartridges while in or near a vehicle transporting or storing explosive materials. No person shall drive, load or unload such a vehicle in a careless or reckless manner. 
SFPC-3310.12 Spark protection. Spark producing metal or tools, oils, matches, firearms, electric storage batteries, flammable materials, acids, oxidizers or corrosives shall not be transported or stored in the body of any vehicle being used to store or transport explosive materials or blasting agents. 
SFPC-3310.13 Unattended vehicles. Vehicles being used to store or transport explosive materials shall not be left unattended at any time within the city. No unauthorized person shall ride or be permitted to ride on any such vehicle. 
SFPC-3310.14 Responsibilities. The authorized vehicle attendant shall remain awake and alert at all times. 
SFPC-3310.15 Vehicle parking and transfer. Vehicles being used to transport explosive materials shall not be parked, attended or unattended on any street or road within the city or adjacent to or in proximity to any building or structure, including a bridge or tunnel, or other place where persons work, congregate or assemble, prior to reaching the vehicles' destination. Explosive materials shall not be transferred from one vehicle to another except in an emergency and under the supervision of the fire official. 
SFPC-3310.16 Emergency conditions. In the event a vehicle being used to transport explosive materials breaks down, is involved in an accident or catches on fire, the city police and fire department shall be notified immediately. Only in the event of a breakdown or accident shall explosive materials be transferred from the disabled vehicle to another and then only by proper and qualified personnel and under the supervision of the fire official. 
SFPC-3310.17 Delivery. Delivery of explosive materials shall only be made to authorized persons and into approved magazines or approved temporary storage or handling areas. 
SFPC-3310.18 Explosive materials at terminals. The fire official shall designate the location and specify the maximum quantity of explosive materials which are to be loaded, unloaded, reloaded or stored at any given time at each terminal where such operations are permitted. 
SFPC-3310.19 Carrier responsibility. A carrier shall immediately notify the fire official when explosive materials or blasting agents are to be transported within the City. 
SFPC-3310.20 Notice to consignee. A carrier shall immediately notify the consignee of the arrival of explosive materials at the carrier's terminal. 
SFPC-3310.21 Consignee responsibility. Upon notification that a shipment of explosive materials has arrived at a terminal, the consignee shall remove such materials to a storage area complying with the provisions of this chapter. Such removal shall be accomplished within 48 hours after receipt of notice, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays. 
SFPC-3404.2.13.1.4. Tanks abandoned in place. Delete and substitute item #5. 
SFPC-3404.2.13.1.4. Tanks abandoned in place. #5. A record of tank size, location, and date of abandonment shall be promptly filed by the property owner with the Fire Code Official and shall be retained by both parties for the duration of the abandonment or, in the case of the owner, for the duration of his/her ownership interest in the property. 
SFPC-3501.2. Permits. Delete and substitute as follows. 
SFPC-3501.2. Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in Sections 107.2 and 108. 
SFPC-3601.2. Permits. Delete and substitute as follows. 
SFPC-3601.2. Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in Sections 107.2 and 108. 
SFPC-3701.2. Permits. Delete and substitute as follows. 
3701.2. Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in Sections 107.2 and 108. 
SFPC-3701.3. Spills, leaks, discharges, and other releases. Add the following 3701.3. 
SFPC-3701.3. Spills, leaks, discharges, and other releases. Any person who witnesses, discovers, or otherwise has knowledge of a spill, leak, discharge or other release of highly toxic or toxic material/s shall immediately report such to the fire department, the fire code official and other authorities having jurisdiction. When a spill, leak, discharge, or other release occurs, or when a spill, leak, discharge, or other release is discovered, the owner and the tenant or other person in control of the premises shall be fully responsible for the containment and cleanup of the highly toxic or toxic materials, the containment of the vapors released there from, and for the disposal of waste. The cost of such containment, cleanup and waste disposal and any other related activities shall be at the sole expense of the owner or his/her authorized agent. The cleanup, containment and disposal shall be to the satisfaction of the fire code official. 
SFPC-3801.2. Permits. Delete and substitute as follows. 
SFPC-3801.2. Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in Sections 107.2 and 108. 
SFPC-3806.5 Dispensing and overfilling. Add the following 3806.5. 
SFPC-3806.5. Remote control shutoff. When a tank vehicle is equipped with a remote control shutdown device, the driver shall have the remote control with him/her at all times. 
SFPC-3901.2. Permits. Delete and substitute as follows. 
SFPC-3901.2. Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in Sections 107.2 and 108. 
SFPC-4001.2. Permits. Delete and substitute as follows. 
SFPC-4001.2. Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in Sections 107.2 and 108. 
SFPC-4101.2. Permits. Delete and substitute as follows. 
SFPC-4101.2. Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in Sections 107.2 and 108. 
SFPC-4201.2. Permits. Delete and substitute as follows. 
SFPC-4201.2. Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in Sections 107.2 and 108. 
SFPC-4301.2. Permits. Delete and substitute as follows. 
SFPC-4301.2. Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in Sections 107.2 and 108. 
SFPC-4401.2. Permits. Delete and substitute as follows. 
SFPC-4401.2. Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in Sections 107.2 and 108. 
APPENDIX A 
REQUIREMENTS FOR A FIRE WATCH 
A101.1. Scope. 
A fire watch is a temporary measure intended to ensure continuous and systematic surveillance of a building, structure or portion thereof by one (1) or more qualified individuals for the purposes of identifying and controlling fire hazards, detecting early signs of unwanted fire, raising an alarm of fire and immediately notifying the 911 - Emergency Communications Center. 
A102.1. Initiation. 
In the event that a fire protection system, sprinkler system, alarm, detection, or other suppression system is impaired or out of service, a fire watch shall be instituted by the person in control (as defined in Chapter 18-3 of the Falls Church City Code). 
A102.2. Procedures. 
When the establishment of a fire watch is initiated by the person in control, or ordered by the fire department or fire official, the owner or the owner's representative shall implement the following procedures for the duration of the fire watch. The fire watch shall be maintained until such time the noted system(s) is returned to normal ready service and approved for use by the fire official. 
1.  A fire watch shall consist of the following: 
a)  A designated number of staff (minimum of two personnel) performing fire watch duties at all times and until the fire protection system has been repaired, inspected, tested, and certified to be placed back in service. During the duration of a fire watch, the sole duty of such designated staff shall be the fire watch. 
b)  Each participating staff member shall be equipped with reliable two-way system of communications. 
c)  One (1) staff member shall always be stationed in an area or room equipped with a working telephone or cellular phone to report a fire, smoke or other hazardous situation by dialing 9-1-1. 
NOTE: When dialing 9-1-1 from a cellular phone, some cellular phone systems may connect user with another jurisdiction's emergency communications center, therefore the caller should confirm they are speaking with the "Emergency Communications Center serving the City of Falls Church, Virginia." 
d)  At least one (1) staff member shall conduct a walking tour of all areas of the building no less than every fifteen (15) minutes to look for fire, smoke, or hazardous situations that require fire department response; or 
e)  A complete tour of the facility within a time frame prescribed by the fire official or fire department and with the fire watch staffing level contingent upon the size of the facility and the type of occupancy. 
NOTE: If the building or property is of such size that two (2) individuals cannot adequately perform the required fire watch; the fire department representative may require additional on-site personnel to participate in the fire watch. Upon request, the fire department representative may permit one (1) person to perform the fire watch if the building or property is size that one (1) person can adequately perform the required fire watch. 
2.  A legibly written log shall be kept on site at all times for review by any fire department employee documenting: 
a)  The reason the fire watch was implemented. 
b)  The date and time the fire department was notified the fire watch was initiated and concluded. 
c)  The start and stop time of each building or property tour. 
d)  The key locations visited in the building(s) requiring the fire watch. 
e)  Name(s) of personnel conducting the fire watch. 
f)  Name(s) of personnel recording the information. 
g)  Log entries shall be kept for a minimum of two (2) years. 
3.  Personnel conducting the fire watch shall be: 
a)  Capable of performing patrol duties. 
b)  Reliable and not under the influence of intoxicants or illegal substances. 
c)  Able to clearly and accurately converse with fire department personnel in English, in the event of an emergency. 
d)  Able to remain awake and alert at all times. 
NOTE: In all cases, the sole duty of personnel assigned to the fire watch shall be to perform constant patrols of the protected premises, to keep watch for fires, and if necessary to summon the fire department. 
4.  In the event of a fire emergency: 
a)  The fire watch staff shall immediately call 9-1-1 and report the location of the fire within the building. 
b)  Activate the emergency alarm signal (if available). 
c)  Begin the evacuation of the building starting on the fire floor, then above the fire floor, then below the fire floor. 
All questions concerning the fire watch shall be directed to the Falls Church Fire Marshal (normal business hours) at (703) 248-5058 and the Falls Church Emergency Communications Center (after hours) at (703) 241-5053. 
(Ord. No. 1856, 4-11-2011; Ord. No. 1871, 3-12-2012) 
Secs. 18-20-18-40. - Reserved. 
Chapter 20 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 4; air pollution, § 14-20 et seq.; fire prevention, ch. 18; food and food service establishments, § 8-272 et seq.; solid waste, ch. 34; massage therapy establishments and services, § 8-20 et seq.; vegetation, ch. 44. 
State Law reference- Health, Code of Virginia, title 32.1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 20-1-20-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HEALTH[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Health, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 20-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City manager means the city manager of the City of Falls Church, Virginia. 
    Director of health means the Fairfax County Director of Health, or such director's designee, responsible for enforcement of this article through the city's contract with the County of Fairfax. 
    Disposal means the discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of any solid waste into or on any land or water so that such solid waste or any constituent thereof may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including groundwaters. 
    Hazardous waste means a solid waste or combination of solid waste which, because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may: 
(1)  Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating illness; or 
(2)  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
    Occupant includes the lessee of vacant land. 
    Public health or safety menace means any condition which might endanger the health or safety of the public, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Unsanitary or improper storage or disposal of trash, garbage, refuse, debris, other solid waste or hazardous waste; 
(2)  Unburied dead animals; 
(3)  Accumulation of water causing mosquito or other vector breeding or proliferation; 
(4)  Rodent or insect infestation; 
(5)  Accumulation of bees, fowl or animals in such a manner to create a condition that may be injurious to the public health or safety; 
(6)  Hazards such as open excavations, open wells, pits, or parts thereof in danger of falling, discarded refrigerators and freezers with doors attached, unsecured vacant structures, or habitation for bats, wasps or other venomous pests; 
(7)  Garbage which is not contained in a watertight, rodentproof container which is equipped with a tightfitting lid; 
(8)  Improper disposal of medical, dental, veterinary or pharmaceutical equipment or supplies, including but not limited to syringes, needles, scalpels, and blades or other medicinal items in solid or liquid form, in such a manner as to make it possible for any other person to retrieve and utilize said equipment or supplies; 
(9)  Any other condition that may be injurious to the public health or safety. 
    Sanitary landfill means a disposal facility for solid waste so located, designed and operated that it does not pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment, including pollution of air, land, surface water or groundwater. 
    Solid waste. 
(1)  The term "solid waste" means any garbage, refuse, sludge and other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material, resulting from industrial, commercial, mining and agricultural operations and from community activities. 
(2)  The term "solid waste" does not include: 
a.  Solid or dissolved material in domestic sewage; 
b.  Solid or dissolved material in irrigation return flows or in industrial discharges which are sources subject to a permit from the state water control board; or 
c.  Source, special nuclear, or byproduct material as defined by the Federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 20-20. - Health or safety menaces-Inspection. 
    The director of health is authorized to inspect occupied or vacant land or premises to ascertain the existence of health or safety menaces on such land or premises. The director of health shall inspect the land or premises at reasonable daylight times in a reasonable manner. If the owner or occupant of the land or premises denies the director of health free access for such purposes, the director of health may inspect after obtaining a search warrant. 
Sec. 20-21. - Same-Abatement. 
(a)  When any condition that constitutes a public health or safety menace is found on occupied or vacant land or premises, the director of health shall notify, in writing, the owner or occupant of the land or premises on which the condition exists and/or any other person who the director of health believes is responsible for the health or safety menace. Such notice shall contain a description of the health or safety menace; the time within which the menace shall be abated, corrected or eliminated; and a statement that the owner, occupant or other person responsible may request a hearing within ten days of the receipt of the notice. Notice sent by registered or certified mail, to the last-known address of the owner whose name is shown on the current real estate tax assessment records or the occupant or other identified person responsible, shall be deemed compliance with the notice requirement to the person responsible. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the written notice from the director of health, the owner, occupant or other person responsible shall abate, correct or eliminate the health or safety menace. The time allowed to abate, correct or eliminate the health or safety menace condition shall be determined by the director of health, and shall not be less than 24 hours nor more than ten days. If the director of health determines that the menace cannot be abated, corrected or eliminated within ten days, the director of health may order temporary abatement measures and allow a longer period of time to abate, correct or eliminate the condition. The director of health may allow such a longer period of time only upon request of the owner, occupant or other person responsible and only upon a good-faith showing that such longer period of time is necessary. 
Sec. 20-22. - Same-Failure to abate. 
(a)  After receipt of the written notice, it is unlawful for the owner, occupant or other person responsible to fail to abate, correct or eliminate the health or safety menace within the time determined by the director of health. 
(b)  If the written notice is undeliverable or if, after receipt of the written notice, the owner, occupant or other person responsible fails to abate, correct or eliminate the health or safety menace, the director of health may request the city department of environmental services to take reasonable steps to abate, correct or eliminate the health or safety menace, whether the land or premises are occupied or vacant. If the owner, occupant or other person responsible denies free access for such purposes, the director of health may proceed after obtaining a warrant. Costs and expenses incurred by the director of health or the city department of environmental services abating, correcting or eliminating a health or safety menace on private property shall be assessed against the owner and/or occupant of the land or premises and/or any other person responsible for the health or safety menace, and shall be recoverable from the owner in the same way as taxes and levies. Costs and expenses incurred by the director of health in abating, correcting or eliminating a health or safety menace on public property shall be recoverable from the person responsible for causing the health or safety menace. 
Sec. 20-23. - Hearing and appeals procedure. 
    In the absence of an emergency, the city department of environmental services may abate, correct or eliminate the health or safety menace only after providing the owner, occupant or other person responsible an opportunity to be heard. Such a hearing request shall be made within ten days after receipt by the owner, occupant or other person responsible of the notice to abate, correct or eliminate the health or safety menace. In the case of an emergency, the director of health may request the city department of environmental services to take reasonable steps to abate, correct or eliminate the health or safety menace without providing the owner, occupant or other person responsible an opportunity to be heard until after the health or safety menace is abated, corrected or eliminated. In such an emergency the hearing request shall be made within ten days after the condition is abated, corrected or eliminated. All hearing requests shall be in writing and directed to the general manager for the city department of environmental services, who shall forward the requests to the city manager within two days of receipt. All hearings shall be before the city manager or the city manager's designee. The city manager, or the designee of the city manager, shall set a time and place for the hearing, which shall occur within ten days of the request for the hearing, and shall so notify the director of health and the appellant. After the hearing, the city manager, or the designee of the city manager, may order the appellant to abate, correct or eliminate the health or safety menace in the same manner as the director of health may require. Any person who fails, refuses, or neglects to comply with any such order shall be guilty of violating the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 20-24. - Penalty. 
    If after receipt of the written notice or an order from the city manager or the designee of the city manager, the owner, occupant, or other person responsible refuses or neglects to abate, correct or eliminate the condition as required, such individual shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. Further, each day any violations of this article shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
Chapter 22 - HOUSING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of city to regulate housing, § 2.04. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; architectural advisory board, § 2-137 et seq.; buildings, ch. 6; condominiums, § 6-48 et seq.; outdoor lighting, § 14-127 et seq.; utilities, ch. 42; subdivisions, ch. 38; house numbering, § 36-2; zoning, ch. 48. 
State Law reference- Housing generally, Code of Virginia, § 36-1 et seq.; authority of city to regulate light ventilation, sanitation and use and occupancy of buildings, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1117. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1-22-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HOUSING COMMISSION 

Sec. 22-19. - Establishment; functions. 
    There is hereby established a housing commission. The commission shall: 
(1)  In accordance with city goals and objectives, maintain awareness of housing needs and opportunities in the city. 
(2)  Investigate and prepare appropriate housing policy initiatives and changes for recommendation to the council. 
(3)  Perform the functions of the commission as specified in article IV of this chapter. 
(4)  Mediate or arbitrate conflicts arising out of the application of the Virginia Residential Landlord and Tenant Act as specified in article V of this chapter. 
(5)  Offer reconciliatory services in conflicts arising out of article IV, division 3 and article VI, division 6 of chapter 48, pertaining to zoning, the Virginia Condominium Act and the United States Housing and Community Development Act. 
(6)  Coordinate its activities with other city commissions having a related interest. 
(7)  Perform such additional functions as are listed herein or which may be assigned by the council. 
(Code 1982, § 16-4; Ord. No. 709; Ord. No. 1041, 3-28-1983) 
Sec. 22-20. - Composition; organization; staffing. 
(a)  The commission shall be appointed by the city council and consist of five members. It is the intent of this article that the interests of both landlords and tenants shall be represented equally on the commission. The members shall be appointed for a term of three years; provided that of the members first appointed, one shall be appointed for a term of one year each, one shall be appointed for a term of two years each and three shall be appointed for terms of three years each. Any vacancy shall be filled by the city council for the unexpired portion of a term of office. All members shall be residents of the city. 
(b)  The commission shall elect a chairperson from among its members, and shall do so annually within two months of the selection of full-term members. Three members of the commission shall constitute a quorum, and decisions of the commission shall be made by a majority of the members present. The commission shall meet at least quarterly. Meetings shall be at the call of the chairperson, or of three members of the commission after notice to all members, or upon request of the city council. The commission shall maintain records of its proceedings. 
(c)  The commission shall have the assistance of staff designated by the city manager, hereinafter referred to as "the staff representative." The commission shall be provided additional staff as deemed necessary and may call upon special consultants for assistance when needed. The commission shall likewise have the assistance of the city attorney, as needed, in its deliberations and proceedings. 
(Code 1982, § 16-5; Ord. No. 709; Ord. No. 1728, 4-14-2003) 
Sec. 22-21. - Submission and processing of complaints. 
    Complaints shall be submitted and processed pursuant to the procedures, rules, and regulations provided in articles IV and V of this chapter, and those which the commission shall establish from time to time. After consultation with the city attorney, the commission may make, issue, adopt, promulgate, amend, and rescind such rules and regulations as it deems necessary to carry out its responsibilities under this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 16-6; Ord. No. 709) 
Sec. 22-22. - Additional functions. 
    In addition to its duties, as outlined in this article, the commission may engage in such of the following functions as in its judgment will further the housing goals of the city: 
(1)  Make studies with respect to: 
a.  Housing practices in the city generally and in its various neighborhoods, including the practices of multifamily apartment complexes with respect to low- and moderate-income tenants. 
b.  The availability of housing for low- and moderate-income persons and those who are handicapped. 
c.  The availability of rental housing. 
(2)  Prepare recommendation for the city's annual community development block grant program. 
(3)  Initiate action and cooperate with others in action designed to: 
a.  Prevent or eliminate discrimination in housing and to encourage fair housing. 
b.  Improve landlord-tenant relations. 
c.  Assist property owners and property owners' associations in resolving problems unique to individuals living in cluster housing and condominiums. 
(4)  Assist tenants and property owners to resolve problems arising from conversions to condominiums and cooperatives. 
(5)  Recommend desired housing related legislation to be presented to the city council for consideration. 
(6)  Disseminate information concerning the various laws and ordinances relative to housing and promote compliance with them. 
(Code 1982, § 16-7; Ord. No. 709; Ord. No. 1041, 3-28-1983) 
Sec. 22-23. - Disclosure of information. 
(a)  Unless the parties agree in writing to prior disclosure, all information relevant to a complaint under this article shall be held confidential until reconciliation is reached, a public hearing is initiated or the proceedings of the commission are concluded. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall contravene the Virginia Freedom of Information Act. 
(Code 1982, § 16-8; Ord. No. 709) 
Sec. 22-24. - Other remedies. 
    Nothing herein shall prevent any person from exercising any rights or seeking any remedy to which that person might otherwise be entitled. 
(Code 1982, § 16-9; Ord. No. 709) 
Secs. 22-25-22-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RENT RELIEF FOR LOW INCOME ELDERLY AND/OR PERSONS PERMANENTLY AND TOTALLY DISABLED 

Sec. 22-52. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Affidavit means the rental grant affidavit. 
    Applicant means the person who applies for rent relief. 
    City means the City of Falls Church, Virginia. 
    City manager means the city manager of the City of Falls Church, Virginia, or any of his duly authorized deputies or agents. 
    Council means the city council for the City of Falls Church, Virginia. 
    Dwelling means the residence of the person seeking a grant. 
    Grant means a financial assistance payment made to any person meeting the requirements of this article. 
    Grant year means the calendar year for which a grant is sought. 
    Rent means the monetary consideration paid for occupation of the dwelling unit, and including the monetary stipend paid to a cooperative housing association by its residents. 
    Tenant means the one who resides in a dwelling, for the privilege of which rent is paid. 
(Code 1973, § 16-8; Code 1982, § 16-10; Ord. No. 602; Ord. No. 1245, 12-12-1988) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-53. - Grants authorized; effective date. 
    Grants in varying amounts, according to the terms of this article, are provided for qualified tenants: 
(1)  Who are residents of the city; 
(2)  Not less than 65 years of age; and/or 
(3)  Who are permanently and totally disabled as hereinafter defined. 
The rent relief for low-income elderly and/or persons' permanently and totally disabled program provides rent relief to eligible residents to help them remain in the city. Persons qualifying for grants are deemed to bear an extraordinary burden in rent costs in relation to their income and net worth and are in need of public relief. Such persons thus qualify for general relief as provided in Code of Virginia, § 63.2-802. 
(Code 1973, § 16-9; Code 1982, § 16-11; Ord. No. 602; Ord. No. 801; Ord. No. 1245, 12-12-1988; Ord. No. 1564, 12-23-1996; Ord. No. 1714, 12-10-2001) 
Sec. 22-54. - Administration of grants. 
    The grants shall be administered by the city manager according to the provisions of this article. The city manager is hereby authorized and empowered to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations in conformance with the provisions of this article, including, but not limited to the requiring of answers under oath, and requiring the production of rent receipts or cancelled checks to determine the validity of grant claims. The city may also require the production of certified tax returns and appraisal reports to establish income or financial worth. 
(Code 1973, § 16-10; Code 1982, § 16-12; Ord. No. 602; Ord. No. 1245, 12-12-1988) 
Sec. 22-55. - Requirement for grants. 
(a)  Rent relief will be granted to persons subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  The applicant has paid rent for resident housing within the city during the grant year and is a resident of the city on December 31 of the grant year. 
(2)  The applicant or the spouse of the applicant, if they live together, is 65 years of age or older; or the applicant is permanently and totally disabled on December 31 of the grant year; provided that the amount of the grant shall be prorated in the case of the death of a spouse over age 65 or who was permanently and totally disabled in a household in which the other spouse is under 65 and not permanently and totally disabled during the year for which application is made. 
(b)  The amount of rent relief granted to a qualified tenant is governed by the following table of income, assets, and eligible relief payments: 
If income is And assets are Grant as a 
% of rent Subject to 
a cap of At or below 16.66% of MFI* or $10,000.00, whichever is the greater amount $0-$50,000.00 25% $50,001.00-$100,000.00 20% $100,001.00-150,000.00 15% $1,700.00 Between 16.66% of MFI plus $1.00 or $10,001.00, whichever is the greater of the amount; and 33.33% of MFI or $20,001.00, whichever is the greater amount $0-$ 50,000.00 15% $50,001.00-$100,000.00 12% $1,200.00 $100,001.00-150,000.00 9% Between 33.33% of MFI plus $1.00 or $20,001.00, whichever is the greater amount; and 50% of MFI or $30,000.00, whichever is the greater amount $0-$ 50,000.00 15% $50,001.00-$100,000.00 12% $700.00 $100,001.00-150,000.00 9% Between 50% of MFI or $30,001.00, whichever is the greater amount; plus $1 and 50% of MFI plus $10,000.00 or $40,000.00, whichever is the greater amount. Any amount 0% *Note-MFI is the Median Family Income for the Washington Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area (PMSA) determined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). The MFI utilized is for a single person household. HUD income determinations are updated annually and are available from local HUD offices for the appropriate jurisdictions.  
The term "income" is defined as total combined income received from all sources by: the applicant and the applicant's relatives who live in the dwelling; provided that up to $8,500.00 of income of each relative not the spouse of an applicant living in the dwelling shall be excluded. There shall also be excluded all or any portion of the income received by a permanently disabled applicant during the grant calendar year, regardless of the source, up to a maximum of $7,500.00 or one-half the amount received for a permanent disability, whichever is greater; provided, further, that the rental grant for the previous year shall not be included in such total. If the applicant has been a resident of the city for less than the full grant year, the income received for the grant year and the maximum allowable income shall be prorated for the period of actual residency. 
(c)  The net combined financial worth of the applicant as of December 31 of the grant year did not exceed $150,000.00. The term "total financial worth" shall include the value of all assets, including equitable interest of the applicant's relatives living in the dwelling for which rent relief is claimed. Household furnishings shall not be included. 
(d)  The applicant or spouse of the applicant, if they live together, is not receiving financial assistance under the provisions of the state public welfare laws and implementing regulations, with the exception of food stamps and Medicaid. 
(e)  Notwithstanding subsection (c) of this section, if a person qualifies for a grant under this section, and if the person can prove by clear and convincing evidence, as determined by the city or its designee, that the person's physical or mental health has deteriorated to the point that the only alternative to permanently residing in a hospital, nursing home, convalescent home, or other facility for physical or mental care is to move in with a relative or to have a relative move in and provide care for the person, and if a relative does then move in for that purpose, or the applicant moves in with a relative, then none of the income of the relative or of the relative's spouse shall be counted towards the income limit; provided the applicant has not transferred assets in excess of $5,000.00 without adequate consideration within a three-year period prior to or after the relative moves into such residence, or the applicant moves in with the relative. 
(Code 1973, § 16-11; Code 1982, § 16-13; Ord. No. 602; Ord. No. 654; Ord. No. 676; Ord. No. 801; Ord. No. 817; Ord. No. 892; Ord. No. 937; Ord. No. 1019, 8-9-1982; Ord. No. 1226, 6-13-1988; Ord. No. 1245, 12-12-1988; Ord. No. 1284, 11-27-1989; Ord. No. 1386, 12-9-1991; Ord. No. 1462, 2-28-1994; Ord. No. 1564, 12-23-1996; Ord. No. 1714, 12-10-2001; Ord. No. 1746, 11-24-2003) 
Sec. 22-56. - Exception. 
    No rent relief will be granted an applicant for such period of the grant year as the applicant was a renter in a nonprofit facility for the elderly located in the city, the owner of which was exempted from payment of real estate taxes under Code of Virginia, § 58-12, as of July 1 of the grant year, or was living in housing for which the rent was subsidized through federal, state, local funds or living in a facility in which a below market rate land sale or other subsidy results in a reduction of the applicant's rent. 
(Code 1973, § 16-12; Code 1982, § 16-14; Ord. No. 602; Ord. No. 801; Ord. No. 1245, 12-12-1988; Ord. No. 1462, 2-28-1994) 
Sec. 22-57. - Claiming of grant. 
(a)  Annually, but not later than April 15 of the year following the grant year, the person claiming the grant shall file with the city manager a rental grant affidavit and other such information as required according to procedures set forth by the city manager and every three years thereafter on a three-year cycle, with annual certification by the applicant that no information contained on the last preceding affidavit filed has changed to violate the limitations and conditions provided herein. The city manager may, for good cause shown, extend such deadline for persons making application for this exemption for the first time or for persons failing to meet such deadline due to demonstrated hardship. 
(b)  The affidavit shall set forth the names of the related persons sharing the same dwelling with the applicant, their gross combined income, their total combined income, their total combined financial worth, and all other information as may be necessary to evaluate the application. 
(c)  If, after audit and investigation, a determination is made that the applicant is entitled to a grant, it shall be certified to the city treasurer, who shall pay to the applicant the amount of the grant as determined by section 22-58; provided that the treasurer may make partial payment of the amount at intervals established by the city council. If the application is denied, the applicant shall be so notified in a timely manner. 
(Code 1973, § 16-12; Code 1982, § 16-15; Ord. No. 602; Ord. No. 682; Ord. No. 892; Ord. No. 1245, 12-12-1988; Ord. No. 1462, 2-28-1994; Ord. No. 1665, 1-24-2000; Ord. No. 1746, 11-24-2003) 
Sec. 22-58. - Amount of grant. 
(a)  For a qualifying applicant, the amount of the grant shall be 25 percent of the annual rent paid for a dwelling in the city during the grant year or $1,700.00, subject to the limits set out in section 22-55, whichever is less. 
(b)  For a qualifying applicant residing in the city for less than the grant year, the amount of the grant shall be 15 percentum of the actual rent paid during the period of residency or a prorated grant for each month of residency, whichever is less. 
(Code 1973, § 16-13; Code 1982, § 16-16; Ord. No. 602; Ord. No. 817; Ord. No. 892; Ord. No. 937; Ord. No. 978, 7-27-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1019, 8-9-1982; Ord. No. 1073, 5-29-1984; Ord. No. 1226, 6-13-1988; Ord. No. 1245, 12-12-1988; Ord. No. 1284, 11-27-1989; Ord. No. 1386, 12-9-1991; Ord. No. 1714, 12-10-2001) 
Sec. 22-59. - False claims. 
    Any person falsely claiming a grant shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $50.00 or more than $300.00 for each offense. 
(Code 1982, § 16-17; Ord. No. 602; Ord. No. 1245, 12-12-1988) 
Secs. 22-60-22-76. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FAIR HOUSING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to continue to enforce ordinances providing for fair housing in effect prior to January 1, 1991, Code of Virginia, § 36-96.21; Virginia Fair Housing Law, Code of Virginia, § 36-96.1 et seq. 

Sec. 22-77. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Aggrieved person means any person who: 
(1)  Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice; or 
(2)  Believes that such person will be injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur. 
    Commission means the Falls Church Housing Commission. 
    Complainant means a person, including the Falls Church Housing Commission, who files a complaint under section 22-86. 
    Conciliation means the attempted resolution of issues raised by a complainant, or by the investigation of such complaint, through informal negotiations involving the aggrieved person, the respondent, their respective authorized representatives, and the Falls Church Housing Commission. 
    Conciliation agreement means a written agreement setting forth the resolution of the issues in conciliation. 
    Discriminatory housing practices means an act that is unlawful under sections 22-79, 22-80, 22-81, or 22-82. 
    Dwelling means any building, structure, or portion thereof, which is occupied as, or designated or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion thereof. 
    Elderliness means an individual who has attained the 55th birthday. 
    Familial status means one or more individuals who have not attained the age of 18 years being domiciled with: 
(1)  A parent or other person having legal custody of such individual or individuals; or 
(2)  The designee of such parent or other person having custody with the written permission of such parent or other person. 
The term "familial status" also includes any person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of 18 years. For the purposes of this section, the term "in the process of securing legal custody" means having filed an appropriate petition to obtain legal custody of such minor in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
    Family includes a single individual, whether male or female. 
    Handicap means, with respect to a person: 
(1)  A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities; 
(2)  A medical or psychological record of having such an impairment; or 
(3)  Being regarded as having such an impairment. 
The term does not include current illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance as defined in state or federal law. Neither the term "individual with handicap" nor the term "handicap" shall apply to an individual solely because that individual is a transvestite. 
    Lending institution includes any bank, savings and loan institution, credit union, insurance company, or mortgage lender. 
    Marital status means the status of being married, divorced, single, or widowed. The term "marital status" also includes any person whose marriage has been dissolved through annulment and any person seeking a divorce or an annulment. 
    Person means one or more individuals, whether male or female, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, fair housing organizations, civil rights organizations, organizations, governmental entities, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, and fiduciaries. 
    Rent means to lease, to sublease, to let, or otherwise to grant for consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
    Respondent means any person or other entity alleged to have violated the provisions of this article, as stated in a complaint filed under the provisions of this article and any other person joined pursuant to the provisions of section 22-86. 
    Restrictive covenant means any specification in any instrument affecting title to real property which purports to limit the use, occupancy, transfer, rental, or lease of any dwelling because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, elderliness, familial status, or handicap. 
(Code 1982, § 16-18; Ord. No. 1379, 10-15-1991) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-78. - Declaration of policy. 
    It is the policy of the city to provide for fair housing throughout the city to all persons, regardless of race, color, religion, marital status, national origin, sex, elderliness, familial status, or handicap, and, to that end, to prohibit discriminatory practices with respect to residential housing by any person or group of persons, in order that the peace, health, safety, prosperity, and general welfare of all the inhabitants of the city may be protected and ensured. 
(Code 1982, § 16-19; Ord. No. 1379, 10-15-1991) 
Sec. 22-79. - Unlawful discriminatory housing practices. 
(a)  It shall be an unlawful discriminatory housing practice for any person having the right to sell, rent, lease, control, construct, or manage any dwelling constructed, or to be constructed, or any agent, independent contractor, or employee of such person: 
(1)  To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, marital status, national origin, sex, elderliness, familial status, or handicap; 
(2)  To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in the connection therewith to any person because of race, color, religion, marital status, national origin, sex, elderliness, familial status, or handicap; 
(3)  To make, print, or publish, or cause to be made, printed, or published, any notice, statement, or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination based on race, color, religion, marital status, national origin, sex, elderliness, familial status, or handicap. The use of words or symbols associated with a particular religion, marital status, national origin, sex, or race shall be prima facie evidence of an illegal preference under this article which shall not be overcome by a general disclaimer; 
(4)  To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, marital status, national origin, sex, elderliness, familial status, or handicap that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available; 
(5)  To deny any person access to membership in or participation in any multiple listing service, real estate broker's organization, or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against such person in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation because of race, color, religion, marital status, national origin, sex, elderliness, familial status, or handicap; 
(6)  To include in any transfer, sale, rental, or lease of housing any restrictive covenant that discriminates because of race, color, religion, marital status, national origin, sex, elderliness, financial status, or handicap or for any person to honor or exercise, or attempt to honor or exercise any such discriminatory covenant pertaining to housing; 
(7)  To induce, or attempt to induce to sell or rent, any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion, marital status, national origin, sex, elderliness, familial status, or handicap; 
(8)  To refuse to sell or rent, or refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise discriminate or make unavailable or deny a dwelling because of a handicap of: 
a.  The buyer or renter; 
b.  A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is so sold, rented or made available; or 
c.  Any person associated with the buyer or renter; 
(9)  To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith because of a handicap of: 
a.  That person; 
b.  A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it was so sold, rented or made available; or 
c.  Any person associated with that buyer or renter; 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, the term "discrimination" includes: 
(1)  A refusal to permit, at the expense of the handicapped person, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by any person if such modifications may be necessary to afford such person full enjoyment of the premises; except that, in the case of a rental, the landlord may, where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification on the renter agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed before the modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted; 
(2)  A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, practices, policies, or services when such accommodations may be necessary to afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling; or 
(3)  In connection with the design and construction of covered multifamily dwellings for first occupancy after March 13, 1991, a failure to design and construct dwellings in such a manner that: 
a.  The public use and common use areas of the dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons; 
b.  All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises are sufficiently wide to allow passage by handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and 
c.  All premises within covered multifamily dwelling units contain an accessible route into and through the dwelling; light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats, and other environmental controls are in accessible locations; there are reinforcements in the bathroom walls to allow later installation of grab bars; and there are usable kitchens and bathrooms such that an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space. 
As used in this article the term "covered multifamily dwellings" means buildings consisting of four or more units, if such buildings have one or more elevators and ground floor units in other buildings consisting of four or more units. 
(c)  Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the American National Standards for Building and Facilities, commonly cited as "ANSI A117.1," or with any other standards adopted as part of regulations promulgated by HUD providing accessibility and usability for physically handicapped people shall be deemed to satisfy the requirements of subsection (b)(3) of this section. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to invalidate or limit any state law or regulation which requires dwellings to be designed and constructed in a manner that affords handicapped persons greater access than is required by this article. 
(Code 1982, § 16-20; Ord. No. 1379, 10-15-1991) 
Sec. 22-80. - Persons engaging in discriminatory real estate transactions. 
(a)  Unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity, including any lending institution whose business includes engaging in residential real estate-related transactions, to discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction, or in the terms or conditions of such a transaction, or in the manner of providing such a transaction, because of race, color, religion, marital status, national origin, sex, elderliness, familial status, or handicap. It shall not be unlawful, however, for any person or other entity whose business includes engaging in residential real estate transactions to require any applicant to qualify financially for the loan for which such person is making application. 
(b)  Definition. As used in this section, the term "residential real estate-related transaction" means any of the following: 
(1)  The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial assistance: 
a.  For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling; or 
b.  Secured by residential real estate. 
(2)  The selling, brokering, insuring or appraising of residential real property. However, nothing in this article shall prohibit a person engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of real property to take into consideration factors other than race, color, religion, marital status, national origin, sex, elderliness, familial status, or handicap. 
(Code 1982, § 16-21; Ord. No. 1379, 10-15-1991) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-81. - Interference with enjoyment of rights. 
    It shall be an unlawful discriminatory housing practice for any person to coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any person: 
(1)  In the exercise or enjoyment of; 
(2)  On account of that person having exercised or enjoyed; or 
(3)  On account of that person having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of; 
any right granted or protected by this article. 
(Code 1982, § 16-22; Ord. No. 1379, 10-15-1991) 
Sec. 22-82. - Restrictive covenants. 
(a)  Any restrictive covenant purporting to restrict occupancy or ownership of property on the basis of race, color, religion, marital status, national origin, sex, elderliness, familial status, or handicap, whether heretofore or hereafter included in an instrument affecting the title to real or leasehold property, is declared to be void and contrary to the public policy of the city. 
(b)  Any person who is asked to accept a document affecting title to real or leasehold property may decline to accept the same if it includes such a covenant until the covenant has been removed from the document. Refusal to accept delivery of an instrument for this reason shall not be deemed a breach of a contract to purchase, lease, mortgage, or otherwise deal with such property. 
(c)  A family care home, foster home, or group home in which individuals with mental illness, intellectual disability, developmental disability, or physical disabilities reside, with one or more resident counselors or other staff persons, shall be considered for all purposes residential occupancy by a single family when construing any restrictive covenant which purports to restrict occupancy or ownership of real or leasehold property to members of a single family or to residential use or structure. 
(Code 1982, § 16-23; Ord. No. 1379, 10-15-1991; Ord. No. 1991, 12-18-2018) 
Sec. 22-83. - Familial status protection not applicable to housing for older persons. 
(a)  Nothing in this article regarding unlawful discrimination because of familial status shall apply to housing for older persons. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "housing for older persons" means housing: 
(1)  Provided under any state or federal program that is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons, as defined in the state or federal program; 
(2)  Intended for and solely occupied by persons 62 years of age or older; or 
(3)  Intended for and solely occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or older per unit. The following factors shall be considered in determining whether housing qualifies as housing for older persons under this subsection (b)(3): 
a.  The existence of significant facilities and services specifically designed to meet the physical or social needs of older persons, or, if the provision of such facilities and services is not practicable, that such housing is necessary to provide important housing opportunities for older persons; 
b.  That at least 80 percent of the units are occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or older per unit; and 
c.  The publication of and adherence to policies and procedures which demonstrate intent by the owner or manager to provide housing for persons 55 years of age or older. 
(c)  Housing shall not fail to meet the requirements for housing by older persons by reason of: 
(1)  Persons residing in such housing as of September 13, 1988, who do not meet the age requirements of subsection (b)(2) and (3) of this section, provided that new occupants of such housing meet the age requirements of those subsections; or 
(2)  Unoccupied units, provided that such units are reserved for occupancy by persons who meet the provisions of subsection (b)(2) and (3) of this section. 
(Code 1982, § 16-24; Ord. No. 1379, 10-15-1991) 
Sec. 22-84. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 22-79(a)(3) and (b)(3), this article shall not apply to any single-family house sold or rented by an owner; provided that such private, individual owner does not own more than three single-family houses at any one time. In the case of the sale of any single-family house by a private individual owner not residing in the house at the time of sale or who was not the most recent resident of the house prior to sale, the exemption granted shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24-month period; provided that such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of, more than three such single-family house shall be exempt from the application of this article only if the house is sold or rented: 
(1)  Without the use, in any manner, of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent, or salesperson, or of the facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee, independent contractor, or agent of any broker, agent, salesperson, or person; and 
(2)  Without the publication, posting, or mailing, after notice, of any advertisement or written notice in violation of this article. 
However, nothing herein shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and other professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title. This exemption shall not apply to or inure to the benefit of any licensee of the state real estate board, regardless of whether the licensee is acting in a personal or professional capacity. 
(b)  Except for section 22-79(a)(3) and (b)(3), this article shall not apply to rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as the residence of such owner. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization, association or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates, for other than a commercial purpose, to persons of the same religion, or from giving preferences to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, marital status, national origin, sex, elderliness, familial status, or handicap. Nor shall anything in this article apply to a private membership club which is a bona fide club and which is exempt from taxation under section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954. Nor shall anything in this article be construed to prohibit any private, state-owned or state-supported educational institution, hospital, nursing home, religious or correctional institution, from requiring that persons of both sexes not occupy any single-family residence or room or unit of dwellings or other buildings or restrooms in such room or unit in dwellings or other buildings, which it owns or operates. 
(d)  Nothing in this article prohibits conduct against a person because such person has been convicted by any court of competent jurisdiction of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance as defined in federal law. 
(e)  It shall not be unlawful under this article for any owner to deny or limit the rental of housing to persons who pose a clear and present threat of substantial harm to themselves, to others, or to the dwelling itself. 
(f)  A rental application may require disclosure by the applicant of any criminal convictions and the owner or managing agent may require as a condition of acceptance of the rental application that the applicant consent, in writing, to a criminal record check to verify the disclosures made by applicant in the rental application. The owner or managing agent may collect from the applicant monies to reimburse the owner or managing agent for the exact amount of the out-of-pocket costs for such criminal record check. Nothing in this article shall require an owner or managing agent to rent a dwelling to an individual who, based on a prior record of criminal convictions involving harm to persons or property, would constitute a clear and present threat to the health or safety of other individuals. 
(g)  Nothing in this article limits the applicability of any reasonable local, state or federal restriction regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling. Owners or managing agents of dwellings may develop and implement reasonable occupancy and safety standards based on factors such as the number and size of sleeping areas or bedrooms and overall size of a dwelling unit, as long as the standards do not violate local, state or federal restrictions. Nothing in this article prohibits the rental application or similar document from requiring information concerning the number, ages, sex and familial relationship of the applicants and the dwelling's intended occupants. 
(Code 1982, § 16-25; Ord. No. 1379, 10-15-1991) 
Sec. 22-85. - Housing commission powers. 
(a)  The housing commission has the power, for the purposes of this article, to initiate and receive complaints, conduct investigations of any violation of this article, attempt resolution of complaints by conference and conciliation, issue a charge and refer it to the city attorney for action, or, at any stage of the complaint process, refer the complaint to the state real estate board and/or the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
(b)  Any respondent may file an answer to a complaint. Complaints and answers must be made in writing, under oath or affirmation, and in such form as the commission requires. Complaints and answers may be reasonably and fairly amended at any time. 
(c)  Upon the filing of a complaint or the initiation of a complaint by the commission or its designee, the commission shall provide written notice to the parties, as follows: 
(1)  To the aggrieved person, acknowledging the filing and advising such person of the time limits and choice of forums under this article; and 
(2)  To the respondent, not later than ten days after such filing or the identification of an additional respondent under subsection (b) of this section, identifying the alleged discriminatory housing practice and advising such respondent of the procedural rights and obligations of respondents under this article with a copy of the original complaint and copies of any supporting documentation referenced in the complaint. 
(Code 1982, § 16-26; Ord. No. 1379, 10-15-1991) 
Sec. 22-86. - Complaint filing. 
(a)  Requirements. A complaint under section 22-85 shall be filed with the commission, in writing, within one year after the alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred or terminated. 
(b)  Additional or substitute respondents. Any person not named in the complaint, who is identified as a respondent in the course of the investigation, may be joined as an additional or substitute respondent upon written notice to such person by the commission explaining the basis for the commission's belief that such person is properly joined as a respondent. 
(Code 1982, § 16-27) 
Sec. 22-87. - Procedures for investigation of complaints. 
(a)  The commission shall commence proceedings with respect to a complaint within 30 days after receipt of the complaint, and shall complete the investigation within 100 days thereof, unless it is impracticable to do so. If the commission is unable to complete the investigation within 100 days after the receipt of the complaint, the aggrieved person and the respondent shall be notified in writing of the reasons for not doing so; however, in no event shall the investigation extend beyond one year from the receipt of the complaint by the commission. 
(b)  When conducting an investigation of a complaint filed under this article, the commission shall have the right to interview any person who may have any information which may further its investigation and to request production of any records and documents for inspection and copying in the possession of any person which may further the investigation. Such persons shall be interviewed under oath. The commission, by majority vote with the advice of the city attorney, shall have the power to issue and serve a subpoena to any such person to appear and testify and to produce any such records or documents for inspection and copying. Said subpoenas and discovery may be ordered to the same extent and subject to the same limitations as would apply if the subpoenas or discovery were ordered or served as part of a civil action in the commonwealth. In case of refusal or neglect to obey a subpoena, the commission may refer this matter to the city attorney, if necessary, in order to take appropriate action to petition for its enforcement in the Circuit Court for the county. The hearing on such petition shall be given priority on the court docket over all cases which are not otherwise given priority on the court docket by law. 
(c)  At the end of each investigation under this section, the commission shall prepare a final investigative report containing: 
(1)  The names and dates of contacts with witnesses; 
(2)  A summary and the dates of correspondence and other contacts with the aggrieved person and the respondent; 
(3)  A summary description of other pertinent records; 
(4)  A summary of witness statements; and 
(5)  Answers to interrogatories. 
A final report under this subsection may be amended if additional evidence is later discovered. 
(d)  The commission shall make available to the aggrieved person and the respondent at any time upon request, following completion of the commission's investigation, information derived from an investigation and any final investigative report relating to that investigation. 
(Code 1982, § 16-28; Ord. No. 1379, 10-15-1991) 
Sec. 22-88. - Reasonable cause determination. 
    The commission shall, within 100 days after the filing of a complaint, determine based on the facts and after consultation with the office of the city attorney whether reasonable cause exists to believe that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about to occur, unless it is impracticable to do so or unless the commission has approved a conciliation agreement with respect to the complaint. In no event, however, shall the investigation be extended beyond one year from the receipt of the complaint by the commission. 
(Code 1982, § 16-29; Ord. No. 1379, 10-15-1991) 
Sec. 22-89. - No reasonable cause determination. 
    If the commission determines that no reasonable cause exists to believe that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about to occur, the commission shall promptly dismiss the complaint notifying the parties within 30 days of such determination. The commission shall make public disclosure of each dismissal. 
(Code 1982, § 16-30; Ord. No. 1379, 10-15-1991) 
Sec. 22-90. - Conciliation. 
    During the period beginning with the filing of such complaint and ending with the filing of a charge or a dismissal by the commission, the commission shall, to the extent feasible, engage in conciliation with respect to such complaint. 
(1)  A conciliation agreement arising out of such conciliation shall be an agreement between the respondent and the complainant, and shall be subject to approval by the commission. 
(2)  A conciliation agreement may provide for binding arbitration of the dispute arising from the complaint. Any such arbitration that results from a conciliation agreement may award appropriate relief, including monetary relief. 
(3)  Each conciliation agreement shall be made public unless the complainant and respondent otherwise agree and the commission determines that disclosure is not required to further the purposes of this article. 
(4)  Whenever the commission has reasonable cause to believe that a respondent has breached a conciliation agreement, the commission may refer the matter to the city attorney with a recommendation that a civil action be filed under section 22-94 for the enforcement of such agreement. 
(5)  Any and all information not otherwise admissible in a court of law derived from the investigation, the investigative report or the copy of the proposed conciliation agreement to which one or more parties objected shall be precluded from use as evidence in any subsequent proceedings, in arbitration or in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1982, § 16-31; Ord. No. 1379, 10-15-1991) 
Sec. 22-91. - Issuance of charge. 
    Upon failure to resolve a complaint by conciliation and after consultation with the office of the city attorney, the commission shall issue a charge on behalf of the aggrieved person and shall immediately refer the charge to the city attorney, who shall consider proceeding with the charge as directed by section 22-93. The commission may not issue a charge under this section regarding an alleged discriminatory housing practice after the beginning of a trial of a civil action commenced by the aggrieved party under an Act of Congress or a state law seeking relief with respect to that discriminatory housing practice. 
(1)  Such charge: 
a.  Shall consist of a short and plain statement of the facts upon which the commission has found reasonable cause to believe that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about to occur; 
b.  Shall be based on the final investigative report; and 
c.  Need not be limited to the acts or ground alleged in the complaint filed under section 22-86. 
(2)  After the commission issues a charge under this section, the commission shall cause a copy thereof to be served on each respondent named in such charge and on each aggrieved person on whose behalf the complaint was filed. 
(Code 1982, § 16-32; Ord. No. 1379, 10-15-1991) 
Sec. 22-92. - Prompt judicial action. 
    If the commission concludes at any time following the filing of a complaint and after consultation with the office of the city attorney that prompt judicial action is necessary to carry out the purpose of this article, the commission may authorize a civil action by the city attorney for appropriate temporary or preliminary relief. Upon receipt of such authorization, the city attorney shall promptly consider commencing and maintaining such action. Any temporary restraining order or other order granting preliminary or temporary relief shall be issued in accordance with the Virginia Rules of Civil Procedure. The commencement of a civil action under this section shall not affect the initiation or continuation of administrative proceedings by the commission under section 22-85. 
(Code 1982, § 16-33; Ord. No. 1379, 10-15-1991) 
Sec. 22-93. - Civil action by city attorney-Charge by housing commission. 
(a)  Not later than 30 days after a charge is referred by the commission to the city attorney under section 22-91, the city attorney shall reach a final decision on whether to commence and maintain a civil action seeking relief on behalf of the complainant in the Circuit Court for the county. 
(b)  Any aggrieved person with respect to the issues to be determined in such a civil action pursuant to subsection (a) of this section may intervene as of right. 
(c)  In a civil action under this section, if the court finds that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about to occur, the court may grant, as relief, any relief which a court could grant with respect to such discriminatory housing practice in a civil action under section 22-95. Any relief so granted that would accrue to an aggrieved person under section 22-95 shall also accrue to the aggrieved person in a civil action under this section. If monetary relief is sought for the benefit of an aggrieved person who does not intervene in the civil action, the court shall not award such relief if that aggrieved person has not complied with discovery orders entered by the court in the course of the action brought under this section. 
(d)  In any court proceeding arising under this section, the court, in its discretion, may allow reasonable attorney's fees and costs. 
(Code 1982, § 16-34; Ord. No. 1379, 10-15-1991) 
Sec. 22-94. - Same-Practices of resistance to article provisions. 
(a)  Issues of public importance. Whenever the city attorney has reasonable cause to believe that any person or group of persons is engaged in a pattern or practice of resistance to the full enjoyment of any of the rights granted by this article, or that any group of persons has been denied any of the rights granted by this article and such denial raises an issue of general public importance, the city attorney may commence a civil action in the appropriate circuit court for appropriate relief. 
(b)  Breach of a conciliation agreement. In the event of a breach of a conciliation agreement by a respondent, the commission may authorize a civil action by the city attorney. The city attorney may commence a civil action in any appropriate circuit court for appropriate relief. A civil action under this subsection shall be commenced no later than the expiration of 90 days after the referral of such alleged breach. 
(c)  Subpoena. The city attorney, on behalf of the commission or other party at whose request a subpoena is issued under this article, may enforce such subpoena in appropriate proceedings in the appropriate circuit court. 
(d)  Relief, penalties. In a civil action under subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the court may: 
(1)  Award such preventive relief, including a permanent or temporary injunction, restraining order, or other order against the person responsible for a violation of this article as is necessary to ensure the full enjoyment of the rights granted by this article; 
(2)  Award such other relief as the court deems appropriate, including compensatory and punitive damages to the person aggrieved; 
(3)  Assess a civil penalty against the respondent: 
a.  In an amount not exceeding $50,000.00 for a first violation; and 
b.  In an amount not exceeding $100,000.00 for any subsequent violation; 
(4)  Award the complainant, when the prevailing party, reasonable attorney's fees and costs. The defendant may be awarded such fees and costs if the complaint was brought in bad faith and without any basis. 
(e)  Other aggrieved persons. Upon timely application, any person may intervene in a civil action commenced by the city attorney under subsection (a) or (b) of this section which involves an alleged discriminatory housing practice with respect to which such person is an aggrieved person or a party to a conciliation agreement. The court may grant such appropriate relief to any such intervening party as is authorized to be granted to a plaintiff in a civil action under section 22-95. 
(Code 1982, § 16-35; Ord. No. 1379, 10-15-1991) 
Sec. 22-95. - Civil action; enforcement by private parties. 
(a)  An aggrieved person may commence a civil action in an appropriate state court not later than two years after the occurrence or the termination of an alleged discriminatory housing practice, or the breach of a conciliation agreement entered into under this article, whichever occurs last, to obtain appropriate relief with respect to such discriminatory housing practice or breach. 
(b)  An aggrieved person may commence a civil action under this section no later than 180 days after the conclusion of the administrative process with respect to a complaint or charge, or not later than two years after the occurrence or the termination of an alleged discriminatory housing practice, whichever is later. This subsection shall not apply to actions arising from a breach of a conciliation agreement. An aggrieved person may commence a civil action under this section whether or not a complaint has been filed under section 22-86 and without regard to the status of any such complaint. If the commission or a state or federal agency has obtained a conciliation agreement with the consent of an aggrieved person, no action may be filed under this section by such aggrieved person with respect to the alleged discriminatory housing practice which forms the basis for such complaint except for the purpose of enforcing the terms of such an agreement. 
(c)  In a civil action under subsection (a) of this section, if the court finds that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about to occur, the court may award to the plaintiff, as the prevailing party, compensatory and punitive damages, reasonable attorney's fees and costs, and subject to subsection (d) of this section, may grant as relief, any permanent or temporary injunction, temporary restraining order, or other order, including an order enjoining the defendant from engaging in such practice or order such affirmative action as may be appropriate. 
(d)  Relief granted under subsection (c) of this section shall not affect any contract, sale, encumbrance, or lease consummated before the granting of such relief and involving bona fide purchasers, encumbrancers or tenants without actual notice of the filing of a complaint with the commission or civil action under this article. 
(e)  Upon timely application, the city attorney may intervene in such civil action, if the city attorney certifies that the case is of general public importance. Upon intervention, the city attorney may obtain such relief as would be available to the private party under subsection (c) of this section. 
(Code 1982, § 16-36; Ord. No. 1379, 10-15-1991) 
Sec. 22-96. - Witness fees. 
    Witnesses summoned by a subpoena under this article shall be entitled to the same witness and mileage fees as witnesses in proceedings in the courts of the commonwealth. Fees payable to a witness summoned by a subpoena issued at the request of a party shall be paid by that party or, where a party is unable to pay the fees, by the commission. 
(Code 1982, § 16-37; Ord. No. 1379, 10-15-1991) 
Sec. 22-97. - Additional powers of the commission. 
(a)  In any case in which the commission has received or initiated a complaint and conducted an investigation of any violation of this article and determined that there exists a reasonable cause to believe that a licensed broker, salesperson, rental location agent, or agency has engaged in discriminatory housing practices prohibited by the Virginia Fair Housing Law (section 36-96.1 et seq.) or the Virginia Equal Credit Opportunity Act (section 59.1-21.19 et seq.), the commission shall refer the matter to the state real estate board. 
(b)  The commission shall perform all acts necessary and proper to carry out the provisions of this article and may promulgate and amend necessary regulations. 
(Code 1982, § 16-38; Ord. No. 1379, 10-15-1991) 
Sec. 22-98. - Construction of law. 
    Nothing in this article shall abridge the Federal Fair Housing Act of 1968, as amended (42 USC 3601 et seq.). 
(Code 1982, § 16-40; Ord. No. 1379, 10-15-1991) 
Secs. 22-99-22-126. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RESIDENTIAL LANDLORD-TENANT RELATIONS 

Sec. 22-127. - Definitions. 
    The terms "landlord," "owner," "tenant," "rent," "rental agreement," and other terms used in this article and by the housing commission carry the same definitions as are contained in Code of Virginia, § 55-248.4. 
(Code 1982, § 16-41; Ord. No. 708) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-128. - Territorial application. 
    This article applies to rental agreements, wherever made, for dwelling units within the city, with such exemptions as are set forth in Code of Virginia, § 55-248.5. 
(Code 1982, § 16-42; Ord. No. 708) 
Sec. 22-129. - Functions. 
(a)  Conflicts in landlord-tenant relationships arising out of the application of the Virginia Residential Landlord and Tenant Act regarding dwelling units located within the city may be submitted to the city housing commission. The housing commission is authorized to mediate such conflicts, as is permitted by the Code of Virginia, § 55-248.2 et seq. and is authorized to provide arbitration, as is permitted by state law. 
(b)  The housing commission shall have the assistance of staff designated by the city manager and may also avail itself of the services of the city attorney. 
(Code 1982, § 16-43; Ord. No. 708) 
Sec. 22-130. - Procedure. 
    Complaints alleging conflict in the application of the Virginia Residential Landlord and Tenant Act shall be received and processed pursuant to procedures, rules and regulations provided herein and those which the housing commission shall establish from time to time. 
(Code 1982, § 16-44; Ord. No. 708) 
Sec. 22-131. - Staff processing of complaints. 
(a)  Complaints alleging conflict shall be made initially to the staff representative. Upon receiving the complaint, the staff representative shall make such investigation as is necessary and appropriate to ascertain the facts, and shall make every reasonable effort to resolve the conflict or shall refer the complaint to the proper authority. The staff representative shall maintain a record specifying the names, addresses, nature of the conflict, all action taken on the conflict and all action taken toward its resolution. 
(b)  If the staff representative is unable to resolve the conflict, the parties, upon mutual agreement, may elect to submit the conflict to the housing commission for either mediation, pursuant to section 22-132, or arbitration, pursuant to section 22-133. If the parties elect to submit the conflict to the housing commission, the staff representative shall then submit the record of the complaint to the housing commission, in writing, with copies also being provided to the parties. 
(Code 1982, § 16-45; Ord. No. 708) 
Sec. 22-132. - Mediation. 
    The housing commission shall review the report of the staff representative, meet with the parties to hear their views, and recommend such reconciliatory action as the housing commission deems appropriate. If reconciliation is reached, the terms thereof shall be reduced to writing and incorporated into a stipulation of settlement signed by the parties. This stipulation is for reconciliation purposes only and does not constitute an admission by any party that any law has been violated. Such stipulation of settlement shall be filed with and maintained by the housing commission. 
(Code 1982, § 16-46; Ord. No. 708) 
Sec. 22-133. - Arbitration. 
(a)  The housing commission shall provide arbitration pursuant to rules and regulations set forth by the housing commission and those specified by the Code of Virginia. Should the parties mutually agree to this procedure, its consequences shall be binding upon them. In accordance with the Code of Virginia, such settlements are enforceable in court. 
(b)  The terms of any arbitration settlement shall be filed with and maintained by the housing commission. 
(Code 1982, § 16-47; Ord. No. 708) 
Sec. 22-134. - Rules and regulations for landlord-tenant proceedings. 
(a)  The housing commission shall send sufficient notification of the time and place of any mediation or arbitration proceedings to the parties. 
(b)  During the proceedings, the parties shall, at their option, appear before the housing commission in person or be represented by duly authorized representatives, and may have the assistance of an attorney. 
(c)  The parties or their authorized representatives may present testimony and evidence, and the right to cross examine witnesses shall be preserved. 
(d)  The parties or their authorized representatives may file such statements with the housing commission as they deem necessary. 
(e)  The housing commission shall not be bound by strict rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity. 
(f)  The housing commission shall maintain a record of the proceedings. Upon request by any party, the housing commission shall furnish a copy of the record, at such cost as it deems appropriate. 
(Code 1982, § 16-48; Ord. No. 708) 
Sec. 22-135. - Disclosure of information. 
(a)  All information relevant to a complaint under this article shall be held confidential by the housing commission until the proceedings before the housing commission shall be concluded or reconciliation is reached, unless the parties agree in writing to disclosure of such information. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall contravene the Virginia Freedom of Information Act. 
(Code 1982, § 16-49; Ord. No. 708) 
Sec. 22-136. - Other remedies. 
    Nothing herein shall prevent any person from exercising any rights or seeking any remedy to which that person might otherwise be entitled. 
(Code 1982, § 16-50; Ord. No. 708) 
Chapter 24 - LIBRARIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of city to provide or support public libraries, § 2.02. 
Cross reference- Zoning, ch. 48. 
State Law reference- Libraries generally, Code of Virginia, § 42.1-1 et seq.; local libraries, Code of Virginia, § 42.1-33 et seq. 

Sec. 24-1. - Established. 
    A public library, for the use and benefit of the residents of the city and others by cooperative agreement, is hereby established. 
(Code 1973, § 17-1; Code 1982, § 17-1; Ord. No. 800) 
Sec. 24-2. - Library funds. 
(a)  The city council shall provide sufficient support, as defined in Code of Virginia, § 42.1-33 for the operation of the public library with funds appropriated for that purpose by means of monies derived from the general levy of the city and other sources. 
(b)  The library board of trustees shall have the right to recommend the acceptance of donations and bequests of money, personal property and real estate, or endowments for the maintenance of the public library. 
(Code 1982, § 17-2; Ord. No. 800) 
Sec. 24-3. - Board of trustees-Establishment; appointment, terms, compensation and removal of members. 
    A library board of trustees, composed of seven members, is hereby established. The members shall be appointed by the city council from among the eligible voters' residents in the city, with reference to their fitness for such office. The members holding office on the date of enactment of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall continue in office until the expiration of their presently designated terms. Thereafter, each member shall be appointed for a term of four years. Upon the expiration of a term of office, the member holding that office may continue to serve until a successor shall be qualified. Any vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term as soon as possible in the manner in which members of the board are regularly chosen. A member shall not receive a salary or other compensation for services as a member, but necessary expenses actually incurred are authorized to be paid from library funds. A member may be removed for misconduct or neglect of duty by the city council. 
(Code 1982, § 17-3; Ord. No. 800) 
State Law reference- Library board, Code of Virginia, § 42.1-35. 
Sec. 24-4. - Same-Election of chair and vice-chair. 
    The chair and vice-chair of the library board of trustees shall be elected by the board from among its members within two months following the annual installation of new full-term members. 
(Code 1982, § 17-4; Ord. No. 800) 
Sec. 24-5. - Same-Procedural regulations. 
    The library board of trustees shall: 
(1)  Establish such bylaws, rules of procedure, and regulations for its own guidance consistent with the state code, the city Charter, and this Code; 
(2)  Meet in sessions open to the public regularly on dates established by the board and in special sessions as necessary; 
(3)  Post with the city clerk, in a prominent place in the library, notices of all meetings and proposed agendas which shall be available to the public at least three days prior to meetings, except in cases of emergency; 
(4)  Maintain and file with the city clerk approved minutes of its meetings; and 
(5)  Follow, unless otherwise provided, the general requirements for citizen boards, commissions and committees of the city, as set forth in chapter 2. 
(Code 1982, § 17-5; Ord. No. 737; Ord. No. 800) 
Sec. 24-6. - Same-Duties. 
    The functions of management and control of the public library, referred to in the Code of Virginia, § 42.1-35, as vested in local library boards shall be: 
(1)  Performed by the library board of trustees in a manner compatible with the council/manager form of government provided for in the city Charter; and 
(2)  Defined and construed to consist of the following specific duties: 
a.  The library board of trustees shall serve, on behalf of the city council and the residents of the city as the citizen body charged with the general supervision of the public library; 
b.  The board shall establish policies, including a internet policy, and issue necessary regulations for the governance of the public library as the board deems appropriate, acting within general policies or guidelines as may be set forth by the city council; 
c.  The board shall keep the city council and city manager informed in a timely manner of pertinent matters relating to the library and advise the city council and city manager on actions respecting the library as the board deems appropriate; 
d.  The board shall maintain appropriate liaison with other libraries throughout the metropolitan area and the state, including the Library of Virginia, and with various state and national library associations, as required; 
e.  The board, after consultation with the city manager, shall recruit persons to fill vacancies in the position of director of the library and, in so doing, may utilize the services provided by the personnel office. The board shall recommend to the city manager a person qualified to be director and acceptable to the board for appointment as director by the city manager. The board shall recommend to the city manager all other personnel actions relative to the position of director, including compensation; 
f.  The board shall prepare annually, with the advice and assistance of the director of the library and pursuant to the call for estimates and other guidance from the city manager, the board's estimates for funds required for sufficient support of the public library. The city manager shall review the board's estimates; make such adjustments deemed appropriate by the city manager; inform the board, through the director of the library, regarding any such adjustments, together with information on any estimates for other departments and offices that affect library operations; hear any appeals of the board regarding such information; and include in the budget prepared by the city manager for presentation to the city council recommendations regarding estimates for sufficient support of the public library, appending to the budget the estimates proposed by the board; 
the board shall perform any other duty necessary to carryout the duties of this section. 
(Code 1982, § 17-6; Ord. No. 800) 
State Law reference- Every library board shall adopt and file an acceptable use policy for the Internet, Code of Virginia, § 42.1-36.1. 
Sec. 24-7. - Director and other library employees. 
(a)  The director of the library shall be appointed by the city manager, pursuant to section 5.02 of the city Charter, as the head of a department. The director, acting under the policies established by the library board of trustees and under the direction of the city manager regarding the effective operation of the library in accord with the board's policies, shall perform the day-to-day professional management of the public library, shall supervise and direct the work of the other employees of the library and shall coordinate the work of the library with the work of the other departments and offices of the city government as may be necessary. The director shall keep the board and the city manager fully and appropriately informed regarding the management of the library. 
(b)  All other employees of the library shall perform their duties under the direction of the director of the library. They shall be classified and compensated pursuant to the provisions of the position classification and pay plan of the city and shall be subject to the rules with respect to persons in the classified service. 
(Code 1982, § 17-7; Ord. No. 800) 
Chapter 26 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of city over motor vehicles and traffic, § 2.04. 
Cross reference- Noise, § 14-49 et seq.; breaking, injuring or preventing the operation of vehicle, aircraft, or boat, etc., § 28-75; entering or setting in motion vehicle, aircraft, or boat without the consent of owner, etc., § 28-76; coasting with sleigh, sled, bobsled, etc., on city streets, § 28-158; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 36; emergency closing of streets, § 36-12; temporary one-way streets, § 36-13; public parking lots, § 36-166 et seq.; relief from payment of personal property taxes on automobiles, § 40-162 et seq.; vehicles for hire, ch. 46. 
State Law reference- Municipal powers as to use of streets, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2013, 15.2-2029; authority of city to regulate traffic, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1300 et seq.; motor vehicles generally, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Definitions. 
    The words and phrases defined in the Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100 shall, when used in this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in such section, except in those instances where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
(Code 1982, § 20-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-2. - Adoption of state law. 
(a)  Pursuant to the authority of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1313, all of the provisions and requirements of the laws of the commonwealth contained in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100 et seq., those pertaining to dispositions in the Juvenile and Domestic Relations Court contained in Code of Virginia, § 16.1-278 et seq. and those contained in Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266 et seq., as they may be amended, except those which by their very nature can have no application within or to the city and those the violation of which constitutes a felony, are hereby adopted and incorporated as part of this chapter, by reference and made applicable within the city. References to "highways of the state" contained in such provisions and requirements hereby adopted shall be deemed to refer to streets, highways, alleys and other public ways within the city. Such provisions and requirements are hereby adopted, mutatis mutandis, and made a part of this chapter as fully as though set forth at length herein. It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to violate or fail, neglect or refuse to comply with Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100 et seq., or of Code of Virginia, § 16.1-278 et seq., or of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266 et seq., which is adopted by this section. In no event shall the penalty imposed for the violation of any provision or requirement adopted herein exceed the penalty imposed for a similar offense under Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100 et seq., Code of Virginia, § 16.1-278 et seq., or Code of Virginia, § 18.2-266 et seq. 
(b)  Pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 1-220, all references to the Code of Virginia in subsection (a) of this section shall include all future amendments to the state statutes. 
(Code 1973, § 21-3; Code 1982, § 20-2; Ord. No. 722; Ord. No. 904; Ord. No. 952; Ord. No. 1057, 7-25-1983; Ord. No. 1079, 7-9-1984; Ord. No. 1089, 11-26-1984; Ord. No. 1107, 5-28-1985; Ord. No. 1147, 6-23-1986; Ord. No. 1186, 5-11-1987; Ord. No. 1224, 6-13-1988; Ord. No. 1270, 6-26-1989; Ord. No. 1275, 9-25-1989; Ord. No. 1313, 6-11-1990; Ord. No. 1351, 4-9-1991; Ord. No. 1364, 6-24-1991; Ord. No. 1407, 6-8-1992; Ord. No. 1423, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 1441, 6-14-1993; Ord. No. 1490, 9-12-1994; Ord. No. 1522, 9-11-1995; Ord. No. 1535, § 1, 2-12-1996; Ord. No. 1537, § 1, 2-26-1996; Ord. No. 1552, § 1, 7-22-1996; Ord. No. 1580, § 1, 6-9-1997; Ord. No. 1610, § 1, 5-26-1998; Ord. No. 1649, § 1, 6-14-1999; Ord. No. 1682, 5-22-2000; Ord. No. 1694, 2-26-2001; Ord. No. 1705, 6-11-2001; Ord. No. 1722, 7-8-2002; Ord. No. 1739, 7-14-2003; Ord. No. 1764, 6-28-2004) 
Sec. 26-3. - Powers and duties of city manager. 
(a)  The city manager, except as otherwise directed by this chapter or the council, shall have power and is hereby authorized: 
(1)  To regulate the operation and parking of vehicles within the city by the erection or placing of proper signs or markers indicating prohibited or limited parking, restricted speed areas, one-way streets, through or arterial streets, stop streets, U-turns, school zones, hospital zones, loading and unloading zones, safety zones, crosswalks, quiet zones, play streets and other signs or markers indicating the place and manner of operating or parking vehicles within the city. 
(2)  To regulate the movement of pedestrians upon the streets and sidewalks of the city by the erection or placing of proper signs or markers indicating the flow of pedestrian traffic. 
(3)  To designate bus stops and taxicab stands and to erect signs prohibiting the parking of vehicles other than buses and taxicabs at such stops. 
(4)  To designate truck routes and to regulate the parking of vehicles of various sizes and weights. 
(5)  To secure all such necessary signs or markers to be erected or placed on any street or part of a street when he deems such action necessary. 
(6)  To mark off traffic lanes on streets and parts of streets indicating and directing the flow of traffic, when, in the judgment of the city manager, such action is necessary. 
(7)  To make and enforce temporary regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. 
The existence of such signs or markers at any place within the city shall be prima facie evidence that such signs or markers were erected or placed by and at the direction of the city manager and in accordance with the provisions of this subsection. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with the directions indicated or any sign or marker erected or placed in accordance with the provisions of this section when so placed or erected, which violation shall, upon conviction, be punishable as a traffic infraction. 
(c)  The city manager shall have the power and is hereby authorized to promulgate a rule establishing a uniform fine schedule for any violation of any ordinance regulating parking or any regulation promulgated pursuant to any such parking ordinance. 
(Code 1973, § 21-4; Code 1982, § 20-3; Ord. No. 952) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to grant city manager power to designate stop and yield intersections, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1301; grant of authority to regulate parking, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1220. 
Sec. 26-4. - Enforcement of chapter provisions by police officers. 
(a)  Every police officer shall enforce the provisions of this chapter; provided, that such officer shall be uniformed at the time of such enforcement or shall display a badge or other sign of authority of such officer; and provided further, that all officers making arrests incident to the enforcement of this chapter shall be paid fixed and determined salaries for their services and shall have no interest in, nor be permitted by law to accept the benefit of, any fine or fee resulting from the arrest or conviction of an offender against any provision of this chapter. 
(b)  With the consent of the landowner, any such officer or other uniformed employee of the local law enforcement agency may patrol the landowner's property to enforce state, county, city or town motor vehicle registration and licensing requirements. 
(c)  Any law enforcement officer may patrol the streets and roads within subdivisions of real property or within land submitted to a horizontal property regime, pursuant to the Code of Virginia, § 55-79.1 et seq., or the Code of Virginia, § 55-79.39 et seq., which streets and roads are maintained by the owners of the lots or parcels of land within the subdivision or the owners of condominium units within any horizontal property regime or any association of owners, on the request or with the consent of the owners or association of owners, to enforce the provisions of this title punishable as felonies, misdemeanors or traffic infractions. 
(Code 1973, § 21-5; Code 1982, § 20-4) 
Cross reference- Police, ch. 32. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-102. 
Sec. 26-5. - Compliance with chapter provisions; penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse, fail or neglect to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto. 
(b)  Every person who unlawfully violates any of the provisions of this chapter, or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto, for which no other penalty is provided shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a traffic infraction and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00. 
State Law reference- Penalty for violation of traffic laws, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-113. 
Sec. 26-6. - Fees for traffic infractions. 
    The following traffic infractions shall be prepayable in the respective amounts shown: 
(1)  Failure to display valid city auto sticker: $50.00. 
(2)  Failure to display valid license plates: $50.00. 
(3)  Violation of official sign: $35.00. 
(4)  Obstruct or impede traffic on snow emergency route: $50.00. 
(5)  Abandon or park motor vehicle on snow emergency route: $50.00. 
(6)  Parking in a restricted zone: $50.00. 
(7)  Violation of designated parking area: $50.00. 
(8)  Parking in handicapped zone: $500.00. 
(9)  Stopping obstructing traffic: $35.00. 
(10)  Parking on highway: $35.00. 
(11)  Parking on sidewalk: $35.00. 
(12)  Parking more than 48 hours: $35.00. 
(13)  Parking beyond designated time of official sign: $50.00. 
(14)  Parking in a bus/taxicab zone: $35.00. 
(15)  Parking in taxicab stand: $35.00. 
(16)  Parking in fire lane: $50.00. 
(17)  Double parking: $35.00. 
(18)  Parking boat or boat trailer in residential area: $35.00. 
(19)  Parking commercial vehicle in residential area: $35.00. 
(20)  Parking in loading zone or alleyway: $25.00. 
(21)  Interfering right to parking space or driveway: $50.00. 
(22)  Parking within 20 feet of corner: $50.00. 
(23)  Parking within 15 feet of fire hydrant: $50.00. 
(24)  Motor running unattended: $35.00. 
(25)  Parked left wheel to curb: $35.00. 
(26)  Failure to display valid state inspection sticker: $50.00. 
    Failure to pay or to contest this citation by notifying the police department within 30 days will result in a penalty of double the fine. 
(Code 1973, § 21-19; Code 1982, § 20-17; Ord. No. 952; Ord. No. 1312, 6-11-1990; Ord. No. 1681, 5-22-2000; Ord. No. 1683, 6-12-2000; Ord. No. 1685, 7-10-2000; Ord. No. 1765, 7-26-2004; Ord. No. 1849, 9-27-2010) 
Cross reference- General penalty for violations of Code, § 1-12. 
State Law reference- Penalty for violation of traffic laws, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-113. 
Sec. 26-7. - Traffic emergencies. 
(a)  In the interest of preserving the safety, health and welfare of the public under conditions of danger to persons or property specified in this subsection, the city manager, in his sole discretion, may declare a state of traffic emergency and make effective certain regulations affecting the operation and parking of motor vehicles in and on the city streets, as designed by the city manager. These conditions and the regulations in effect during the period of traffic emergency are as follows: The city manager shall have the authority to declare a traffic emergency upon the announcement of a winter storm warning by the U.S. Weather Bureau or a similar professional weather forecasting service. The emergency shall become effective upon the notification to at least three radio stations whose broadcast areas include the city. The emergency shall remain effective until rescinded by the city manager through the same procedure. The city manager shall have the authority to designate and post, with appropriate signs, snow emergency routes. 
(b)  During a traffic emergency it shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Obstruct or impede traffic on a street designated and posted as a snow emergency route by reason of the failure of that person to have the vehicle operated by him equipped on the drive wheels with snow or all-weather tires or snow chains; or 
(2)  To abandon or park a motor vehicle on a street designated and posted as a snow emergency route. Motor vehicles that are stalled, stuck, parked or abandoned on a street designated and posted as a snow emergency route may be towed and stored at the direction of the police department with all reasonable costs being charged to the owner of the vehicle. 
(c)  Upon conviction of a violation of subsection (b) of this section, the penalty shall be no less than $50.00. 
(d)  In order to permit the removal of accumulations of snow, the city manager shall have the authority to designate and post streets for a temporary period so that parking or abandoning a vehicle is prohibited. It shall be unlawful to park or abandon a vehicle on a street when so designated and posted. Any vehicle in violation may be removed and stored at the direction of the police with all reasonable costs charged to the owner of the vehicle. No vehicle shall be removed unless the street has been so designated and conspicuously posted for at least 24 hours. Upon conviction, the penalty for violation of this subsection (d) shall be a fine of no less than $20.00, nor more than $25.00. 
(e)  In any prosecution under subsections (b)(2) or (d) of this section, where the identity of the driver is not known to the charging officer, proof that the vehicle described in the complaint, summons or warrant was parked or abandoned in violation of subsections (b)(2) or (d) of this section, together with proof that the defendant was, at the time of such offense, the registered owner of the vehicle shall constitute a prima facie presumption that such registered owner of the vehicle was the person who parked the vehicle at the location and time during which the offense occurred. 
(Code 1973, § 21-8; Code 1982, § 20-7; Ord. No. 1202, 9-28-1987; Ord. No. 1849, 9-27-2010) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt regulation regarding operation of vehicles in snow, sleet, hail, freezing rain, ice, water, flood, high wind, storm or the threat thereof, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1302. 
Sec. 26-8. - Removal and disposition of unattended or abandoned vehicles. 
(a)  Whenever any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is: 
(1)  Found on the streets of the city or public grounds, which vehicle is unattended by the owner or operator and constitutes a hazard to traffic or is parked in such manner as to be in violation of law; 
(2)  Left unattended for more than 48 hours upon any street or publicly owned property or upon any privately owned property other than the property of the owner of such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, within the city; or 
(3)  Abandoned upon such privately owned property without the permission of the owner, lessee or occupant regardless of whether it was brought onto the private property with the consent of the owner or person in control of the private property; 
Any such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer may be removed for safekeeping by or under the direction of a police officer to a storage garage or area; provided, no such vehicle shall be removed from a privately owned premises without the written request of the owner, lessee or occupant. When the owner, lessee or occupant of such privately owned property requests such removal, he shall be required to indemnify the city against any loss or expense involved by reason of removal, storage or sale. Each removal shall be reported to the chief of police and notice given to the owner of the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer as promptly as possible. 
(b)  The owner of an unattended or abandoned vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, before obtaining possession, shall pay to the parties entitled thereto all reasonable costs incidental to the removal, storage and locating the owner of the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer. 
(c)  Should the owner of an unattended or abandoned vehicle fail or refuse to pay the costs or should the identity or whereabouts of such owner be unknown or unascertainable after a diligent search has been made, and after notice to him at his last known address and to the holder of any lien of record in the office of the division of motor vehicles against the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, the chief of police or his duly designated agent may, after holding the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer 40 days and after due notice of sale, dispose of the same at public sale, and the proceeds of the sale shall be forwarded by the selling officer to the treasurer of the city. The treasurer shall pay from the proceeds of the sale the cost of removal, storage, investigation as to ownership and liens and notice of sale, and the balance of such funds shall be held by him for the owner and paid to the owner upon satisfactory proof of ownership. 
(d)  It shall be presumed that the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, or part thereof, is abandoned if: 
(1)  It lacks: 
a.  A current license plate; 
b.  A current city sticker; or 
c.  A valid state inspection certificate or sticker; and 
(2)  It has been in a specific location for ten days without being moved. 
(e)  If no claim has been made by the owner for the proceeds of such sale, after the payment of the above-mentioned cost, the funds may be deposited to the general fund or any special fund of the city. Any such owner shall be entitled to apply to the city for such funds within three years from the date of the sale, and if timely application is made, the city shall pay the same to the owner without interest or charges. No claim shall be made nor shall any suit, action or proceeding be instituted for the recovery of such funds after three years from the date of such sale. 
(Code 1973, § 21-9; Code 1982, § 20-8; Ord. No. 706; Ord. No. 952) 
Sec. 26-9. - Unlicensed vehicles, boats and trailers on streets. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer on any street in the city unless same shall have displayed valid license plates, a valid state inspection certificate or sticker and a valid city sticker, when such vehicle is, by law, required to display a city sticker or state inspection certificate or sticker. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park any boat or boat trailer on any street in a residentially zoned district in the city. 
(c)  Any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, boat or boat trailer parked on the streets of the city in violation of the provisions of this section may be removed at the expense of the owner and disposed of in the same manner as prescribed in section 26-8. 
(Code 1973, § 21-10; Code 1982, § 20-9; Ord. No. 885; Ord. No. 952) 
State Law reference- Authority of city to provide for removal and disposition of unattended and abandoned vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1201. 
Sec. 26-10. - Prerequisites to leaving vehicle in street or parking lot. 
    No person having control or charge of a motor vehicle shall allow such vehicle to stand on any street or parking lot unattended without first effectively setting the handbrake, stopping the motor and, on public streets, turning the front wheels into the curb or side of the street. 
(Code 1973, § 21-12; Code 1982, § 20-10; Ord. No. 860) 
Sec. 26-11. - Parking spaces reserved for disabled persons. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a vehicle not displaying disabled license plates, organizational removable windshield placards, permanent removable windshield placards, or temporary removable windshield placards issued under Code of Virginia, § 46.2-731 or DV disabled parking license plates issued under Code of Virginia, § 46.2-739B, to be parked in a parking space reserved for persons with disabilities that limit or impair their ability to walk; or for a person who is not limited or impaired in ability to walk, to park a vehicle in a parking space so designated, except when transporting a person with such a disability in the vehicle. 
(b)  A summons or parking ticket for the offense may be issued by law enforcement officers and other uniformed personnel employed by the city to enforce parking regulations without the necessity of warrants being obtained by the owner of the private parking area, shopping center or business office. 
(c)  This section shall apply only to parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities that limit or impair their ability to walk identified in accordance with provisions of Code of Virginia, § 36-99.11. 
(d)  Disabled parking license plates, permanent removable windshield placards, temporary removable windshield placards, and DV disabled parking license plates issued by other states and countries for the purpose of identifying vehicles permitted to use parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities that limit or impair their ability to walk shall be accorded all rights and privileges accorded vehicles displaying such devices in the state. 
(e)  The penalty for parking in violation of this section shall not exceed $500.00. 
(Code 1982, § 20-11; Ord. No. 859; Ord. No. 952; Ord. No. 1527, 10-10-1995) 
State Law reference- Parking spaces for the disabled, Code of Virginia, § 36-99.11; parking for the disabled, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1240 et seq. 
Sec. 26-12. - Authority of fire department officials to direct traffic. 
    Officers of the fire department may direct or assist the police in directing traffic at or in the immediate vicinity of a fire and, while so acting, shall have all the authority of peace officers. 
(Code 1973, § 21-14; Code 1982, § 20-12) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention, ch. 18. 
Sec. 26-13. - Permit for parades and processions. 
    No procession or parade containing 100 or more persons or 25 or more vehicles, except through traffic, the Armed Forces of the United States, the military forces of this state and the forces of the police and fire departments, shall occupy, march, or proceed along any street, except in accordance with a permit issued by the chief of police and approved by the city manager and such other regulations as are set forth in this Code which may apply. 
(Code 1973, § 21-15; Code 1982, § 20-13) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 36; business, professional, occupational licenses, § 40-556. 
Sec. 26-14. - Commercial vehicles on residential streets. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commercial vehicle shall include any motor vehicle upon which is displayed or painted any sign which identifies or advertises any business or commercial venture of any kind, and any other motor vehicle which is used primarily in any business or commercial venture of any kind, when such use is apparent to observation and shall include, but not be limited to, taxicabs, tow trucks, tractors, tractor-trailers, delivery, service and repair vehicles and dump trucks. 
    Residential district shall include only those areas zoned R-1A, R-1B, R-C, R-M and R-TH established under the provisions of chapter 48, pertaining to zoning. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park any commercial vehicle on any street in a residentially zoned district in the city; provided that a commercial vehicle may be parked on such a street for not more than eight hours within any 24-hour period while loading or unloading or while the custodian of the commercial vehicle is performing services at a residence or site adjacent to the street upon which the commercial vehicle is parked. 
(c)  Any commercial vehicle parked in violation of the terms of this section may be removed at the expense of the owner and disposed of in the same manner as prescribed in section 26-8. 
(Code 1982, § 20-14; Ord. No. 897) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-15. - Parking with right wheels to curb. 
    No vehicle shall be stopped or parked except close to and parallel to the right edge of the curb or street; except a vehicle may be stopped close to and parallel to the left curb or edge of the street on one-way streets, other than dual-lane or divided streets. 
(Code 1982, § 20-15; Ord. No. 952) 
Sec. 26-16. - Towing for unpaid parking tickets. 
(a)  Whenever there is found any motor vehicle parked upon the public streets or public grounds within the city against which there are three or more outstanding unpaid or otherwise unsettled parking violation notices, or against which there is one or more outstanding unpaid or otherwise unsettled parking violation notices for failure to display a current city license sticker when such vehicle is, by law, required to display such sticker, such vehicle may be immobilized or, by towing or otherwise, be removed or conveyed to a place designated by the chief of police for the temporary storage of such vehicles. Any immobilization, removal or conveyance of the vehicle, pursuant to this section, shall be by or under the direction of an officer of the police department. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the officer removing such motor vehicle, or under whose direction such vehicle is removed, to inform, as soon as practicable, the owner of the removed vehicle of the fact of the towing with a reference which explains the nature and circumstances of the prior unsettled parking violations. 
(c)  The owner or other duly authorized person shall be permitted to repossess or to secure the release of the vehicle by payment of all outstanding parking violation notices for which the vehicle was removed and, where applicable, by obtaining a current city sticker and by payment of all reasonable costs incidental to the removal and storage of the vehicle and efforts to locate the owner of the vehicle. Should such owner fail or refuse to pay such fines and costs, or should the identity or whereabouts of such owner be unknown or unascertainable, such vehicle may be sold in accordance with the procedures set forth in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1213. 
(Code 1982, § 20-16; Ord. No. 952; Ord. No. 1849, 9-27-2010) 
Sec. 26-17. - Stopping vehicles for inspection or to secure information. 
    Except as prohibited by Code of Virginia, § 19.2-59, on request or signal, any police officer who shall be in uniform or who shall exhibit a badge or other sign of authority shall have the right to stop any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer to inspect its equipment, operation, manufacturer's serial or engine number; or, upon request or signal, the driver of which the officer has reason to believe has committed or is committing a violation of any traffic law or rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto; or stop any property-carrying motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer to inspect its contents or load, if such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is a property-carrying vehicle, or for the purpose of securing such other information as may be necessary, or for the purpose of issuing a traffic citation to or arresting the operator of such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer. 
(Code 1973, § 21-6; Code 1982, § 20-5; Ord. No. 952) 
State Law reference- Stopping vehicles for inspection or to secure information, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-103. 
Sec. 26-18. - Operators to give full time and attention. 
    No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon the streets of the city without giving full time and attention to the operation of the vehicle. 
(Code 1973, § 21-7; Code 1982, § 20-6) 
Sec. 26-19. - Use of photo-monitoring systems to enforce traffic light signals; penalty. 
(a)  [Definitions.] For purposes of this section: 
    Owner means the registered owner of a vehicle on record with the department of motor vehicles. 
    Traffic light signal violation monitoring system means a vehicle sensor installed to work in conjunction with a traffic light that automatically produces two or more photographs, two or more microphotographs, video or other recorded images of each vehicle at the time that the operator of the vehicle fails to stop or remain stopped at a steady red traffic light signal in violation of Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-833, 46.2-835 or 46.2-836, as amended, which are incorporated by reference in section 98-1. For each such vehicle, at least one recorded image shall be of the vehicle before it has illegally entered the intersection, and at least one recorded image shall be of the same vehicle after it has illegally entered that intersection. 
(b)  The city manager or the city manager's designee, may install and operate traffic light signal violation monitoring systems at no more than ten intersections in the city for the purpose of imposing monetary liability on the operator of a motor vehicle for failure to comply with traffic light signals in the city in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(c)  The operator of a vehicle shall be liable for a monetary penalty imposed pursuant to this section if such vehicle is found, as evidenced by information obtained from a traffic light signal violation monitoring system, to have failed to comply with a traffic light signal within the city. 
(d)  Proof of a violation of this section shall be evidenced by information obtained from a traffic light signal violation monitoring system authorized pursuant to this section. A certificate, sworn to or affirmed by a law enforcement officer employed by the city authorized to impose penalties pursuant to this section, or a facsimile thereof, based upon inspection of photographs, microphotographs, videotape or other recorded images produced by a traffic light signal violation monitoring system, shall be prima facie evidence of the facts contained therein. Any photographs, microphotographs, videotape or other recorded images evidencing such a violation shall be available for inspection in any proceeding to adjudicate the liability for such violation pursuant to this section. 
(e)  In the prosecution of an offense established under this section, prima facie evidence that the vehicle described in the summons issued pursuant to subsection (d) above, was operated in violation of this section, together with proof that the defendant was at the time of such violation the owner, lessee or renter of the vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a rebuttable presumption that such owner, lessee or renter of the vehicle was the person who committed the violation. Such presumption shall be rebutted if the owner, lessee or renter of the vehicle: 
(1)  Files an affidavit by regular mail with the clerk of the general district court for the city that he or she was not the operator of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation; or 
(2)  Testifies in the general district court for the city, under oath that he or she was not the operator of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation. 
Such presumption shall also be rebutted if a certified copy of a police report, showing that the vehicle had been reported to the police as stolen prior to the time of the alleged violation of this section, is presented, prior to the return date established on the summons issued pursuant to this section, to the general district court for the city adjudicating the alleged violation. 
(f)  Imposition of a penalty pursuant to this section shall not be deemed a conviction as an operator and shall not be made a part of the operating record of the person upon whom such liability is imposed, nor shall it be used for insurance purposes in the provision of motor vehicle insurance coverage. No monetary penalty imposed pursuant to this section shall exceed $50.00, nor shall it include court costs. 
(g)  A summons for a violation of this section may be executed pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 19.2-76.2, as amended. Notwithstanding the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 19.2-76, as amended, the summons for a violation of this section may be executed by mailing by first class mail, a copy thereof to the address of the owner, lessee, or renter of the vehicle as shown, in the case of vehicle owners, in the records of the department of motor vehicles or, in the case of the vehicle lessees or renters, in the records of the lessee or renter. Every such mailing shall include, in addition to the summons, a notice of: 
(1)  The summoned person's ability to rebut the presumption that he was the operator of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation through the filing of an affidavit as provided in subsection (e) of this section; and 
(2)  Instructions for filing such affidavit, including the address to which the affidavit is to be sent. 
If the summoned person fails to appear on the date of return set out in the summons mailed pursuant to this section, the summons shall be executed in the manner set out in Code of Virginia, § 19.2-76.3, as amended. No proceedings for contempt or arrest of a person summoned by mailing shall be instituted for failure to appear on the return date of the summons. Any summons executed for a violation of this section shall provide to the person summoned at least 30 business days from the mailing of the summons to inspect information collected by a traffic light signal violation monitoring system in connection with the violation. 
(h)  Information collected by a traffic light signal violation monitoring system installed and operated pursuant to this section shall be limited exclusively to that information that is necessary for the enforcement of traffic light violations. A private entity that operates a traffic light signal violation monitoring system may enter into an agreement with the department of motor vehicles, in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-208B21, to obtain vehicle owner information regarding the registered owners of vehicles that fail to comply with a traffic light signal. Information provided to the operator of a traffic light signal violation monitoring system shall be protected in a database with security comparable to that of the department of motor vehicles' system, and used only for enforcement against individuals who violate the provisions of this section. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, all photographs, microphotographs, electronic images, or other personal information collected by a traffic light signal violation monitoring system shall be used exclusively for enforcing traffic light violations and shall not: 
(1)  Be open to the public; 
(2)  Be sold or used for sales, solicitation or marketing purposes; 
(3)  Be disclosed to any other entity except as may be necessary for the enforcement of a traffic light violation or to a vehicle owner or operator as part of a challenge to the violation; or 
(4)  Be used in a court in a pending action or proceeding unless the action or proceeding relates to a violation of Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-833, 46.2-835 or 46.2-836, or is requested upon order from a court of competent jurisdiction. 
Information collected under this section pertaining to a specific violation shall be purged and not retained later than 60 days after the collection of any civil penalties. If the city does not execute a summons for a violation of this section within ten business days, all information collected pertaining to that suspected violation shall be purged within two business days. The city shall annually certify compliance with this section and make all records pertaining to such system available for inspection and audit by the commonwealth transportation commissioner or the commissioner of the department of motor vehicles or his designee. Any person who discloses personal information in violation of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a civil penalty of $1,000.00 per disclosure. Any unauthorized use or disclosure of such personal information shall be grounds for termination of the agreement between the department of motor vehicles and the private entity. 
(i)  A private entity may enter into an agreement with the city to be compensated for providing the traffic light signal violation monitoring system or equipment, and all related support services, to include consulting, operations and administration. However, only a law enforcement officer employed by the city may swear to or affirm the certificate required by subsection (d). The city shall not enter into an agreement for compensation based on the number of violations or monetary penalties imposed. 
(j)  When selecting potential intersections for a traffic light signal violation monitoring system, the city shall consider factors such as: 
(1)  The accident rate for the intersection; 
(2)  The rate of red light violations occurring at the intersection (number of violations per number of vehicles); 
(3)  The difficulty experienced by law enforcement officers in patrol cars or on foot in apprehending violators; and 
(4)  The ability of law enforcement officers to apprehend violators safely within a reasonable distance from the violation. The city may consider the risk to pedestrians as a factor, if applicable. 
The city shall submit a list of intersections to the Virginia Department of Transportation for final approval. 
(k)  Before the implementation of a traffic light signal violation monitoring system at an intersection, the city shall complete an engineering safety analysis that addresses signal timing and other location-specific safety features. The length of the yellow phase shall be established based on the recommended methodology of the Institute of Transportation Engineers. All traffic light signal violation monitoring systems shall provide a minimum 0.5-second grace period between the time the signal turns red and the time the first violation is recorded. If recommended by the engineering safety analysis, the city shall make reasonable location-specific safety improvements, including signs and pavement markings. 
(l)  The city shall evaluate the traffic light signal violation monitoring system on a monthly basis to ensure all cameras and traffic signals are functioning properly. Evaluation results shall be made available to the public. 
(m)  The city shall place conspicuous signs within 500 feet of the intersection approach at which a traffic light signal violation monitoring system is used. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that such signs were in place at the time of the commission of the traffic light signal violation. 
(n)  Prior to or coincident with the implementation or expansion of a traffic light signal violation monitoring system, the city shall conduct a public awareness program, advising the public that the city is implementing or expanding a traffic light signal violation monitoring system. 
(o)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, if a vehicle depicted in images recorded by a traffic light signal photo-monitoring system is owned, leased or rented by a county, city or town, then the county, city or town may access and use the recorded images and associated information for employee disciplinary purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1828, § 20-18, 2-9-2009; Ord. No. 1828, 2-9-2009; Ord. No. 1847, 7-26-2010) 
Sec. 26-20. - Use of photo-monitoring systems to enforce law against passing stopped school buses, penalty. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, "school division" means the Falls Church City Public Schools. "Video-monitoring system" means a system with one or more camera sensors and computers installed and operated on a school bus that produces live digital and recorded video of motor vehicles being operated in violation of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-859. 
(b)  All such video-monitoring systems installed shall, at a minimum, produce a recorded image of the license plate and shall record the activation status of at least one warning device as prescribed in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1090, and the time, date, and location of the vehicle when the image is recorded. 
(c)  The operator of a vehicle shall be liable for a monetary civil penalty imposed in accordance with this section, if such vehicle is found, as evidenced by information obtained from a video-monitoring system, to have failed to comply with Code of Virginia, § 46.2-859. 
(d)  The school division may install and operate a video-monitoring system on any school bus operated by the division for the purpose of recording violations of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-859 and imposing monetary liability in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 46.2-844.B and the provisions in this section. 
(e)  The school division may also contract with a private vendor to install and operate such video-monitoring systems on behalf of the school division for the same purposes. 
Such agreement shall: 
(1)  Ensure adequate and proper retrieval, storage, and disposal of video-monitoring system recordings in accordance with this section; 
(2)  Specify the appropriate format, method and frequency of delivery of video recordings to designated and duly authorized law enforcement officers; 
(3)  Provide that the vendor shall on request of the city or the school division, submit a report to the city and the school division that includes, but is not limited to: (i) the total number of citations issued as a result of a violation detected and recorded by the monitoring system; and (ii) the total amount of funds collected. 
(f)  Information collected by a video-monitoring system installed and operated pursuant to this section shall be limited exclusively to that information that is necessary for the enforcement of school bus stopping violations. Notwithstanding any other provision or law, all images or video or other personal information recorded by a video-monitoring system shall be used exclusively for enforcing school bus stopping violations pursuant to this section, and shall not: (i) be open to the public; (ii) be sold or used for sales, solicitation, or marketing purposes; (iii) be disclosed to any other entity except as may be necessary for the enforcement of a school bus stopping violation or to a vehicle owner or operator as part of a challenge to the violation; or (iv) be used in a court in a pending action or proceeding unless the action or proceeding relates to a violation of Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-859 or 46.2-844, or is requested upon order from a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(g)  Information collected under this section pertaining to a specific violation shall be purged and not retained later than 60 days after the conclusion of any enforcement action based upon such violation. If an authorized law enforcement officer does not issue a summons or notice of violation within ten business days of the date on which the violation of this section was recorded, all information collected pertaining to that suspected violation shall be purged. 
(h)  The school division shall annually certify compliance with this section, and shall make all records pertaining to such system available for inspection and audit by the commonwealth transportation commissioner or the commissioner of the department of motor vehicles or his designee. 
(i)  Violations of the foregoing sections shall carry a civil penalty of not more than $250.00 and shall be prosecuted in the same manner as prosecutions for traffic infractions. Such violations shall not be deemed a conviction as an operator and shall not be made a part of the operating record of the person upon whom such liability is imposed, nor shall such violations be used for insurance purposes in the provision of motor vehicle insurance coverage. 
(j)  Whenever a violation of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-859 is detected and recorded by a video-monitoring system operated in accordance with this section, the vendor or school division shall promptly submit the recorded video to a law enforcement officer employed by the city and authorized to impose penalties pursuant to this section for review. If, after such review, such law enforcement officer determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of Code of Virginia, § 46.2-859 has occurred, the officer may issue a summons or notice of violation by first-class mail to the address of the registered owner of the vehicle involved as shown on the records of the department of motor vehicles. 
(k)  Any person who receives a summons or notice of violation from a law enforcement officer pursuant to this section may waive his right to appear and be formally tried for the offense pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 16.1-69.40:1.B. The waiver shall be effective when the person voluntarily pays $250.00 to the city treasurer's office within 15 business days after receipt of the summons or notice of violation. 
(l)  In any prosecution pursuant to this section, proof that the vehicle described in such summons or notice was operated in violation of this section, together with proof that the defendant was at the time the registered owner of the vehicle, as required by chapter 6 (Code of Virginia, § 46.2-600 et seq.), shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle was the person who committed the violation. A photographic or digital still or video image recorded by a video-monitoring system that clearly shows the license plate number of a vehicle violating Code of Virginia, § 46.2-859 shall be sufficient proof of the identity of such vehicle for purposes of this section. 
(m)  Notwithstanding the exception in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1308, all fines imposed for violations of this section, shall be paid into the city treasury. The city treasurer shall remit to the school division all fine amounts received in respect to the violations of this section after crediting the city's general fund with amount equal to the costs incurred in administering the video enforcement measures under this section. 
(n)  Prosecution under this section, shall not be permitted where a prosecution or proceeding for the same act has otherwise been initiated under Code of Virginia, § 46.2-859. 
(Ord. No. 1887, 1-28-2013) 
Sec. 26-21. - Truck traffic. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of this section to prohibit through truck traffic in residential zones of the city. The city manager is authorized and empowered to designate those residential streets or portions thereof upon which signs prohibiting such traffic shall be posted. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Through traffic means traffic initiated and destined for points outside a posted area. 
Truck includes road tractors, tractor trucks and trucks as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100, as amended. 
(c)  Restrictions. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a truck as through traffic on a street in the city which has been posted with signs prohibiting the passage of through trucks. 
(Code 1982, § 20-19; Ord. No. 749; Ord. No. 1887, 1-28-2013) 
Editor's note- Formerly codified as § 26-20, and renumbered by the inclusion of Ord. No. 1887. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-22. - Parking in time-limited parking zones. 
    On city streets or public parking lots which have time-limited parking designated by official signs posted on any block or public lot or a portion thereof, no person shall park a vehicle within any such block or public lot during the posted hours for more than the allotted time. 
(Ord. No. 1849, 9-27-2010; Ord. No. 749; Ord. No. 1887, 1-28-2013) 
Editor's note- Formerly codified as § 26-21, and renumbered by the inclusion of Ord. No. 1887. 
Secs. 26-23-26-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESIDENT PARKING PERMITS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Business, professional, occupational licenses, § 40-456 et seq. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to issue parking permits, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1230. 

Sec. 26-44. - Issuance or removal of on-street residential parking restrictions. 
(a)  The city manager shall designate new parking restrictions or remove existing parking restrictions on streets within a district where residential uses are permitted according to the following process: 
(1)  Initiation. An individual citizen, groups of citizens, civic association, business, developer, city staff, or the city council may initiate a request for the addition or removal of parking restrictions through a written request to staff. 
(2)  Petition. Staff will provide the petitioner with a request for restricted parking petition form. The petitioner is required to obtain signatures of support for parking restrictions on a block from a minimum of 75 percent of the households located on the block. If a minimum of 75 percent of the households sign the petition indicating support for adding or removing parking restrictions on that block, then data collection will begin. 
(3)  Data collection. The police department will conduct field observations over a one-week period. The following guidelines will be considered when evaluating the block: 
a.  Fifty percent of the available parking spaces on that block are filled. 
b.  Twenty-five percent of those vehicles are from outside the city. 
(4)  Decision. The city manager shall decide, based on the police department survey and the neighborhood petition, whether or not to designate the area under consideration as a restricted area or to remove the designation in the case of an established restricted area. 
a.  Parking restrictions in residential districts abutting metro stations shall limit on-street parking to four hours unless otherwise determined by the city manager. 
b.  Parking restrictions in residential districts abutting commercial corridors shall limit on-street parking to two hours unless otherwise determined by the city manager. 
c.  Current parking restrictions shall remain in effect unless a petition is filed by the parties named in subsection (a)(1) of this section requesting the city manager's office review a change to the existing designation. 
(5)  Notice. The decision of the city manager shall be announced through the notification of property owners within the boundaries of the restricted area. The notice shall clearly state the exact location and boundaries of the restricted area, and the reasons why such area has been designated or withdrawn as a restricted parking area. In addition to property owner notification, a similar notification shall be prominently posted within the area for ten days prior to the installation of parking signs. 
(b)  Proof of registration, as indicated by a city registration decal, shall serve as the parking permit and shall exempt vehicles from residential parking restrictions except that in parking zones for which a separate parking permit sticker or placard is issued by the city, no vehicle shall be exempt from such restrictions unless such vehicle displays a city-issued sticker or placard. 
(c)  On the application of any resident of the district, the chief of police or his authorized designee, may issue visitors permits upon a showing by the resident that, during the hours for which the permits are sought, his residence will be used in such a way consistent with its residential character and other provisions of law, that visitors to his residence would not be able to park without violating the law. If the chief of police shall find the foregoing facts and further find that the issuance of the permits will not unduly impair traffic safety during the time of their validity, he shall issue such permits and may limit the streets or portions of streets on which they shall be valid. 
(d)  Any holder of a visitor permit shall show to the chief of police or his authorized representative, satisfactory evidence that he fulfills all the conditions for such a permit. Whenever the conditions no longer exist, the person holding such a permit shall surrender it to the city manager or designee. It shall be unlawful for any person to represent that he is entitled to such a permit when he is not so entitled, to fail to surrender a permit to which he is no longer entitled, or to park a vehicle displaying such a permit at any time when the holder of such permit is not entitled to hold it. No permit issued hereunder shall be valid for more than one year, but may be renewed upon expiration, provided the conditions for issuance exist. 
(Code 1982, § 20-41; Ord. No. 825; Ord. No. 1811, § 20-41; Ord. No. 1949, 3-28-2016) 
Sec. 26-45. - City manager to establish additional regulations; fees. 
    The city manager is authorized to establish, after due notice and opportunity for interested parties to be heard, written regulations to implement the provisions of this article. Fees may be established only by resolution by the city council and only in an amount sufficient to pay the costs incidental to their issuance. 
(Code 1982, § 20-43; Ord. No. 825; Ord. No. 1811, § 20-42) 
Sec. 26-46. - Violations. 
(a)  The parking of any vehicle or the use of any parking permit in a manner contrary to the provisions established by the city manager, pursuant to this article, is prohibited; and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a traffic infraction. Any person violating this article shall, upon conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction, be fined not more than $50.00 for each violation. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall repeal or supersede any other provision of law which provides authority to regulate parking. 
(Code 1982, § 20-44; Ord. No. 825; Ord. No. 952; Ord. No. 1811, § 20-43) 
Secs. 26-47-26-67. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CITY VEHICLE LICENSE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Business, professional, occupational licenses, § 40-456 et seq. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to impose vehicle licenses, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-752. 

Sec. 26-68. - Requirements. 
(a)  Except as provided in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-755, every person owning a motor-driven vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or motorcycle with a situs in the city, as defined by Code of Virginia, § 46.2-752, as amended, shall on or before the fifth day of October, apply for a license from the city treasurer. Licenses so obtained must be displayed by November 15. 
(b)  Every person owning a motor-driven vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or motorcycle shall, within 60 days of the acquisition of situs within the city, obtain and display a current decal. No license shall be issued unless and until the applicant for such license shall have produced satisfactory evidence that all personal property taxes upon the motor-driven vehicle to be licensed have been paid and satisfactory evidence that any delinquent motor vehicle personal property taxes owed to the city have been paid which have been assessed or are assessable against the applicant by the city. No license shall be issued unless all fines owed to the city by the owner of the vehicle for violations of ordinances governing parking of vehicles have been paid, excepting vehicles owned by firms or companies in the business of renting vehicles. 
(c)  The windshield sticker license tag issued under this section shall be affixed on the inside of the windshield of the motor vehicle. It shall be placed adjacent to the state inspection sticker and no higher than three inches from the bottom of the windshield or at such other location as may be prescribed by state law. 
(Code 1973, § 21-49; Code 1982, § 20-45; Ord. No. 699; Ord. No. 1011, 6-14-1982; Ord. No. 1178, 4-27-1987; Ord. No. 1466, 2-28-1994; Ord. No. 1750, 3-8-2004) 
Sec. 26-69. - Application. 
    The city treasurer shall, on or before September 15, supply application forms for such license, and such application form shall contain space for the name and residence of the applicant, and if the owner is a corporation or firm, its place of business. Such application shall give a description of the vehicle, including such identification as may be required by the treasurer, limited; however, to a description not to exceed the description required by the state department of motor vehicles. Registration of a vehicle with the commissioner of the revenue's office shall constitute application for the license. 
(Code 1973, § 21-50; Code 1982, § 20-46; Ord. No. 655; Ord. No. 1466, 2-28-1994; Ord. No. 1750, 3-8-2004) 
Sec. 26-70. - Fees. 
    Every person required to obtain a license hereunder shall make such application to the city treasurer and: 
(1)  Shall pay a fee of $33.00 for: 
a.  All passenger vehicles, including motorhomes, designed and used primarily for the transportation of not more than ten persons, including the driver (other than motorcycles); provided such vehicle is not used for the transportation of passengers for compensation; 
b.  Vehicles designed but not used for the transportation of property; 
c.  Vehicles designed and used for the transportation of property with a gross registered vehicle weight of 4,000 pounds or less. 
(2)  Shall pay a fee of $28.00 for each motorcycle. 
(3)  Shall pay a fee of $45.00 for motor vehicles designed and used for the transportation of property, having a registered gross vehicle weight of more than 4,000 pounds. 
(4)  Shall pay a fee of $30.00 for each taxicab or other vehicle used for the transportation of passengers, kept for rent or hire, which operates or should operate under permits issued by the corporation commission, as required by law. Commercial buses, station wagons, automobiles or trucks used primarily for the transportation of pupils to and from public, private or parochial schools or used for the transportation of the mentally or physically handicapped to and from a sheltered workshop (and painted yellow and bearing the words "School Bus" in black letters of a specified size on front and rear, and equipped with warning devices prescribed in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1090) shall be exempt from the charges and fees imposed by this section. 
(Code 1973, § 21-51; Code 1982, § 20-47; Ord. No. 589; Ord. No. 655; Ord. No. 952; Ord. No. 1027, 9-27-1982; Ord. No. 1750, 3-8-2004; Ord. No. 1859, 4-25-2011) 
Sec. 26-71. - Conditions for exemptions from decal fees. 
    Current decal fees shall not be charged for vehicles whose situs in the city begins September 1 through October 15. Fees shall not be charged for vehicles newly acquiring situs in the city, upon presentation of satisfactory evidence of current local license fee payment to another state locality. 
(Code 1982, § 20-48; Ord. No. 655; Ord. No. 1027, 9-27-1982; Ord. No. 1750, 3-8-2004) 
Sec. 26-72. - Operation without license. 
(a)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of a motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, or motorcycle to fail to obtain and display the local license required by this article, or to display such local license after its expiration date. Any violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor, the penalty for which shall not exceed that of a class 4 misdemeanor under general law. Each failure or refusal and each day's continuance shall constitute a separate offense. Violation of this section by the owner may be discharged by payment of a fine upon presentation to the court of satisfactory evidence that the required license has been obtained. When the operator is not the owner of the cited vehicle, the violation may be discharged by payment of the requisite fine. In the case of a motor vehicle registered to a resident of the city, local law enforcement officers may issue a citation, summons, parking ticket, or uniform traffic summons for violation of this section. 
(b)  Cross-jurisdictional enforcement. Pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 46.2-752K, as amended, and the Northern Virginia Local Motor Vehicle License Compact (Compact) entered into by the counties of Arlington, Fairfax and Loudoun, the Cities of Alexandria, Fairfax and Falls Church, and the Town of Herndon (Participating Jurisdictions): 
(1)  Any owner or operator of a motor vehicle who is required to display a local motor vehicle license for that vehicle by any participating jurisdiction must display such license at all times while such vehicle is operated or parked in the city. 
(2)  Any vehicle exempt in all of the participating jurisdictions from imposition of the license tax or fee under Code of Virginia, § 46.2-755A is exempt from this section. 
(c)  Violation. A violation of this section shall constitute a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(1)  When the operator is the owner of the cited vehicle, such violation shall be discharged by payment of the requisite fine and presentation of satisfactory evidence that the required license has been obtained. 
(2)  When the operator is not the owner of the cited vehicle, the violation may be discharged by payment of the requisite fine. 
(Code 1982, § 20-49; Ord. No. 655; Ord. No. 1466, 2-28-1994; Ord. No. 1478, 5-23-1994; Ord. No. 1589, 9-8-1997; Ord. No. 1750, 3-8-2004) 
State Law reference- Authority to enter into compact for regional enforcement, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-752 K. 
Sec. 26-73. - Relief from city automobile license fees to elderly residents. 
(a)  The city finds that persons who are 65 years of age or older and who are the owners or leasees of passenger automobiles are in need of public relief from the payment of city automobile license fees for such automobiles. Any person who is, on December 31 of the year immediately preceding the grant year, 65 years of age or older and is subject to charge for a city license may apply for a 50 percent reduction in the fee charged for one vehicle per household. If the automobile for which relief is sought is co-owned, all owners must be 65 years of age or older, except the applicant's spouse need not have attained the age of 65 years. 
(b)  The application for relief from the payment of such automobile license is to be filed on forms to be furnished such person by the city upon request. Any such application for relief shall be filed with the city on or before April 15 of the calendar year for which such relief is sought; provided, however, that the city manager or designee may, for good cause shown, extend such deadline for persons making application for this exemption for the first time or for persons failing to meet such deadline due to demonstrated hardship. 
(c)  The city manager or designee shall make such investigation as may be necessary to verify that such automobile for which such relief is sought is in fact owned by a city resident who was 65 years of age or older on December 31 of the year immediately preceding the grant year and who satisfies the requirements as set forth in subsection (a) of this section. If the application is denied, the city shall notify the applicant of denial of the application in a timely manner. 
(d)  Any change in respect to ownership of such automobile, or other applicable factors, which occurs during the year for which the application is filed, and which has the effect of exceeding or violating the limitations and conditions of this article, shall nullify any exemption for the current taxable year and the taxable year immediately following. 
(Code 1982, § 20-51; Ord. No. 602; Ord. No. 682; Ord. No. 801; Ord. No. 989, 11-9-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1246, 12-12-1988; Ord. No. 1464, 2-28-1994; Ord. No. 1750, 3-8-2004) 
State Law reference- Authority to provide for a 50 percent reduction in fee for persons 65 years of age or older, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-752 A. 
Sec. 26-74. - Imposition of license tax on owners of certain motor vehicles. 
    A license tax of $100.00 annually shall be imposed upon the owners of motor vehicles which do not display current license plates and which are not exempted from the requirements of displaying such license plates under the provisions of Article 6 (Code of Virginia § 46.2-662 et seq.) of Chapter 6 of Title 46.2, Code of Virginia §§ 46.2-1554 and 46.2-1555, are not in a public dump, in an "automobile graveyard" as defined in Code of Virginia § 33.1-348 or in the possession of a licensed junk dealer or licensed motor vehicle dealer. Provided, however, that this section 26-74 shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Any vehicle that is stored on private property for a period not in excess of 60 days, for the purpose of removing parts for the repair of another vehicle; and 
(2)  Any vehicle being held or stored by or at the direction of any governmental authority; 
(3)  Any vehicle owned by a member of the Armed Forces on active duty; or 
(4)  Any vehicle regularly stored within a structure. 
(Ord. No. 1981, 1-8-2018) 
Secs. 26-75-26-104. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BICYCLES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 36. 
State Law reference- Authority to license bicycles, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1720; bicycle regulations, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-800, 46.2-808, 46.2-847, 46.2-903, 46.2-904-46.2-906.1, 46.2-932, 46.2-1015, 46.2-1081. 

Sec. 26-105. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bicycle means a device upon which any person may ride, propelled by human power through a belt, chain or gears, and having two or three wheels in a tandem or tricycle arrangement. The term "bicycle" shall also include pedal bicycles with helper motors rated less than one brake horsepower, which produce only ordinary pedaling speeds up to a maximum of 20 miles per hour; provided, that such bicycles so equipped shall not be operated upon any highway or public vehicular area of the city by any person under the age of 16 years; provided, further, that no such bicycles so equipped shall be operated upon any public sidewalk or bike trail in the city. 
(Code 1982, § 20-52; Ord. No. 858; Ord. No. 952) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-106. - Defacing or removing serial numbers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, modify or remove from any bicycle the serial number imprinted thereon. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to sell or purchase any bicycle on which the serial number or identification number has been defaced or removed without first registering same. 
(Code 1982, § 20-54; Ord. No. 858) 
Sec. 26-107. - Equipment requirements. 
(a)  No person shall operate a bicycle on streets, sidewalks and bikeways unless it is equipped with coaster brakes or handbrakes in good working condition. 
(b)  Every bicycle operated upon any street, highway, sidewalk or bikeway during darkness or other periods of restricted visibility shall be equipped, or the operator of such a bicycle shall be equipped, with a front lamp emitting a white light visible from a distance of 500 feet in front of the bicycle and with a red reflector of a type approved by the superintendent of the department of state police, which shall be visible in clear weather from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible in clear weather from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector. 
(Code 1982, § 20-55; Ord. No. 858; Ord. No. 1454, 10-12-1993) 
Sec. 26-108. - Bicycle paths. 
(a)  Established. The existing and approved bikeways within the city, which have been established by the Northern Virginia Regional Park Authority or by the city, and any bikeways, which are in the future established by the Northern Virginia Regional Park Authority or the city, are hereby established as the bikeways of the city. 
(b)  Vehicles prohibited; city and park authority vehicles exempted. The use of off-street bikeways as specified in subsection (a) of this section and/or any sidewalk by any person operating vehicles other than bicycles is unlawful. The term "vehicle," as used herein, means any motorized vehicle powered by an internal combustion engine, electrical motor or other electrical device. The prohibition of this section shall not apply to city or park authority vehicles entering the off-street bikeways for maintenance, fire and police patrol purposes. 
(c)  Exceptions for vehicles used by handicapped persons. The prohibitions of this section do not apply to vehicles being used by persons with disabilities when such use is necessary because of the handicapped condition of the person using such vehicle. 
(Code 1982, § 20-56; Ord. No. 858; Ord. No. 1454, 10-12-1993) 
Sec. 26-109. - Riding and parking regulations. 
    Every person riding a bicycle upon a bikeway, sidewalk, street, highway or roadway has all the rights and is subject to all the duties applicable to the driver of a motor vehicle, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no application. Additionally, every such person shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Speed. No bicycle shall be operated faster than is reasonable and proper, but every bicycle shall be operated with reasonable regard for the safety of the operator and every other person upon the streets, sidewalks, highways, roadways, and bikeways of the city. 
(2)  Observation of traffic regulations. Every person riding a bicycle in the city shall observe all authorized traffic signs, signals and traffic control devices. Whenever signs are erected indicating that no right turn or left turn or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the direction of any such signs, except where such persons dismount from the bicycle to make any such movements or turns; in which event such a person shall then obey the regulation applicable to pedestrians. 
(3)  Stop signs. All persons operating a bicycle shall stop at all stop signs. 
(4)  Riding with the traffic flow. Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as practical, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction. 
(5)  Riding on handlebars. No person operating a bicycle shall permit any person to ride on the handlebars. 
(6)  Interference with control. No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or article which prevents that person from keeping at least one hand firmly upon the handlebars and in full control of the bicycle. 
(7)  Hitching rides. No person riding upon any bicycle shall attach the same or self to any vehicle on the roadway. 
(8)  Riding abreast. Bicycles shall be ridden or operated in a single file, except when overtaking a slower moving bicycle, and except on bikeways set aside for the use of bicycles. 
(9)  Riding on sidewalk. Persons of any age may ride a bicycle upon any sidewalk, except as otherwise prohibited in section 26-110, and except in those areas designated as unsafe by the city manager because of the narrowness of the sidewalk, slope of the sidewalk, number of pedestrians customarily using the sidewalk or potential vehicle conflict. 
(10)  Pedestrian right-of-way. Whenever any person shall ride a bicycle on the sidewalk or bikeway, whether paved or unpaved, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing any pedestrian. 
(11)  Bicycle lane. Where the city council has by ordinance designated a lane for the exclusive use of bicycles, a motor vehicle may enter or cross this lane for the purpose of access to adjacent property or for the purpose of parking, but a motor vehicle shall not be driven in this lane. 
(12)  Parking. No person shall stand or park a bicycle upon the street, highway, or roadway other than upon the street, highway, or roadway against the curb. No person shall stand or park a bicycle upon the sidewalk or bikeway other than in a rack to support the bicycle, or against the building, or at the curb, or at the back edge of the sidewalk. This will be done in such a manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. 
(13)  Riding on paths adjacent to a roadway. Whenever a usable path or designated bikeway has been provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path or bikeway and shall not use the roadway. 
(14)  Helmet required. Every person 14 years of age or younger shall wear a protective helmet that meets the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission safety standard for bicycle helmets, whenever riding or being carried on a bicycle, an electric personal assistive mobility device, a toy vehicle, or an electric power-assisted bicycle on any highway, sidewalk, or public bicycle path. 
(Code 1982, § 20-57; Ord. No. 858; Ord. No. 1454, 10-12-1993; Ord. No. 1880, 8-13-2012) 
Sec. 26-110. - Riding or driving on sidewalks. 
    The city manager, upon the request of any owner of any property adjacent to any public sidewalk, may prohibit or restrict the use of such sidewalks by persons riding bicycles; provided such restrictions are posted; and further provided, that children who have not attained their 13th birthday are not prohibited in the first instance from riding bicycles and similar leg-propelled children's devices upon sidewalks. This exception is subject, however, to the right of residents to file complaints of disturbance and to request that the exception herein be modified or set aside in proper cases as found by the court to constitute abuse by such children of pedestrian or neighborhood rights to peace and the use of sidewalks. 
(Code 1982, § 20-58; Ord. No. 858) 
Sec. 26-111. - Violations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this article. Any such violation shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a fine of $25.00. In the case of subsection 26-109(14), such fine shall be suspended for first-time violators; and for violators who, subsequent to the violation but prior to imposition of the fine, purchase helmets of the type required by this article. Violators of this article can waive trial and prepay the fine. 
(Code 1982, § 20-59; Ord. No. 858; Ord. No. 952; Ord. No. 1454, 10-12-1993; Ord. No. 1879, 8-13-2012) 
Cross reference- General penalty for violations of Code, § 1-12. 
State Law reference- Traffic infractions within authority of traffic violations clerk; schedule of fines; prepayment of local ordinances, Code of Virginia § 16.1-69.40:1. 
Secs. 26-112-26-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TOWING AND IMMOBILIZATION OF VEHICLES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Towing and immobilization of vehicles due to unpaid parking violations, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1216; immobilization of trespassing vehicles, Code of Virginia, §§ 46.2-1231-46.2-1233. 

Sec. 26-136. - Towing advisory board. 
    In accordance with Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1233, the city hereby establishes a towing advisory board consisting of one representative from local law enforcement; one representative from licensed local towing and recovery operators; and one citizen representative. Any such advisory board shall meet at least once per year at the call of the chairperson of the advisory board, who shall be elected annually from among the voting members of the advisory board by a majority vote. The towing advisory board shall advise the governing body with regard to the appropriate provisions of the ordinance or terms of the contract. Members shall be appointed by the city council to serve three-year terms. 
(Ord. No. 1797, § 20-60, 11-27-2006; Ord. No. 1841, 3-8-2010) 
Sec. 26-137. - Vehicle immobilization devices. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator or lessee of any parking lot or parking area or space therein or part thereof, or of any other lot or building, or authorized agent of the person having control of such premises, to place upon a vehicle occupying such lot, area, space or building or part thereof, a boot or other device that prevents a vehicle from being moved by preventing a wheel from turning, on such vehicle unless: 
(1)  The property has been conspicuously marked at each entrance with a warning sign using letters at least three inches high that vehicles parked or placed without permission may be immobilized; and removal of the device will not be done until a fee is paid; and, in letters at least one inch high, that complaints about the use of any immobilization device should be made to the city police department; 
(2)  The vehicle has occupied the premises without permission for a continuous period of at least ten minutes; and 
(3)  A written record shall be made by the person using an immobilization device immediately after the immobilization device has been used, showing the make, model, state and license number of the vehicle immobilized, the precise date and time of day the vehicle was first parked or placed without permission and the time the vehicle was immobilized and the signature of the person who made the determination that immobilization was authorized. These records shall be provided to the city manager on a monthly basis on a form provided by the city manager. 
(b)  No vehicle bearing a handicapped or disabled veterans decal or plate issued by a governmental authority or one which is engaged in an official local, state or federal governmental activity shall be immobilized by any owner or operator or their agent; nor shall any vehicle parked or left temporarily because of a wreck or other emergency be immobilized. 
(c)  A $500.00 cash bond shall be posted with the city manager by any person desiring to use one or more immobilization device, prior to such use. Anyone complaining that the person's use of the device violated any provision of this section may apply in writing to the city manager for reimbursement of any fees charged for the immobilization. The city manager shall make a determination as to whether, for the civil purpose of the bond, a violation has occurred and if the city manager finds by a preponderance of the evidence that a violation has occurred, the city manager shall award a reimbursement of the charge levied for removal of the device. Prior to any determination, the person posting the bond shall have notice of the complaint and an opportunity to be heard. Complaints must be filed with the manager no later than 30 days after the alleged violation. If the bond amount falls below $400.00 at any time, the person posting the bond shall be notified; and if the amount of the bond is not raised to $500.00 within 14 days of the notice having been mailed, the right to use an immobilization device shall cease. 
(d)  Any person convicted of violating any provision of this section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or one year in jail or both. 
(Code 1982, § 20-60; Ord. No. 1108, 6-10-1985; Ord. No. 1797, § 20-61, 11-27-2006) 
Sec. 26-138. - Removal of trespassing vehicles by owners of parking or other lot or building. 
(a)  Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Custodian means any person who has been given permission by a vehicle owner to operate a vehicle. 
    Parking lot, parking area, parking space or parking building means that private property made available for parking. 
    Tow truck means any motor vehicle used to tow another motor vehicle. 
    Tow truck driver means any licensed driver, over the age of 18 years, who is employed and authorized by a tow truck operator to remove by towing any trespassing vehicles from private property. After July 1, 2008, "towing and recovery driver" shall mean a licensed driver, over the age of 18 years, who is employed and authorized by a tow truck operator to remove by towing trespassing vehicles from private property and has a valid tow truck driver authorization document issued by the commonwealth's board for towing and recovery operators. 
    Towing and recovery operator means any person offering services involving the use of a tow truck and services incidental to use of a tow truck which has paid the business privilege tax authorized by state statues and required by local ordinances and which tows any motor vehicle for compensation without the consent of the vehicle owner or custodian from private property. After July 1, 2008, the term "towing and recovery operator" shall mean persons offering services involving the use of a tow truck and services incidental to use of a tow truck which has paid the business privilege tax required by local ordinances, tows any motor vehicle for compensation without the consent of the vehicle owner or custodian from private property, and is licensed as a class A operator or a class B operator by the commonwealth's board for towing and recovery operations. 
(b)  It shall be lawful for any owner, operator or lessee of any parking lot or parking area or space therein or part thereof, or of any other lot or building, or the authorized agent of the one having control of such premises to have any motor vehicle occupying such lot, area, space or building, or part thereof, removed by a tow truck service to a garage licensed by the city or to a garage licensed by Fairfax County or Arlington County, located within three miles of the city boundary for storage until called for by the owner or the custodian of the owner. Such garage must be open for retrieval of vehicles by the vehicle owner or custodian 24 hours per day. Prior to removing any vehicle from the premises, notice must be given by the tow truck service to the city police department and all the other applicable provisions of this section must be complied with. Notice to the police shall consist of: 
(1)  The name and business phone number of the tow truck operator and tow truck driver removing the vehicle; 
(2)  A description of the vehicle towed, including color, make and model, license plate and vehicle identification number, if visible; 
(3)  The location of trespassing vehicle and the time the tow truck service was contacted; 
(4)  Where the vehicle is towed; and 
(5)  The name, address and the telephone number of the owner of the property or his agent authorizing the tow. 
Any violation of this subsection dealing with the notice to the city police department is unlawful and shall constitute a traffic infraction punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00. Such failure to report shall limit the amount which may be charged for storage and safekeeping of the towed vehicle to an amount no greater than that charged for one day of storage and safekeeping. If the vehicle is removed and stored, the vehicle owner may be charged and the vehicle may be held for a reasonable fee for the removal and storage. 
(c)  The towing and recovery operator performing a tow shall obtain authorization of the owner, operator or lessee of the property from which the vehicle is towed, or the authorized agent. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "authorized agent" may include a representative of the towing and recovery operator. The towing and recovery operator shall maintain for public inspection at its business office and at its storage property, copies of all contracts or other documents that appoint the operator as the authorized agent for the owner, operator or lessee of the property for purposes of authorizing tows from the property. 
Prior to removing any vehicle from the premises, the towing and recovery operator performing a tow shall obtain a time-dated photograph of the vehicle. 
(d)  A written receipt shall be prepared by the tow truck service for each tow. The written receipt shall contain in legible English: 
(1)  The name and title or business of the person authorizing the tow; 
(2)  The name and address of the tow truck service; 
(3)  The street address from which the vehicle was towed; 
(4)  The date and time the vehicle was removed from the property; 
(5)  The reason for the tow; 
(6)  An itemized list of initial fees for towing and storage; 
(7)  A space for the signatures of the vehicle owner or custodian and the one releasing the vehicle from the tow truck service; 
(8)  The address and telephone number of the vehicle owner or custodian recovering their vehicle; 
(9)  The contact information for the city police official who is responsible for receiving official complaints regarding towing services in the city; and 
(10)  The BTRO (Virginia's Board for Towing and Recovery Operators) license number of the tow truck driver who towed the vehicle. 
A copy of this receipt, including an itemized list of all fees for towing and storage paid when the vehicle was released and the signature spaces completed, shall be kept by the tow truck service for one year, along with a time-dated photograph, and be available for inspection by the city police department. A copy of this receipt, including all items listed in this subsection and an itemized list of all fees for towing and storage paid when the vehicle was released and the signature spaces completed, shall be given to the vehicle owner or custodian upon payment. 
(e)  All businesses engaged in towing vehicles without the consent of their owners shall prominently display, at their main place of business and at any other location where towed vehicles may be reclaimed, a conspicuous sign that indicates the maximum charges allowed by the city. 
(f)  The towing or removal or authorization for towing or removal of vehicles under this section or their immobilization pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1231, shall not be lawful unless such parking lot, parking area, space therein or part thereof or other lot or building shall have prominently posted double-sided signs on both sides of all vehicle entrances to the property which clearly, conspicuously, and legibly discloses that vehicles parked without permission will be towed. Such signs shall be posted so that the locations on the property subject to towing shall be clearly identified. The signs shall meet the following requirements and include the following information: 
(1)  Each sign shall be not less than 18 x 24 inches. 
(2)  Each sign must be made of metal construction and contain reflective letters and reflective graphics on a reflective white background with a three-eighths-inch reflective red trim strip around the entire outer edge of the sign. 
(3)  Each sign shall contain a black and white pictorial symbol of a tow truck at the top of the sign that is no less than five inches high and 17 inches wide. 
(4)  The lettering on each sign shall be below the pictorial symbol of the tow truck and shall be as follows and in the following order: 
a.  "Towing Enforced" in red lettering and not less than three inches in height; 
b.  If applicable, "24 hours a day/7 days a week" in red lettering not less than one inch in height. Otherwise, the days/times of towing enforcement shall also be identified in red letters not less than one inch in height; 
c.  "Do not leave premises" in black lettering not less than one inch in height; 
d.  "$135.00 Tow Fee" in black lettering and not less than 11/2 inches in height; 
e.  "Storage fees may apply" in black lettering and not less than one-half-inch in height; 
f.  The towing company's name and phone number in red not less than one-half-inch in height; 
g.  "Falls Church Police - 703-241-5053" in red lettering and not less than one-half-inch in height. 
(5)  In circumstances where the above requirements cannot or should not be met, exceptions or variations to these requirements may be appealed to the chief of police or his/her designee. At the chief's discretion, and/or his designee, flexibility may be applied under certain circumstances. 
(6)  In addition to the mandatory entrance signs, additional signs may be used to specify requirements for parking and/or disclose that if parked without permission, such vehicle will be towed. 
(7)  There will be a grace period of 90 days from the date of adoption to bring all signs into compliance. 
(8)  Prior to installation, towing signs must be approved for compliance with these regulations by the City of Falls Church Police Department and have an approval sticker affixed to the back of the sign. 
The requirement for signs shall not apply on any parcel of property used at the time of removal for one single-family residence or one two-family residence. 
(g)  No towing and recovery operator shall be liable for damages in any civil action for responding in good faith to the lawful direction of a law enforcement agency to tow, recover, or store any vehicle, combination of vehicles, their contents or any other object. The immunity provided by this subsection shall not extend to the liability for negligence in the towing, recovery or storage carried out by the towing and recovery operator. For the purposes of this subsection, any towing, recovery or storage carried out in compliance with a contract between a towing business and a local law enforcement agency or local government shall be deemed to have been performed at the lawful direction of a law enforcement agency. 
(h)  Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, if the owner, or representative or agent of the owner, of the trespassing vehicle appears at the scene before the vehicle is connected to the tow truck, no fee will be charged provided the vehicle is removed from the premises promptly. If the owner, or representative or agent of the owner of the trespassing vehicle appears at the scene after the vehicle is connected to the tow truck but before it is removed from the premises, the owner or representative or agent of the owner of the trespassing vehicle shall be liable for a reasonable fee, not to exceed $25.00. After the drop fee is paid, the owner or custodian of the vehicle must remove it from the premises promptly. 
(i)  Except as otherwise specifically provided, any violation of this section is unlawful and punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. It shall be a violation of this section to authorize or perform a tow not in conformity with this section. 
(j)  It shall be unlawful for any reason to tow any vehicle from a city-owned public parking space unless authorized by the owner or representative of the vehicle, city parking enforcement officer, city police or sheriff's department. 
(k)  All tow trucks operated by a tow truck operator shall display the name, address and business phone number of the owner thereof on both sides of the tow truck on permanently mounted signs or painted directly on the body of the truck in letters large enough to be readily legible, and in no case less than two inches in height. It shall be unlawful to operate a tow truck displaying an incorrect name, address or telephone number. 
(l)  In lieu of having a trespassing vehicle removed by towing, the owner, operator, lessee or authorized agent of the owner of the parking lot, parking area or parking space may request that a duly authorized local government official or law enforcement officer issue, on the premises, a notice of the violation of a parking ordinance to the registered owner of the vehicle. 
(m)  A tow truck operator, tow truck driver, and storage facility operator shall accept paying for towing fees, storage fees, retrieval fees and drop fees in each of the following ways: Cash, traveler's checks or money orders payable in US currency, at least one of the commonly used, nationally recognized credit cards, insurance company checks, certified checks, money orders and any additional methods of payment approved by the board for towing and recovery operations. 
(n)  The fee for hookup and initial towing shall be $135.00. In addition, a tow company may charge an additional fee of $25.00 for towing a vehicle between 7:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., or on any Saturday, Sunday or holiday. However, in no event shall more than two such additional fees be charged for towing any vehicle. No charge shall be made for storage and safekeeping for a period of 24 hours or less. Except for fees or charges by this section or revisions to this section pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 46.2-1233, no other fees or charges shall be imposed during the first 24-hour period. Vehicle storage fees after the first 24 hours may not exceed $40.00 per day. 
(Code 1982, § 20-61; Ord. No. 1538, 2-26-1996; Ord. No. 1744, 9-8-2003; Ord. No. 1797, § 20-62, 11-27-2006; Ord. No. 1807, 5-29-2007; Ord. No. 1841, 3-8-2010; Ord. No. 1962, 8-8-2016) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Secs. 26-139-26-159. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MOPEDS 

Sec. 26-160. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Moped means a bicycle-like device with pedals and a helper motor which is rated at no more than two-brake horsepower and which produces speeds up to a maximum of 30 miles per hour. 
(Code 1982, § 20-62; Ord. No. 1137, 5-12-1986; Ord. No. 1538, 2-26-1996; Ord. No. 1797, § 20-63, 11-27-2006) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-161. - Protective helmets required. 
    Every person riding a moped upon any street, road or highway in the city, either as an operator or a passenger, shall wear a protective helmet. All helmets shall meet or exceed the standards promulgated by the superintendent of state police, as required by state law for helmets worn by operators and passengers of motorcycles. 
(Code 1982, § 20-63; Ord. No. 1137, 5-12-1986; Ord. No. 1538, 2-26-1996; Ord. No. 1797, § 20-64, 11-27-2006) 
State Law reference- Authority to require helmets to be worn, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-915.2. 
Secs. 26-162-26-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - WASHINGTON METROPOLITAN AREA TRANSIT AUTHORITY 

Sec. 26-191. - Prohibited conduct. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for passengers or occupants, while aboard a public passenger vehicle owned, operated or controlled by Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority (WMATA) within the corporate limits of the city, to: 
(1)  Smoke or carry lighted or smoldering pipe, cigar or cigarette; 
(2)  Consume food or drink; 
(3)  Spit; 
(4)  Discard litter; 
(5)  Play any radio, tape recorder or similar instrument, unless the same is connected to an earphone that limits the sound to the individual user; 
(6)  Carry any flammable liquids, live animals, birds, reptiles, explosives, acid and other dangerous articles defined in Code of Virginia, § 18.2-278.1, except for guide dogs properly harnessed and accompanied by handicapped passengers, and small animals properly packaged; 
(7)  Stand in front of the white line marked on the forward and end of the floor of any bus, or otherwise conduct self in such manner as to obstruct the vision or function of the operator; 
(8)  Board any bus through the rear exit door, unless so directed by an employee or agent of the carrier; 
(9)  Refuse to leave a bus after having been ordered to do so by the operator or other designated agent of WMATA; 
(10)  Run, climb through windows or on seats, obstruct passage, obstruct the use of elevators, or otherwise endanger a passenger; 
(11)  Wear or use roller skates, skateboards, baby carriages or strollers that are not readily collapsible, wagons or carts, unless permitted by an operator; 
(12)  Walk with bare feet; 
(13)  Sell or try to sell anything; 
(14)  Ride on top or on the side of any vehicle without the express written permission of WMATA; and 
(15)  Mark, draw on, or damage a bus stop or vehicle. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful, except in an emergency, for any person while aboard a public passenger vehicle owned, operated or controlled by WMATA, while said vehicle is transporting passengers in regular route service, contract service, special service or community type service, within the corporate limits of the city, to open, stop, impede or interfere with the doors of a public passenger vehicle, or otherwise obstruct the operation of public passenger vehicles, or transit facilities. 
(Code 1982, § 20-64; Ord. No. 1352, 4-9-1991; Ord. No. 1538, 2-26-1996; Ord. No. 1797, § 20-65, 11-27-2006) 
Sec. 26-192. - Failure to pay fares. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly board a public passenger vehicle of WMATA which is transporting passengers in regular route service without paying the established fare, or board without presenting a valid transfer or pass for transportation on a public passenger vehicle. 
(Code 1982, § 20-65; Ord. No. 1352, 4-9-1991; Ord. No. 1538, 2-26-1996; Ord. No. 1797, § 20-66, 11-27-2006) 
Sec. 26-193. - Violations. 
    Violations of this article shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $10.00, nor more than $50.00 for a first offense; and not less than $50.00, nor more than $100.00, or ten days in jail or both for each second or subsequent offense. 
(Code 1982, § 20-66; Ord. No. 1352, 4-9-1991; Ord. No. 1538, 2-26-1996; Ord. No. 1797, § 20-67, 11-27-2006) 
Chapter 28 - MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Noise, § 14-49 et seq. 
State Law reference- State law crimes and offenses, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - Penalties. 
    The authorized punishments for conviction of a misdemeanor are: 
(1)  For class 1 misdemeanors or for any offense not otherwise classified, confinement in jail for not more than 12 months and a fine of not more than $2,500.00, either or both. 
(2)  For class 2 misdemeanors, confinement in jail for not more than six months and a fine of not more than $1,000.00, either or both. 
(3)  For class 3 misdemeanors, a fine of not more than $500.00. 
(4)  For class 4 misdemeanors, a fine of not more than $250.00. 
(Code 1982, § 22-1; Ord. No. 948; Ord. No. 1350, 4-9-1991) 
Cross reference- General penalty for violations of Code, § 1-12. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-11. 
Secs. 28-2-28-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLACES OF ENTERTAINMENT 

Sec. 28-21. - Closing hours. 
(a)  No public exhibition, carnival, carousel or other place of public entertainment where a fee is charged for entering or remaining therein, or where the nature of the entertainment is such as to disturb the quiet of the neighborhood, shall be permitted to be operated, conducted, kept open or participated in at any time on Sunday or between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person conducting a public dancehall to have such dancehall open Sunday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and midnight or open on Monday between the hours of midnight and 9:00 a.m. A public dancehall shall be construed to mean any place open to the general public where dancing is permitted; provided, however, that a restaurant located in the city licensed under Code of Virginia, § 4.1-210, to serve food and beverage having a dance floor with an area not exceeding ten percent of the total floor area of the establishment shall not be considered a public dancehall. 
(Code 1973, §§ 24-2, 24-3; Code 1982, §§ 22-2, 22-3; Ord. No. 948) 
State Law reference- Definition of dancehalls and authority to regulate, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-912.3. 
Secs. 28-22-28-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON 

Sec. 28-46. - Assault and battery. 
    It shall be unlawful to commit a simple assault or assault and battery, which offense, upon conviction, shall be punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 24-5; Code 1982, § 22-4; Ord. No. 948) 
State Law reference- Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-57. 
Sec. 28-47. - Peeping Tom or eavesdropper. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Peephole means any hole, crack or other similar opening through which a person can see. 
(b)  Entering property for spying, peeping. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon the property of another and secretly or furtively peep, spy or attempt to peep or spy into or through a window, door, or other aperture of any building, structure or other enclosure of any nature occupied or intended for occupancy as a dwelling, whether or not such building, structure, or enclosure is permanently situated or transportable and whether or not such occupancy is permanent or temporary; or to do same, without just cause, upon property owned by such person and leased or rented to another under circumstances that would violate the occupant's reasonable expectation of privacy. 
(c)  Peepholes or other apertures. It shall be unlawful for any person to use a peephole or other aperture to secretly or furtively peep, spy or attempt to peep or spy into a restroom, dressing room, locker room, hotel room, motel room, tanning bed, tanning booth, bedroom or other location or enclosure for the purpose of viewing any nonconsenting person who is totally nude, clad in undergarments, or in a state of undress exposing the genitals, pubic area, buttocks or female breast and the circumstances are such that the person would otherwise have a reasonable expectation of privacy. 
(d)  Exception. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a lawful criminal investigation or a correctional official or local or regional jail official conducting surveillance for security purposes or during an investigation of alleged misconduct involving a person committed to the department of corrections or to a local or regional jail. 
(e)  Penalty. A violation of this section is a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 24-6; Code 1982, § 22-5; Ord. No. 948) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-130. 
Secs. 28-48-28-67. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 

Sec. 28-68. - Carelessly damaging property by fire. 
    If any person shall carelessly, negligently, or intentionally set any woods or marshes on fire or set fire to any stubble, brush, straw or any other substance capable of spreading fire on lands, whereby the property of another is damaged or jeopardized, such person shall be guilty of a class 4 misdemeanor, and shall be liable for the full amount of all expenses incurred in fighting the fire. 
(Code 1973, § 24-7; Code 1982, § 22-6) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention, ch. 18. 
State Law reference- Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-88. 
Sec. 28-69. - Entering property of another for purpose of damaging it, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter the land, dwelling, outhouse or any other building of another for the purpose of damaging such property, or any of the contents thereof, or in any manner to interfere with the rights of the owner, user or the occupant thereof to use such property free from interference. 
(b)  Violation of the provisions of this section, upon conviction, shall be punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 24-8; Code 1982, § 22-7; Ord. No. 948) 
State Law reference- Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-121. 
Sec. 28-70. - Injury to property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to take and carry away, or destroy, deface or injure, any property, real or personal, not his own. Violation of the provisions of this section, upon conviction, shall be punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, without approval of the owner or designated agent, to pick, pull, pull up, tear, tear up, dig up, cut, break, injure, burn or destroy, in whole or in part, any tree, shrub, vine, plant, flower or turf found, growing or being upon the land of another or upon any land reserved, set aside or maintained by the city as a public park. Violation of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be punishable as a class 3 misdemeanor; provided, however, that the approval of the owner, his agent, tenant or lessee, or the custodian of such park afterwards given in writing or in open court shall be a bar to further prosecution or suit. 
(b)  If any person unlawfully: 
(1)  Destroys, defaces, damages or removes, without the intent to steal, any property, real or personal, not that person's own; or 
(2)  Breaks down, destroys, defaces, damages or removes, without the intent to steal: 
a.  Any monument or memorial for war veterans described in Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1812; 
b.  Any monument erected for the purpose of marking the site of any engagement fought during the War Between the States, or for the purpose of designating the boundaries of any city, town, tract of land or any tree marked for that purpose. 
Such person shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor; provided that the court may, in its discretion, dismiss the charge if the locality or organization responsible for maintaining the injured property, monument, or memorial files a written affidavit with the court stating it has received full payment for the injury. 
(c)  If any person intentionally causes such injury, such person shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor, if the value of or damage to the property, memorial or monument is less than $1,000.00. The amount of loss caused by the destruction, defacing, damage or removal of such property, memorial, or monument may be established by proof of the fair market cost of repair or fair market replacement value. Upon conviction, the court may order that the defendant pay restitution. 
(Code 1973, § 24-9; Code 1982, § 22-8; Ord. No. 948; Ord. No. 1834, 9-30-2009) 
State Law reference- Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-137. 
Sec. 28-71. - Taking from lands of others. 
    No person shall take or remove anything from any lands within the city, except with the consent of the owner or rightful possessor of such lands. 
(Code 1973, § 24-10; Code 1982, § 22-9) 
Sec. 28-72. - Trespass-Unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to walk, ride or drive upon the land owned, leased or occupied by another person, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., without the consent of the person entitled to possession of such premises. 
(Code 1973, § 24-11; Code 1982, § 22-10) 
Sec. 28-73. - Same-After having been forbidden to do so. 
(a)  Any person who without authority of law goes upon or remains upon the lands, buildings or premises of another, or any portion or area, after having been forbidden to do so: 
(1)  Either orally or in writing, by the owner, lessee, custodian or other person lawfully in charge; 
(2)  By a sign posted by such persons or by the holder of any easement or other right-of-way authorized by the instrument creating such interest to post such signs on such lands, structures, premises or portion or area thereof at a place or places where it or they may be reasonably seen; or 
(3)  If any person, whether such person is the owner, tenant or otherwise entitled to the use of such land, building or premises, goes upon, or remains upon such land, building or premises after having been prohibited from doing so by a court of competent jurisdiction, by an order issued pursuant to the Code of Virginia, §§ 16.1-253, 16.1-253.1, 16.1-253.4, 16.1-278.2-16.1-278.6, 16.1-278.8, 16.1-278.14, 16.1-278.15, 16.1-279.1, 19.2-152.8, 19.2-152.9 or § 19.2-152.10, or an ex parte order issued pursuant to the Code of Virginia, § 20-103, and after having been served with such order; that person shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  This section shall not be construed to affect in any way the provisions of the Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-132-18.2-136. 
(Code 1973, § 24-12; Code 1982, § 22-11) 
State Law reference- Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-119. 
Sec. 28-74. - Same-At night upon church or school property. 
(a)  Entering property without consent. Any person who, without the consent of some person authorized to give such consent, goes or enters upon, in the nighttime, the premises or property of any church or upon any school property, for any purpose other than to attend a meeting or service held or conducted in such church or school property, shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Entering in violation of directions or posted notice. It shall be unlawful for any person, whether or not a church member or student, to enter upon or remain upon any church or school property in violation of: 
(1)  Any direction to vacate the property by a person authorized to give such direction; or 
(2)  Any posted notice which contains such information, posted at a place where it reasonably may be seen. 
Each time such person enters upon or remains on the posted premises or after such direction that person refuses to vacate such property, it shall constitute a separate offense. A violation of this subsection shall be punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(c)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Church means any place of worship and includes any educational building or community center owned or leased by a church. 
    School property includes a school bus as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100. 
(Code 1973, § 24-13; Code 1982, § 22-12; Ord. No. 948) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-128. 
Sec. 28-75. - Preventing the operation of vehicles, aircrafts, boats, or vessels. 
    No person shall individually or in association with one or more other persons willfully break, injure, tamper with or remove any part of any vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel for the purpose of injuring, defacing or destroying the vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel, or temporarily or permanently preventing its useful operation or, for any purpose, against the will or without the consent of the owner of such vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel, or shall in any other manner willfully or maliciously interfere with or prevent the running or operation of such vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel. Violation of the provisions of this section, upon conviction, shall be punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 24-14; Code 1982, § 22-13; Ord. No. 948) 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic generally, ch. 26. 
State Law reference- Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-146. 
Sec. 28-76. - Entering or setting in motion vehicle, aircraft or boat; exceptions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner or person in charge of a vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel, to climb into or upon such vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel, with intent to commit any crime, malicious mischief or injury thereto; or who, while a vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel is at rest and unattended, shall attempt to manipulate any of the levers and starting cranks or other devices, brakes or mechanism thereof; or to set such vehicle, aircraft, boat or vessel in motion with the intent to commit any crime, malicious mischief or injury thereto. Such violation shall, upon conviction, be punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor. The foregoing provision shall not apply when any such act is done in an emergency or in furtherance of public safety or by or under the direction of an officer in the regulation of traffic or performance of any other official duty. 
(Code 1973, § 24-15; Code 1982, § 22-14; Ord. No. 948) 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic generally, ch. 26. 
State Law reference- Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-147. 
Sec. 28-77. - Petit larceny. 
    Any person who: 
(1)  Commits larceny from the person of another of money or other thing of value of less than $5.00; or 
(2)  Commits simple larceny, not from the person of another, of goods and chattels of the value of less than $200.00, except as provided in Code of Virginia, § 18.2-95(iii); 
shall be deemed guilty of petit larceny, which offense, upon conviction, shall be punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 24-16; Code 1982, § 22-15; Ord. No. 948) 
State Law reference- Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-96. 
Sec. 28-78. - Defrauding hotels, motels, boardinghouses, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, without paying therefor, and with the intent to cheat or defraud the owner or keeper to: 
(1)  Put up at a hotel, motel, campground or boardinghouse; 
(2)  Obtain food from a restaurant or other eating house; 
(3)  Gain entrance to an amusement park; or 
(4)  Without having an express agreement for credit, procure food, entertainment or accommodation from any hotel, motel, campground, boardinghouse, restaurant, eating house or amusement park. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person with intent to cheat or defraud the owner or keeper out of the pay to obtain credit at a hotel, motel, campground, boardinghouse, restaurant or eating house for food, entertainment or accommodation by means of any false show of baggage or effects brought thereto. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person with intent to cheat or defraud to obtain credit at a hotel, motel, campground, boardinghouse, restaurant, eating house or amusement park for food, entertainment or accommodation through any misrepresentation or false statement. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person with intent to cheat or defraud to remove or cause to be removed any baggage or effects from a hotel, motel, campground, boardinghouse, restaurant or eating house while there is a lien existing thereon for the proper charges due from him for fare and board furnished. 
(e)  Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, if the value is less than $200.00, be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 24-17; Code 1982, § 22-16; Ord. No. 948) 
State Law reference- Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-188. 
Sec. 28-79. - Defrauding garage keeper. 
    A person shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor, if such person: 
(1)  Stores a motor vehicle, boat or other watercraft with any person engaged in the business of conducting a garage, marina, watercraft dealership or other facility for the: 
a.  Storage of motor vehicles, boats or other watercraft; 
b.  Furnishing of supplies to motor vehicles, boats or other watercraft; 
c.  Alteration or repair of motor vehicles, boats or other watercraft; and 
d.  Obtains storage, supplies, alterations or repairs for such motor vehicle, boat or other watercraft, without having an express agreement for credit, or procures storage, supplies, alterations or repairs on account of such motor vehicle, boat or other watercraft so stored, without paying therefor, and with the intent to cheat or defraud the owner or keeper of the garage, marina or boat repair facility. 
(2)  With such intent, obtains credit at the garage, marina, watercraft dealership or boat repair facility for such storage, supplies, alterations or repairs through any misrepresentation or false statement. 
(3)  With such intent, removes or causes to be removed any such motor vehicle, boat or other watercraft from any such garage, marina, watercraft dealership or boat repair facility while there is a lien existing thereon for the proper charges due that person for storage, supplies, alterations or repairs furnished thereon, in accordance with the provisions of Code of Virginia, §§ 43-32 or 43-33. 
(Code 1973, § 24-18; Code 1982, § 22-17; Ord. No. 948) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-189. 
Sec. 28-80. - Unlawful operation of coin box telephone, vending machine, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to: 
(1)  Operate, cause to be operated or attempt to operate any coin-box telephone, vending machine or other machine that operates on the coin-in-the-slot principle (whether of like kind or not) designed only to receive lawful coins of the United States, in connection with the use or enjoyment of telephone or telegraph service or any other service, or the sale of merchandise or other property, by means of a slug, or any false, counterfeit, mutilated, sweated or foreign coin, or by any means, method, trick or device whatsoever, not authorized by the owner, lessee, or licensee of such coin-box telephone, vending machine or other machine; or 
(2)  Obtain or receive telephone or telegraph service, merchandise or any other service or property from any such coin-box telephone, vending machine or other machines, designed only to receive lawful coins of the United States, without depositing in or surrendering to such coin-box telephone, vending machine or other machine lawful coins of the United States to the amount required by the owner, lessee or licensee of such coin-box telephone, vending machine or other machine. 
(b)  Violation of any provision of this section, upon conviction, shall, for the first offense, be punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 24-19; Code 1982, § 22-18; Ord. No. 948) 
State Law reference- Stealing from or tampering with coin operated devices, Code of Virginia, § 18.2.152. 
Sec. 28-81. - Concealment of merchandise; alteration of price tags; etc.-Prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person who, without authority, with the intention of converting goods or merchandise to his own or another's use without having paid the full purchase price, or of defrauding the owner of the value of the goods or merchandise, to: 
(1)  Willfully conceal or take possession of the goods or merchandise of any store or other mercantile establishment; 
(2)  Alter the price tags or other price marking on such goods or merchandise, or transfer the goods from one container to another; or 
(3)  Counsel, assist, aid or abet another in the performance of any of the acts specified in this subsection (a). 
(b)  Violation of any provision of this section, when the value of the goods or merchandise involved in the offense is less than $200.00, shall be guilty of petit larceny, shall be punishable upon conviction, as provided in section 28-82. The willful concealment of goods or merchandise of any store or other mercantile establishment, while still on the premises thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of an intention to convert and defraud the owner out of the value of the goods or merchandise. 
(Code 1973, § 24-20; Code 1982, § 22-19; Ord. No. 948; Ord. No. 1023, 9-13-1982) 
State Law reference- Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2.103. 
Sec. 28-82. - Same-Penalties and conviction. 
(a)  Any person convicted for the first time of an offense under section 28-81, when the value of the goods or merchandise involved is less than $200.00, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person convicted of an offense under section 28-81 shall be confined in jail not less than 30 days, nor more than 12 months for the second offense, when the value of the goods or merchandise involved is less than $200.00; and it is alleged in the warrant or information on which such person is convicted and admitted, or found by the jury or judge before whom that person is tried that he has been before convicted in the commonwealth or in another jurisdiction for any offense of larceny or any offense deemed or punishable as larceny, or of any substantially similar offense in any other jurisdiction, regardless of whether the prior convictions were misdemeanors, felonies or a combination thereof. 
(Code 1982, § 22-20; Ord. No. 948) 
State Law reference- Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-104. 
Sec. 28-83. - Same-Detention of suspected shoplifter. 
    A merchant, or agent or employee of the merchant who has probable cause to believe that a person has shoplifted in violation of section 28-81, on the premises of the merchant, may detain such person for a period not to exceed one hour pending arrival of a law enforcement officer. 
(Code 1982, § 22-21; Ord. No. 948) 
State Law reference- Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-105.1. 
Sec. 28-84. - Same-Liability of convicted person to merchant. 
    Any person who has been convicted of violating the provisions of section 28-81 shall be civilly liable to the owner for the retail value of any goods and merchandise illegally converted and not recovered by the owner and for all costs incurred in prosecuting such persons. Such costs shall be limited to actual expenses, including the base wage of one employee acting as a witness and suit costs; provided, however, that the total amount of allowable costs shall not exceed $250.00, excluding the retail value of the goods and merchandise. 
(Code 1982, § 22-22; Ord. No. 948) 
State Law reference- Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-104.1. 
Sec. 28-85. - Same-Exemption of merchant from civil liability for arrest or detention of suspects. 
(a)  A merchant, or agent or employee of the merchant who causes the arrest or detention of any person, pursuant to the provisions of section 28-81, shall not be held civilly liable for: 
(1)  Unlawful detention, if such detention does not exceed one hour; 
(2)  Slander, malicious prosecution, false imprisonment, false arrest or assault and battery of the person so arrested or detained, whether such arrest or detention takes place on the premises of the merchant or after close pursuit from such premises by such merchant, the merchant's agent or employee; provided, in causing the arrest or detention of such person, the merchant, or agent or employee of the merchant had, at the time of such arrest or detention, probable cause to believe the person had shoplifted or committed willful concealment of goods or merchandise. 
(b)  The activation of an electronic article surveillance device as a result of a person exiting the premises or an area within the premises of a merchant where an electronic article surveillance device is located shall constitute probable cause for the detention of such person by such merchant, the agent or employee of the merchant; provided: 
(1)  Such person is detained only in a reasonable manner and only for such time as is necessary for an inquiry into the circumstances surrounding the activation of the device; and 
(2)  Clear and visible notice is posted at each exit and location within the premises where such a device is located, indicating the presence of an anti-shoplifting or inventory control device. 
For purposes of this subsection, the term "electronic article surveillance device" means an electronic device designed and operated for the purpose of detecting the removal from the premises, or a protected area within such premises of specially marked or tagged merchandise. 
(Code 1973, § 24-21; Code 1982, § 22-23; Ord. No. 948) 
State Law reference- Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 8.01-226.9. 
Sec. 28-86. - Same-Agents of the merchant defined. 
    As used in sections 22-83 and 22-85, the term "agent or employee of the merchant" shall include attendants at any parking lot owned or leased by the merchant, or generally used by customers of the merchant through any contract or agreement between the owner of the parking lot and the merchant. 
(Code 1973, § 24-22; Code 1982, § 22-24; Ord. No. 948) 
State Law reference- Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-106. 
Sec. 28-87. - Bad checks-Issuance. 
(a)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person with intent to defraud, to make or draw or utter or deliver any check, draft or order for the payment of money upon any bank, banking institution, trust company or other depository, who knows at the time of such making, drawing, uttering or delivering that the maker or drawer has not sufficient funds in, or credit with, such bank, banking institution, trust company or other depository for the payment of such check, draft or order, although no express representation is made in reference thereto. 
(b)  Definition. The term "credit" as used herein shall be construed to mean any arrangement or understanding with the bank, trust company or other depository for the payment of such check, draft or order. 
(c)  Penalty. Making, drawing, uttering or delivering any such check, draft or order in payment as a present consideration for goods or services for the purposes set out in this section where the value is less than $200.00 shall, upon conviction, be punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 24-23; Code 1982, § 22-25; Ord. No. 948) 
State Law reference- Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-181. 
Sec. 28-88. - Same-Issuance prima facie evidence of intent and knowledge. 
(a)  In any prosecution under the section 28-87, the making or drawing or uttering or delivery of a check, draft or order, payment of which is refused by the drawee because of lack of funds or credit, shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud and of knowledge of insufficient funds in, or credit with, such bank, banking institution, trust company or other depository unless such maker or drawer, or someone for the maker or drawer, shall have paid the holder the amount due, together with interest and protest fees, if any, within five days after receiving written notice that such check, draft or order has not been paid to the holder. 
(b)  Notice mailed by certified or registered mail, evidenced by return receipt, to the last known address of the maker or drawer, shall be deemed sufficient and equivalent to notice having been received by the maker or drawer. 
(c)  If such check, draft or order shows on its face a printed or written address, home, office or otherwise, of the maker or drawer, then the foregoing notice, when sent by certified or registered mail to such address, with or without return receipt requested, shall be deemed sufficient and equivalent to notice having been received by the maker or drawer, whether such notice shall be returned undelivered or not. 
(d)  When a check is drawn on a bank in which the maker or drawer has no account, it shall be presumed that such check was issued with intent to defraud and the five days' notice set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall not be required. 
(Code 1973, § 24-24; Code 1982, § 22-26; Ord. No. 948) 
State Law reference- Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-183. 
Sec. 28-89. - Outdoor advertising. 
    No person shall, except as required by law, place, erect, affix or maintain any sign, advertisement, poster, notice or billboard on or along or over any part of any street or upon private property within the city, unless such person shall have first obtained consent in writing of the city manager or of the owner as to private property. 
(Code 1973, § 24-25; Code 1982, § 22-27; Ord. No. 948) 
Cross reference- Outdoor lighting, § 14-127 et seq. 
Sec. 28-90. - Serial numbers of secondhand items. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to offer to sell or barter, or to trade in or deal with, as part of the purchase price, any article from which the manufacturer's serial number has been mutilated or obliterated. 
(b)  The manufacturer's serial number of any article received by any established dealer as part of the purchase price for another article, or which is purchased outright from other than a dealer in or manufacturer of such article, shall be recorded as to such number, date of acceptance, description of the article and name of the transferor. 
(c)  Such records shall be available for inspection by the chief of police of the city or by a designee of the chief. 
(Code 1973, § 24-27; Code 1982, § 22-28; Ord. No. 948) 
Sec. 28-91. - Nighttime city park usage prohibited; permits. 
    No person or group of persons shall enter upon a city park, including city-owned parking lots appurtenant or adjacent thereto, after 9:00 p.m. and before 5:00 a.m.; except, during the times the city hall, recreation and parks department or other public facilities are authorized to be and are in fact in use. The city manager or designee may issue permits for nighttime use upon application of parties who may show that such use or activity is not at variance with the preservation of public health, safety and welfare, with particular regard to lighting, noise control and sanitation. 
(Code 1973, § 24-28; Code 1982, § 22-29; Ord. No. 948) 
Sec. 28-92. - Alcoholic beverages on city property prohibited; exception. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession or to drink or consume any beer, wine, whiskey or other alcoholic beverage on city property, except by written permission of the city manager where a permit has been issued by the state alcoholic beverage control board. 
(Code 1982, § 22-30; Ord. No. 948) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 36. 
Sec. 28-93. - Use of alcoholic beverages in public places. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to take a drink of alcoholic beverage or tender a drink to another, whether accepted or not, at or in any public place in the city. The term "public place" shall be construed to mean any place, building or conveyance to which the public has or is permitted to have access. The term "public place" shall not include any place the operator of which is required by state law to have and does have a license to sell at retail for consumption in such place such alcoholic beverages, and the alcoholic beverages drunk or offered were purchased therein. A violation shall be punishable as a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1982, § 22-31; Ord. No. 948) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 36. 
State Law reference- Drinking alcoholic beverages in public places, Code of Virginia, § 1-308. 
Sec. 28-94. - Defacement of property. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. It is the purpose and intent of this section to provide a procedure for removal or repair of defacement, including graffiti, from public and private property to protect the public health, safety and welfare and to reduce blight and the deterioration of property within the city. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section: 
(1)  City manager means the city manager of the city or his designee. 
(2)  Defacement means spoiling the appearance, disfiguring, marring, or making illegible by injuring the surface of public or private property. Defacement includes the placement of graffiti on such property. 
(3)  Graffiti means the unauthorized application of any writing, painting, drawing, etching, scratching or marking of an inscription, word, figure or design of any type on any public or private building or other real or personal property owned, operated or maintained by a governmental entity or an agency or instrumentality thereof or by any private person, firm or corporation. 
(4)  Placement of graffiti means any form or act of drawing, painting, scrawling, writing, marking, inscribing, scratching, gluing, posting or otherwise affixing graffiti to public or private property. 
(5)  Public or private property means the exterior surface of any building, wall, fence, structure, or any street, alley, sidewalk or other vehicular or pedestrian right-of-way or any article of street furniture, utility or public service equipment, or other personal property located outdoors, whether owned by a public entity or by a private person or entity, and visible from any public right-of-way. 
(c)  Violation as public nuisance. The failure of any owner of public or private property to remove or repair defacement from such property or to permit removal or repair of the defacement, after notice as provided in this section, is declared to be a public nuisance. 
(d)  Removal or repair of defacement. 
(1)  Notice and opportunity to remove or repair. Whenever the city manager becomes aware of the existence of defacement on any public or private property, the city manager or designee, may give, or cause to be given to the property owner, written notice to remove or repair the defacement. Such notice shall be served either by personal delivery or by certified mail and shall be effective upon delivery or mailing. Such notice shall request the property owner to remove or repair the defacement within 15 calendar days after the effective date of the notice. Such notice further shall seek the owner's written permission for the city to enter upon the property to remove or repair the defacement. Such notice further shall inform the property owner that, if the property owner fails to comply with the notice, then the city may maintain a public nuisance action against the property owner to compel the property owner to allow for the removal or repair of the defacement. Before issuing a notice under this subsection, the city manager shall contact the owner and manager or occupant of the property and attempt to obtain a commitment to remove or repair the defacement within a reasonable period of time. If no such commitment is made, or, if made, the commitment is not honored within a reasonable period of time as determined by the city manager, then the manager may issue a notice described in this subsection. 
(2)  Removal or repair by city. If the owner of the property upon which the defacement exists fails to remove or repair the defacement or grant written permission to the city to enter upon the property to remove or repair the defacement within 15 calendar days after the effective date of the notice described in subsection (d)(1) of this section, the city, its agents or employees may enter upon the property and remove the defacement. Such agents or employees shall have any and all immunity normally provided to an employee of the city. The city may also impose a fine of $10.00 per day for every day that the defacement remains on the property after the effective date of the notice described in subsection (d)(1) of this section. 
(3)  The city manager or a designated representative is authorized to undertake or contract for the removal or repair of the defacement, by or through the application of graffiti, of any public building, wall, fence or other structure, or of any private building, wall, fence or other structure where such graffiti is visible from any public right-of-way. 
(4)  Prior to such removal, the city manager or a designated representative, shall seek the written permission of the property owner. Should the property owner fail to provide such permission within 15 days after the request, the city may have such defacement removed or repaired by the city's agents or employees. 
(5)  All such removal or repair may be at the expense of the city, in the city's discretion; provided, however, that the removal or repair work may be undertaken by volunteers or individuals required to perform community service by order of any court, under appropriate city supervision. 
(6)  After inspection of an unoccupied public or private property, if a violation exists, the community services officer or designee, shall post the notice of violation in a conspicuous place upon the land or premises and shall send a copy of such notice by certified or registered mail to the owner of record's last known address as shown on the city tax records. The notice of violation shall direct the owner to remove or repair the defacement from such public or private property within 15 days of service of the notice of violation. After such notice of violation is served on the owner and such violation has not been corrected within 15 days of service of the notice of violation, the community services officer or designee may proceed to remedy the violation as provided in subsection (d)(7), unless the notice of violation has been appealed under subsection (d)(8). 
(7)  If the defacement is not removed or repaired from the property within the time required by the notice of violation issued pursuant to subsection (d)(6), the community services officer or designee may proceed to have the defacement removed. The costs and expenses for the removal shall be chargeable to and paid by the owner of such property. The costs and expenses may be collected by the city as taxes and levies are collected. If an appeal is filed under subsection (d)(8), the defacement shall not be removed until a decision on the appeal has been made by the city manager. 
(8)  Any owner who is aggrieved by the notice of violation pursuant to subsections (d)(2) or (d)(6) may, within ten days of service of the notice of violation, appeal to the city manager or his designee by submitting to the city manager or his designee and a copy to the community services officer, a written statement setting forth the grounds for the appeal. The city manager or his designee shall make a finding on the appeal based on the written statement provided by the property owner and information provided by the community services officer. Until the decision is made by the city manager, no action shall be taken pursuant to subsections (d)(3) or (d)(7). 
(e)  Exemptions. This section shall not be construed to prohibit temporary, easily removable chalk or other water-soluble markings on streets, sidewalks or other paved surfaces which are used in connection with traditional children's activities, such as drawings or bases for kickball, handball, hopscotch and the like or to prohibit markings placed on public or private property by authorized representatives of the city or of a public utility to indicate the location of service lines and facilities. 
(Ord. No. 1834, 9-30-2009) 
Secs. 28-95-28-114. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST MORALITY AND DECENCY 

Sec. 28-115. - Causing or encouraging acts rendering children delinquent, etc. 
(a)  Any person 18 years of age or older, including the parent of any child, who willfully contributes to, encourages, or causes any act, omission or condition which renders a child delinquent, in need of services, in need of supervision, or abused or neglected as defined in Code of Virginia, § 16.1-228; or engages in consensual sexual intercourse with a child 15 years of age or older, not a spouse, shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. This section shall not be construed as repealing, modifying, or in any way affecting Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-18, 18.2-19, 18.2-61, 18.2-63, 18.2-66 and 18.2-347. 
(b)  If the prosecution under this section is based solely on the accused parent having left the child at a hospital or rescue squad, it shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution of a parent under this section that such parent safely delivered the child to a hospital that provides 24-hour emergency services or to an attended rescue squad that employs emergency medical technicians, within the first 14 days of the child's life. In order for the affirmative defense to apply, the child shall be delivered in a manner reasonably calculated to ensure the child's safety. 
(Code 1973, § 24-29; Code 1982, § 22-32; Ord. No. 948) 
State Law reference- Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-371. 
Sec. 28-116. - Adultery and fornication prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to commit adultery or fornication, which offense, upon conviction, shall be punishable as a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section: 
(1)  Any person being married who voluntarily shall have sexual intercourse with any person not his or her spouse shall be guilty of adultery. 
(2)  Any person not being married who voluntarily shall have sexual intercourse with any other person shall be guilty of fornication. 
(Code 1973, § 24-30; Code 1982, § 22-33; Ord. No. 948) 
State Law reference- Fornication, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-344; adultery, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-365. 
Sec. 28-117. - "Obscene" defined. 
    The term "obscene," where it appears in this article, shall mean that which, considered as a whole, has as its dominant theme or purpose an appeal to prurient interest; that is, a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, excretory functions or products thereof or sadomasochistic abuse, and if it goes substantially beyond customary limits of candor in description or representation of such matters and which, taken as a whole, does not have serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
(Code 1973, § 24-32; Code 1982, § 22-34; Ord. No. 948) 
State Law reference- Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-372. 
Sec. 28-118. - Production, publication, sale, possession, etc., of obscene items. 
    No person shall knowingly: 
(1)  Prepare any obscene item for the purposes of sale or commercial distribution. 
(2)  Print, copy, manufacture, produce or reproduce any obscene item for purposes of sale or commercial distribution. 
(3)  Publish, sell, rent, lend, transport in intrastate commerce or commercially distribute or exhibit any obscene item, or offer to do any of these things. 
(4)  Have in possession of that person with intent to sell, rent, lend, transport, or commercially distribute any obscene item. Possession in public or in a public place of any obscene item shall be deemed prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
For the purposes of this section, the term "distribute" shall mean delivery in person, by mail, by messenger or by any other means by which obscene items, as enumerated in section 28-119, may pass from one person to another. 
(Code 1973, § 24-33; Code 1982, § 22-35; Ord. No. 948) 
State Law reference- Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-374. 
Sec. 28-119. - Obscene items enumerated. 
    Obscene items shall include: 
(1)  Any obscene book. 
(2)  Any obscene leaflet, pamphlet, magazine, booklet, picture, painting, bumper sticker, drawing, photograph, film, negative, slide, motion picture or videotape recording. 
(3)  Any obscene figure, object, article, instrument, novelty device or recording or transcription used or intended to be used in disseminating any obscene song, ballad, words or sounds. 
(4)  Any obscene writing, picture or similar visual representation, or sound recording, stored in an electronic or other medium retrievable in a perceivable form. 
(Code 1973, § 24-34; Code 1982, § 22-36; Ord. No. 948) 
State Law reference- Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-373. 
Sec. 28-120. - Obscene exhibitions and performances. 
    No person shall knowingly: 
(1)  Produce, promote, prepare, present, manage, direct, carry on or participate in any obscene exhibition or performance, including the exhibition or performance of any obscene motion picture, play, drama, show, entertainment, exposition, tableau or scene. No employee of any person or legal entity operating a theatre, garden, building, structure, room or place which presents such obscene exhibition or performance shall be subject to prosecution under this section if the employee is not the manager of the theatre or an officer of such entity, and has no financial interest in such theatre other than receiving salary and wages; or 
(2)  Own, lease or manage any theater, garden, building, structure, room or place and lease, let, lend or permit such theater, garden, building, structure, room or place to be used for the purpose of presenting such obscene exhibition or performance or to fail to post prominently therein the name and address of a person resident in the locality who is the manager of such theatre, garden, building, structure, room or place. 
(Code 1973, § 24-35; Code 1982, § 22-37; Ord. No. 948) 
Charter reference- Provision authorizing city to prevent lewd exhibitions, § 2.04(a). 
State Law reference- Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-375. 
Sec. 28-121. - Providing models and facilities for indecent purposes prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any establishment to operate a business of providing models or facilities for lewd and indecent sketching, painting or photographing of the human figure where either: 
(1)  The model postures; or 
(2)  The model is reproduced by sketches, painting or photographs; 
in a manner which appeals to prurient interests, is utterly without socially redeeming quality or character and patently offends contemporary community standards. Educational institutions, museums and art galleries are not within the purview of this section. 
(Code 1973, § 24-36; Code 1982, § 22-38; Ord. No. 948) 
Sec. 28-122. - Indecent exposure. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally make an obscene display or exposure of his person, or the private parts thereof, in any public place or in any place where others are present, or to procure another to so expose self. Violation of the provisions of this section, upon conviction, shall be punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor. No person shall be deemed to be in violation of this section for breastfeeding a child in any public place or any place where others are present. 
(Code 1982, § 22-39; Ord. No. 948) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-387. 
Sec. 28-123. - Public nudity in places of commercial entertainment. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    State of nudity means a state of undress so as to expose the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering or any portion thereof below the top of the areola. 
(b)  Prohibited acts. Every person who knowingly, voluntarily and intentionally appears in public or in a public place or in a place open to the public or open to public view in a state of nudity, or employs, encourages or procures another person to so appear, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(c)  Applicability. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to apply to the exhibition, presentation, showing or performance of any play, ballet, drama, tableau, production or motion picture in any theater, concert hall, museum of fine arts, school, institution of higher learning or other similar establishment which is primarily devoted to such exhibitions, presentations, shows or performances as a form of expression of opinion, communication, speech, ideas, information, art or drama; as differentiated from commercial or business advertising, promotion or exploitation of nudity for the purpose of advertising, promoting, selling or serving products or services or otherwise advancing the economic welfare of a commercial or business enterprise such as a hotel, motel, bar, nightclub, restaurant, tavern or dancehall. No person shall be deemed to be in violation of this section for breastfeeding a child in any public place or any place where others are present. 
(Code 1982, § 22-40; Ord. No. 748) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Obscene exhibitions and performances, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-375. 
Sec. 28-124. - Display of sexually explicit material. 
(a)  Restricted. No person shall display at a newsstand, newsrack or in a business establishment which is open to persons under the age of 18 years, any publication which exposes to public view any photograph, picture, painting, drawing or other pictorial representation which depicts less than completely and opaquely covered the human genitals, buttocks or that portion of the female breast below the top of the areola, or which depicts the human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, whether covered or uncovered; other than of a child under the age of puberty. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Person means any corporation or other legal entity which owns or leases the business premises as well as the managing agent of such business establishment on duty on the premises at the time of the offense. 
(c)  Violation. A person violating this section is guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion of a day during which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted and each offense is punishable as a class 4 misdemeanor. 
(d)  Applicability. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to apply to the exhibition, presentation, showing or performance of any play, ballet, drama, tableau, production, motion picture, painting or sculpture in any theater, concert hall, museum of fine arts, school, institution of higher learning and/or other similar establishment which is primarily devoted to such exhibitions, presentations, shows or performances as a form of expression of opinion, communication, speech, ideas, information, art or drama; as differentiated from commercial or business advertising, promotion or exploitation of nudity for the purpose of advertising, promoting, selling or serving products or services for otherwise advancing the economic welfare of a commercial or business enterprise such as a hotel, motel, bar, nightclub, restaurant, tavern or dancehall. 
(Code 1982, § 22-41; Ord. No. 767) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Secs. 28-125-28-146. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PEACE AND GOOD ORDER 

Sec. 28-147. - Public drunkenness prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to be drunk in public, which offense, upon conviction, shall be punishable as a class 4 misdemeanor. In any area in which there is located a court-approved detoxification center, a law enforcement officer may authorize the transportation, by police or otherwise, of public inebriates to such detoxification center in lieu of arrest; however, no person shall be involuntarily detained in such center. 
(Code 1973, § 24-39; Code 1982, § 22-42; Ord. No. 948) 
State Law reference- Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-388. 
Sec. 28-148. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person with the intent to cause public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, or recklessly creating a risk thereof, to: 
(1)  In any street, highway, public building, or while in or on a public conveyance or public place, engage in conduct having a direct tendency to cause acts of violence by the person at whom, individually, such conduct is directed. Such conduct shall not be deemed to include the utterance or display of any words or to include conduct otherwise made punishable under this chapter; 
(2)  Willfully or being intoxicated, whether willfully or not, disrupt any meeting of the governing body of the city or a division or agency thereof, or of any school, literary society or place of religious worship, if such disruption prevents or interferes with the orderly conduct of such meeting or has a direct tendency to cause acts of violence by the person at whom, individually, such disruption is directed. Such conduct shall not be deemed to include the utterance or display of any words or to include conduct otherwise made punishable under this chapter; or 
(3)  Willfully or while intoxicated, whether willfully or not, and whether such intoxication results from self-administered alcohol or other drug of whatever nature, disrupt the operation of any school or any activity conducted or sponsored by any school, if the disruption: 
a.  Prevents or interferes with the orderly conduct of the operation or activity; or 
b.  Has a direct tendency to cause acts of violence by the person at whom, individually, the disruption is directed. 
The conduct prohibited under this subsection shall not be deemed to include the utterance or display of any words or to include conduct otherwise made punishable under this chapter. 
(b)  The person in charge of any such building, place conveyance or meeting may eject any person who violates any provision of this section, with the aid, if necessary, of any persons who may be called upon for such purpose. 
(c)  Violation of any of the provisions of this section, upon conviction, shall be punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 24-40; Code 1982, § 22-43; Ord. No. 948) 
Charter reference- Provision authorizing city to prevent disorderly conduct, § 2.04(a). 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-415. 
Sec. 28-149. - Abusive language. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, in the presence or hearing of another, to curse or abuse such other person or to use any violent abusive language to such person concerning himself or any of his relations, or otherwise use such language under circumstances reasonably calculated to provoke a breach of the peace, which offense, upon conviction, shall be punishable as a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 24-41; Code 1982, § 22-44; Ord. No. 948) 
State Law reference- Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-416. 
Sec. 28-150. - Carrying concealed weapons. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to carry about his person, hidden from common observation, any pistol or any other firearm or weapon designed or intended to propel a missile of any kind, dirk, bowie knife, switchblade knife, ballistic knife, machete, razor, slingshot, spring stick, metal knucks, or blackjack or any weapon of like kind, or nunchahka or any other similar flailing instrument consisting of two or more rigid parts connected in such a manner as to allow them to swing freely, which instrument may also be known as a nun chahka, nun chuck, nunchuck, or nunchaku, shuriken, or fighting chain or any weapon of like kind, any disc, of whatever configuration, having at least two points or pointed blades, which is designed to be thrown or propelled and which may be known as a throwing star or oriental dart; or any weapon of like kind. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor, and such weapon shall, by order of the court, be forfeited to the city and may be seized by an officer as forfeited, and, such as may be needed for police officers and conservators of the peace, shall be devoted to that purpose. The remainder shall be destroyed by the officer having them in charge. 
(c)  For the purpose of this section, a weapon shall be deemed to be hidden from common observation when it is observable but is of such deceptive appearance as to disguise the weapon's true nature. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to any person while in his own place of abode or the curtilage thereof or to any police officer, sergeants, sheriffs or deputy sheriffs. Except as provided in Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308 J.1, this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any person while in that person's place of business; 
(2)  Any law enforcement officer, wherever such law enforcement officer may travel in the commonwealth; 
(3)  Any regularly enrolled member of a target shooting organization who is at, or going to or from, an established shooting range; provided that the weapons are unloaded and securely wrapped while being transported; 
(4)  Any regularly enrolled member of a weapons collecting organization who is at, or going to or from, a bona fide weapons exhibition; provided that the weapons are unloaded and securely wrapped while being transported; 
(5)  Any person carrying such weapons between place of abode of that person and a place of purchase or repair; provided the weapons are unloaded and securely wrapped while being transported; 
(6)  Any person actually engaged in lawful hunting, as authorized by the Board of Game and Inland Fisheries, under inclement weather conditions necessitating temporary protection of the firearm of that person from those conditions; provided that possession of a handgun while engaged in lawful hunting shall not be construed as hunting with a handgun, if the person hunting is carrying a valid concealed handgun permit; 
(7)  Any state police officer retired from the department of state police, any local law enforcement officer, auxiliary police officer or animal control officer retired from a police department or sheriff's office within the commonwealth, any special agent retired from the State Corporation Commission or the Alcoholic Beverage Control Board, any conservation police officer retired from the Department of Game and Inland Fisheries, and any state marine police officer retired from the Law Enforcement Division of the Virginia Marine Resources Commission, other than an officer or agent terminated for cause: (i) with a service-related disability; (ii) following at least 15 years of service with any such law-enforcement agency, board or any combination thereof; or (iii) who has reached 55 years of age, provided such officer carries written proof of consultation with and favorable review of the need to carry a concealed handgun issued by the chief law enforcement officer of the last such agency from which the officer retired or, in the case of special agents, issued by the State Corporation Commission or the Alcoholic Beverage Control Board. A copy of the proof of consultation and favorable review shall be forwarded by the chief or the board to the department of state police for entry into the state criminal information network. The chief law enforcement officer shall not, without cause, withhold such written proof if the retired law enforcement officer otherwise meets the requirements of this section. For purposes of applying the reciprocity provisions of Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308 P, any person granted the privilege to carry a concealed handgun, pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308, while carrying the proof of consultation and favorable review required shall be deemed to have been issued a concealed handgun permit. For purposes of complying with the federal Law Enforcement Officers Safety Act of 2004, a retired law enforcement officer who receives proof of consultation and review, pursuant to this section, shall have the opportunity to annually participate, at the retired law enforcement officer's expense, in the same training and testing to carry firearms as is required of active law enforcement officers in the commonwealth. If such retired law enforcement officer meets the training and qualification standards, the chief law enforcement officer shall issue the retired officer certification, valid one year from the date of issuance, indicating that the retired officer has met the standards of the agency to carry a firearm; and 
(8)  Any state police officer who is a member of the organized reserve forces of any of the armed services of the United States, national guard, or naval militia, while such officer is called to active military duty, provided such officer carries with the written proof of consultation with and favorable review of the need to carry a concealed handgun issued by the superintendent of state police. The proof of consultation and favorable review shall be valid as long as the officer is on active military duty and shall expire when the officer returns to active law enforcement duty. The issuance of the proof of consultation and favorable review shall be entered into the Virginia Criminal Information Network. The superintendent of state police shall not without cause withhold such written proof if the officer is in good standing and is qualified to carry a weapon while on active law enforcement duty. For purposes of applying the reciprocity provisions of the Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308 P, any person granted the privilege to carry a concealed handgun, pursuant to the Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308, while carrying the proof of consultation and favorable review required shall be deemed to have been issued a concealed handgun permit. 
(e)  This section shall also not apply to any of the following individuals while in the discharge of their official duties, or while in transit to or from such duties: 
(1)  Carriers of the United States mail; 
(2)  Officers or guards of any state correctional institution; 
(3)  Conservators of the peace, except that the following conservators of the peace shall not be permitted to carry a concealed handgun without obtaining a permit as provided in subsection (d) of this section: 
a.  Notaries public; 
b.  Registrars; 
c.  Drivers, operators or other persons in charge of any motor vehicle carrier of passengers for hire; or 
d.  Commissioners in chancery; 
(4)  Noncustodial employees of the department of corrections designated to carry weapons by the director of the department of corrections, pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 53.1-29; and 
(5)  Harbormaster of the City of Hopewell. 
This section not apply to any person who has obtained a permit in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308. 
(Code 1973, § 24-44; Code 1982, § 22-45; Ord. No. 948; Ord. No. 1487, 9-12-1994) 
State Law reference- Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-308 A-C. 
Sec. 28-151. - Willfully discharging weapons in public places. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully discharge or cause to be discharged any firearm, beanshooter, slingshot, bow or crossbow, air rifle, BB gun, spring gun or similar gun or device for the propulsion of shot or other metal pellet by means of compressed air, mechanical spring action or other mechanical method, in any public street or in any place of public business or place of public gathering. This section shall not apply to the discharge or shooting off of such firearm, beanshooter, slingshot, bow or crossbow, rifle, pistol or shotgun in or upon a range or course, or similar facility when such range or course or similar facility has been approved in writing by the chief of police or designee as presenting no danger to persons, or to the property of others; and provided, further, that this section shall not apply to any law enforcement officer in the performance of the official duties of such law enforcement officer, nor to any other person whose willful act is otherwise justifiable or excusable at law in the protection of the life or property of that person, or is otherwise specifically authorized by law. 
(Code 1973, § 24-45; Code 1982, § 22-46; Ord. No. 948) 
State Law reference- Willfully discharging firearms in public places, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-280. 
Sec. 28-152. - Begging on streets. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accosting means approaching or speaking to someone in such a manner as would cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon his person, or upon property in the immediate possession of that person. 
    Ask, beg, or solicit means and includes, without limitation, the spoken, written or printed word or such other acts as are conducted in furtherance of the purpose of obtaining alms. 
    Forcing oneself upon the company of another means continuing to ask for, beg, or solicit alms from a person after that person has made a negative response, blocking the passage of the individual addressed or otherwise engaging in conduct which could reasonably be construed as intended to compel or force a person to accede to demands. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to go about begging by accosting another or by forcing oneself upon the company of another or to stay upon any sidewalk or street or other public place within the city obstructing pedestrian or vehicle passage and beg. 
(c)  A violation of this section is punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 24-27; Code 1982, § 22-47; Ord. No. 948) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Obstructing passage of others, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-404. 
Sec. 28-153. - False fire alarms. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to, without just cause, call or summon, by telephone or otherwise, any ambulance, or firefighting apparatus, or to maliciously activate a manual or automatic fire alarm in any building used for public assembly or for other public use, including but not limited to schools, theaters, stores, office buildings, shopping centers and malls, coliseums and arenas, regardless of whether fire apparatus responds or not, shall be deemed guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  A violation of this section may be prosecuted either in the jurisdiction from which the call or summons was made or in the jurisdiction where the call or summons was received. 
(Code 1973, § 24-48; Code 1982, § 22-48; Ord. No. 948) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention, ch. 18. 
State Law reference- Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-212. 
Sec. 28-154. - Interference with fire or police department equipment; police dogs. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with or in any manner injure any fire equipment, fire alarm, police signal or any part of any of them established or installed within the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tease, taunt, torment, strike, kick, mutilate, or to interfere or meddle with any dog while such animal is being utilized by the police department, or any officer or employee in the performance of any function or duty of said department, or of such officer or employee. 
(Code 1973, § 24-51; Code 1982, § 22-49; Ord. No. 948; Ord. No. 1343, 2-11-1991) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention, ch. 18; police, ch. 32. 
State Law reference- Injuring or killing police animals, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-144.1. 
Sec. 28-155. - Debris, etc., in streets. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Throw or deposit or cause to be thrown or deposited upon any highway any glass bottle, glass, nail, tack, wire, can, or any other substance likely to injure any person or animal, or damage any vehicle upon such highway; nor shall any person throw or deposit or cause to be thrown or deposited upon any highway any soil, sand, mud, gravel or other substances so as to create a hazard to the traveling public. Any person who drops or throws, or permits to be dropped or thrown, upon any highway any destructive, hazardous or injurious material shall immediately remove the same or cause it to be removed. Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the highway from such vehicle. This subsection shall not apply to the use, by a law enforcement officer while in the discharge of official duties, of any device designed to deflate tires. The division of purchase and supply shall, pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 2.2-1112, set minimum standards for such devices and shall give notice of such standards to law enforcement offices in the commonwealth. No such device shall be used which does not meet or exceed the standards. 
(2)  Dump or otherwise dispose of trash, garbage or other unsightly matter on the street or on private property without the written consent of the owner; except that garbage and rubbish may be placed along the curbline for collection. 
(3)  Operate upon the streets any vehicle hauling any material so loaded as to spill, drop, sift or leak any such material upon the streets; provided, however, that sand or any substance for increasing traction during times of snow and ice may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction. 
(b)  Any persons violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 24-55; Code 1982, § 22-50; Ord. No. 948) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 36. 
State Law reference- Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-324. 
Sec. 28-156. - Games in streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any game in which a ball or other object is thrown with the hands or kicked with the feet or propelled by any stick, cane, bat or other means, in such a manner as to impede or obstruct vehicular traffic, in any street of the city. No person shall play on a highway, other than on the sidewalks, within the city or on any part of a highway outside the limits of a city or town designated by the commonwealth transportation commissioner exclusively for vehicular travel. No person shall use any toy vehicle on the roadway of any highway that: 
(1)  Has a speed limit greater than 25 miles per hour; 
(2)  Has more than two travel lanes; or 
(3)  Is located outside a residence district as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100. 
The city council may designate areas on highways under their control where play is permitted and may impose reasonable restrictions on play on such highways. Persons using such devices, except bicycles, electric personal assistive mobility devices, electric power-assisted bicycles, mopeds, and motorcycles, shall keep as near as safely practicable to the far right side or edge of the right traffic lane so they will be proceeding in the same direction as other traffic. No person riding on any bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, electric power-assisted bicycle, moped, roller skates, skateboards or other devices on wheels or runners shall attach the same or self to any vehicle on a highway. 
(Code 1982, § 22-51) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 36. 
State Law reference- State law as to playing in streets, etc., Code of Virginia, § 46.2-932. 
Sec. 28-157. - Discarded iceboxes, refrigerators and other containers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discard, abandon, leave or allow to remain in any place any icebox, refrigerator or other container, device or equipment of any kind with an interior storage area of more than two cubic feet of clear space which is airtight, without first removing the door or hinges from such icebox, refrigerator, container, device or equipment. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any icebox, refrigerator, container, device or equipment which is being used for the purpose for which it was originally designed, or is being used for display purposes by any retail or wholesale merchant, or is crated, strapped or locked to such an extent that it is impossible for a child to obtain access to any airtight compartment. 
(c)  Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be punishable as a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 24-67; Code 1982, § 22-52; Ord. No. 948) 
State Law reference- Similar state law, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-319. 
Sec. 28-158. - Coasting prohibited; exception. 
(a)  No person shall coast with any sleigh, sled, bobsled, wagon or other vehicle on any street within the city, except when such street has been barricaded and motor vehicular traffic has been temporarily prohibited by order of the city manager. 
(b)  The driver of any motor vehicle traveling on a downgrade on any highway shall not coast with the gears of the vehicle in neutral. 
(Code 1973, § 24-68; Code 1982, § 22-53; Ord. No. 948) 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic generally, ch. 26; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 36; use of coasters, roller skates, etc., on streets and sidewalks, § 36-10. 
State Law reference- Coasting, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-811; play and other vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-932. 
Sec. 28-159. - Urinating and defecating in public prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate on any street, alley, sidewalk, park or public place or area where the public gathers or has access, or within public view, other than in facilities designed for such purposes. Any person found guilty of any provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1982, § 22-53.1; Ord. No. 1567, 2-10-1997) 
State Law reference- Expectorating in public places, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-322. 
Secs. 28-160-28-186. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - WEAPONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Limitation on the regulation of firearms, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-915; authority of city to regulate discharge of firearms, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1113; sale of toy firearms, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-284; discharge of firearms in streets or public places, Code of Virginia, §§ 18.2-280, 18.2-286. 

Sec. 28-187. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Crime of violence includes any of the following crimes, or any attempt to commit any of the same: Murder, manslaughter, rape, mayhem, maliciously disfiguring another, abduction, kidnapping, burglary, housebreaking, larceny, any assault with intent to kill, commit rape or robbery, assault with a dangerous weapon, or assault with intent to commit any offense punishable by imprisonment in the penitentiary. 
    Sell and purchase include letting or hiring and similar forms of transferring. 
(Code 1973, § 40-1; Code 1982, § 37-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Secs. 28-188-28-190. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1993, adopted Jan. 28, 2019, repealed § 28-188, entitled "Committing crime when armed," which derived from Code 1973, § 40-2 and Code 1982, § 37-2; § 28-189, entitled "Unlawful possession of pistol," which derived from Code 1973, § 40-3 and Code 1982, § 37-3; and § 28-190, entitled "Carrying dangerous weapons," which derived from Code 1973, § 40-4, Code 1982, § 37-4 and Ord. No. 1839, adopted Jan. 25, 2010. 
Sec. 28-190.1. - Transporting loaded weapons. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to transport, possess or carry a loaded shotgun or loaded rifle in any vehicle on any public street, road or highway in the city. The provisions of this section shall not apply to duly authorized law enforcement officers or military personnel in the performance of their lawful duties, or to any person who reasonably believes that a loaded rifle or shotgun is necessary for his personal safety in the course of his employment or business. Any person violating this section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 1993, 1-28-2019) 
State Law reference- Regulation of transportation of a loaded rifle or shotgun, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-915.2. 
Secs. 28-191-28-200. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1993, adopted Jan. 28, 2019, repealed § 28-191, entitled "Same-Exceptions," which derived from Code 1973, § 40-5, Code 1982, § 37-5 and Ord. No. 1839, adopted Jan. 25, 2010; § 28-192, entitled "Concealed firearm permit requirements," which derived from Code 1973, § 40-6, Code 1982, § 37-6 and Ord. No. 1600, adopted Feb. 9, 1998; § 28-193, entitled "Sales of pistols to certain persons prohibited," which derived from Code 1973, § 40-7, and Code 1982, § 37-7; § 28-194, entitled "Purchasing and transferring firearms," which derived from Code 1973, § 40-8, and Code 1982, § 37-8; § 28-195, entitled "Weapon dealer's license-Required," which derived from Code 1973, § 40-9, and Code 1982, § 37-9; § 28-196, entitled "Issuance; conditions; records," which derived from Code 1973, § 40-10, and Code 1982, § 37-10; § 28-197, entitled "False information in sale of weapons," which derived from Code 1973, § 40-11, and Code 1982, § 37-11; § 28-198, entitled "Alteration of identifying marks of weapons," which derived from Code 1973, § 40-12, and Code 1982, § 37-12; § 28-199, entitled "Toy or antique pistols," which derived from Code 1973, § 40-13, and Code 1982, § 37-13; and § 28-200, entitled "Possession of certain dangerous weapons prohibited," which derived from Code 1973, § 40-14, and Code 1982, § 37-14. 
Sec. 28-201. - Destruction or sale of unclaimed firearms. 
(a)  Any unclaimed firearms and other weapons which have been in the possession of law enforcement agencies for a period of more than 120 days may be retained for use by the law enforcement agency, or destroyed as provided below. For the purposes of this section, "unclaimed firearms and other weapons" means any firearm or other weapon belonging to another which has been acquired by a law enforcement officer pursuant to his duties, which is not needed in any criminal prosecution, which has not been claimed by its rightful owner and which the state treasurer has indicated will be declined if remitted under the Uniform Disposition of Unclaimed Property Act. 
(b)  At the discretion of the chief of police, sheriff, or their duly authorized agents, any unclaimed firearm or other weapon that has been in the possession of law enforcement agencies for more than 120 days may be destroyed by any means which renders the firearm or other weapon permanently inoperable. Prior to the destruction of such firearms or other weapons, the chief of police, sheriff, or their duly authorized agents shall comply with the following notice provisions. 
(c)  The chief of police, sheriff or their duly authorized agents shall make reasonable attempts to notify the rightful owner of the property of its intent to retain or destroy such weapons, obtain from the attorney for the commonwealth, in writing a statement advising that the item is not needed in any criminal prosecution, and cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the locality, once a week for two successive weeks, notice that such weapons will be retained or destroyed together with the date, time and place of the for such retention or destruction. 
(d)  Any unclaimed item retained for use by the police department shall become the property of the city and shall be retained only if, in the opinion of the chief of police, there is a legitimate use for the property by the police department and that retention of the item is a more economical alternative than purchase of a similar or equivalent item. 
(e)  In lieu of destroying any such unclaimed firearm, the locality may donate the firearm to the department of forensic science, upon agreement of the department. 
(Ord. No. 1993, 1-28-2019) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1993 adopted Jan. 28, 1993 repealed § 28-201 entitled "Seizure and disposition of dangerous articles," which derived from Code 1973, § 40-15, and Code 1982, § 37-15 and further added new provisions as § 28.201 "Destruction or sale of unclaimed firearms," as herein set out above. 
State Law reference- Disposal of unclaimed firearms or other weapons, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-1719, 15.2-1721. 
Sec. 28-202. - Discharge of pneumatic guns in certain places prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot a pneumatic gun in any areas of the city. Pneumatic gun means any implement, designed as a gun, that will expel a BB or a pellet by action of pneumatic pressure; it includes a paintball gun that expels by action of pneumatic pressure plastic balls filled with paint for the purpose of marking the point of impact. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the following acts are not prohibited by this section: 
(1)  Use of pneumatic guns at facilities approved for shooting ranges; 
(2)  Use of pneumatic guns on other property where firearms may be discharged; 
(3)  Use of pneumatic guns on or within private property with the permission of the owner or legal possessor thereof when conducted with reasonable care to prevent a projectile from crossing the bounds of the property; 
(4)  Shooting or discharge of a pneumatic gun by any law enforcement officer acting in the performance of the duties of a law enforcement agency. For the purposes of this section the term "law enforcement officer" includes any person defined as a law enforcement officer pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 9.1-101 and any animal control officer acting in the performance of his or her duty; and 
(5)  Shooting or discharge of a pneumatic gun by any representative of the Virginia Department of Game and Inland Fisheries in the performance of duty for scientific collection or wildlife management purposes. 
(b)  Whenever any minor below the age of 16 uses any pneumatic gun, the minor must be supervised by a parent, guardian, or other adult supervisor approved by the minor's parent or guardian. Any minor using any pneumatic gun shall be responsible for obeying all laws, regulations and restrictions governing such use at all times. Violation of this section shall constitute a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1896, 4-22-2013) 
Chapter 30 - PERSONNEL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Provisions as to personnel, §§ 9.01-9.11. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference- State law requiring city to establish personnel system, pay plan and grievance procedure, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1506. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City employee means any person employed by the city manager. 
    Grievance means a complaint or dispute by an employee based upon an event or condition that affects the circumstances under which an employee works, allegedly caused by misinterpretation, inconsistent or unfair application or lack of established policy pertaining to employment. 
    Immediate family includes parents, step-parents, grandparents, mother-in-law or father-in-law, children, stepchildren, siblings, step-siblings, grandchildren, spouse, domestic partner or other members of a family residing in the same household as the employee. 
    Layoff means the separation of an employee from a position to which such employee was appointed, as a result of the abolition of a position, lack of work or lack of funds. 
    Leadership team means a group of positions that are classified at the division director and general manager levels on the city's classification plan. Individuals employed on the leadership team are at-will employees who serve at the pleasure of the city manager, with the exception of police captains. 
    Police officers means sworn officers of the police department, who are empowered to enforce laws, have the power of arrest and have undergone or will be undergoing on-the-job training or similar instruction, as defined in the Fair Labor Standards Act. 
(Ord. No. 1802, § 25-1, 3-12-2007) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-2. - Application of provisions. 
(a)  The following persons in the service of the city are not subject to the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise provided by law and as mutually agreed to by the appropriate appointing authorities and the city council: 
(1)  Members of the city council. 
(2)  City clerk. 
(3)  City attorney. 
(4)  All other elected officials including constitutional officers and employees appointed by them. 
(5)  Members of boards and commissions. 
(6)  The city manager. 
(7)  The general registrar, deputy registrar, assistant registrars, and all officers of election employed by the electoral board. 
(8)  All persons appointed on a contractual or fee basis. 
(9)  Temporary employees. 
(10)  All others that are exempted by the city Charter or ordinance. 
(11)  School employees. 
(b)  All other positions other than temporary, which are under the administrative direction and control of the city manager, are subject to all provisions of this chapter and supplementary administrative regulations. 
(c)  In addition to the rules in this chapter, city police officers must also follow the general orders issued by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 1802, § 25-2, 3-12-2007) 
Sec. 30-3. - Acceptance of employment deemed consent to chapter provisions. 
    Upon employment, every employee consents and agrees to all the provisions of this chapter and to abide by the administrative regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1802, § 25-3, 3-12-2007) 
Sec. 30-4. - Administrative regulations. 
(a)  The city manager is responsible for the general administration of personnel matters, including but not limited to leave policies, a classification plan for employees, a uniform pay plan, and procedures for resolving grievances of employees. These policies shall be promulgated by the city manager as administrative regulations. 
(b)  Copies of new administrative regulations shall be organized in a unified document and made available to all employees of the city. 
(c)  Proposed changes to the administrative regulations shall be made available to employees and posted for review and comment for no fewer than 30 days before final promulgation by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1802, § 25-4, 3-12-2007) 
Secs. 30-5-30-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GRIEVANCES 

Sec. 30-54. - Eligibility. 
(a)  All nonprobationary, regular fulltime and parttime employees working 20 or more hours weekly are eligible to file grievances, with the exception of the: 
(1)  City manager. 
(2)  City attorney. 
(3)  City clerk. 
(4)  Elected and appointed state and local officials. 
(5)  Employees of constitutional officers. 
(6)  Temporary, term, grant and seasonal employees. 
(b)  The exceptions listed in subsection (a) of this section do not apply to a city employee, if the complaint includes allegations of discrimination on the basis of race, color, creed, religion, age, disability, national origin, gender, political affiliation, sexual orientation or marital status. 
(c)  Leadership team employees' grievance rights are limited in that they may not grieve termination or demotion, with the exception of police captains. 
(d)  Law enforcement officers, as defined in Code of Virginia, § 9.1-500, who have a grievance may proceed under the guidelines cited in the Law Enforcement Officers Procedural Guarantee Act, Code of Virginia, § 9.1-500 et seq. or under the city's grievance procedure, but not both. 
(Ord. No. 1802, § 25-5, 3-12-2007) 
Sec. 30-55. - Types of grievances. 
    A grievance may include, but is not necessarily limited to: 
(1)  Disciplinary actions involving dismissals, demotions and suspensions, provided that the dismissals shall be grievable, whenever resulting from formal discipline or unsatisfactory job performance. 
(2)  The application, meaning or interpretation of personnel policies, procedures, rules and regulations. 
(3)  Complaint of discrimination on the basis of race, color, creed, religion, political affiliation, age, gender, disability, national origin, sexual orientation, or marital status. 
(4)  Sexual harassment. 
(5)  Acts of retaliation as the result of the use of, or participation in, the grievance procedure, or because the employee complied with any law of the United States or of the Commonwealth, has reported any violation of such governmental authority, has sought any change in law before the Congress of the United States or the General Assembly, or has reported an incidence of fraud, abuse, or gross mismanagement to a city councilmember, the city manager, or other governmental authority. 
(6)  Retaliation for exercising any rights otherwise protected by law. 
(Ord. No. 1802, § 25-6, 3-12-2007) 
Sec. 30-56. - Nongrievable actions. 
(a)  A grievance shall not be interpreted to include: 
(1)  The contents of ordinances, statutes, or established personnel policies, rules and regulations. 
(2)  Work activity accepted by the employee as a condition of employment or work activity, which may be reasonably expected to be a part of the job description. 
(3)  Establishment and revisions of wages or salaries, position classifications, or general benefits. 
(4)  Failure to promote, except where the employee can show established promotional policies or procedures were not followed or applied fairly. 
(5)  The methods, means, and personnel by which such work activities are to be completed. 
(6)  Discharge, demotion or layoff because of lack of work, reduction in workforce or job abolition, except where such action affects an employee who has been reinstated within the previous six months as a result of the final determination of a grievance. 
(7)  The hiring, promotion, transfer, assignment, and retention of employees within the city. 
(8)  The relief of employees from duties in emergencies. 
(9)  Oral reprimands. 
(10)  Decisions of a performance evaluation appeals panel. 
(b)  In any grievance brought under the exception to subsection (a)(5) of this section, the action shall be upheld upon a showing by the city that there was a valid business reason for the action and the employee was notified of such reason in writing prior to the effective date of the action. 
(Ord. No. 1802, § 25-7, 3-12-2007) 
Sec. 30-57. - Grievability determinations. 
(a)  Decisions regarding whether or not a matter is grievable shall be made by the city manager at the request of the grievant or the department, on the appropriate form. Such determination of grievability shall be made, subsequent to the placement of the grievance in writing, but prior to a hearing before the city employee review board. The form bearing the decision of the city manager must be returned to the grievant within 14 calendar days after receipt of the request. 
(b)  The issue of grievability may be raised at any step of the procedure prior to a hearing before the board; but once raised, the issue must be resolved before further processing of the grievance. In any event, the issue of grievability must be resolved prior to a board hearing, or it shall be deemed to have been waived. 
(c)  The city manager's decision regarding grievability may be appealed to the County Circuit Court for a hearing de novo on the issue of grievability as provided in section 15.2-1507 A.9.a of the Code of Virginia (Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1507 A.9a), as amended. Such appeal shall be noted by returning the grievability form to the city manager within 14 calendar days after receipt of the initial decision on grievability. Within 14 calendar days thereafter, the city manager shall transmit the record, including copies of the decision of the city manager, the notice of appeal and any exhibits, to the clerk of the County Circuit Court. The procedure for the conduct of the appeal shall be provided for in section 15.2-1507 A.9.a and b of the Code of Virginia (Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1507 A.9.a, b), as amended. The decision of the court is final and is not appealable. 
(Ord. No. 1802, § 25-8, 3-12-2007) 
Sec. 30-58. - Procedure. 
    Employee grievances, whether by an individual or a group of employees, shall be processed as follows: 
(1)  Step 1. Supervisory level. A grievance must be raised within 20 calendar days after the occurrence or condition giving rise to the grievance, or within 20 calendar days following the time the employee knows or should have known of its occurrence. 
a.  Part A. A grievant shall discuss the matter with the grievant's immediate supervisor, who shall attempt to resolve the matter informally. Within five calendar days of such discussion, the supervisor shall give response to the employee with respect to the grievance or shall advise the employee that additional time for such decision is needed, in which case a decision must be given to the employee within five calendar days thereafter. 
b.  Part B. If a satisfactory resolution is not reached by this process, the employee may put the grievance in writing, on the approved city form, stating the nature of the grievance and the expected remedy. Such written grievance shall be presented to the next level of supervision within ten calendar days after notice of the decision of the immediate supervisor. The second level supervisor shall hold a meeting with the employee and render a written decision within seven calendar days of receipt of the appeal. If the second level supervisor is the general manager, step 1, part B and step 2 are consolidated into a single step. 
(2)  Step 2. Management level. If the grievant is not satisfied with the decision of the second level supervisor, the grievant may submit the grievance to the general manager within 15 calendar days of the reply received from step 1, part B as set forth in subsection (1)b of this section. At least three calendar days prior to the hearing, all documents, exhibits, and lists of witnesses shall be exchanged between the parties. The general manager shall hear the appeal within ten calendar days of receipt of the request and shall render a written decision to the grievant within five calendar days following the hearing. If the supervisor is the city manager, steps 2 and 3 as set forth in this subsection and subsection (3) of this section, are consolidated into a single step. 
(3)  Step 3. City manager. If the grievant is not satisfied with the decision of the general manager, the grievant may file a written appeal to the city manager within 21 calendar days of receipt of the decision in step 2 as set forth in subsection (2) of this section. At least three calendar days prior to the hearing, all documents, exhibits, and lists of witnesses shall be exchanged between the parties. The city manager shall hear the grievant within 14 calendar days of receipt of the request, and render a written decision within an additional seven calendar days after completion of the hearing. 
(4)  Step 4. Board hearing. 
a.  If the grievant is not satisfied with the decision of the city manager, he may file a written appeal, on the appropriate city form, to the city employees review board, via the chairman, within 14 calendar days of receipt of the city manager's decision. The city employees review board shall hear the appeal within 40 calendar days of receipt. 
b.  At least ten calendar days before a scheduled hearing, the grievant and such grievant's attorney shall be allowed access to and copies of all relevant files intended to be used in the grievance hearing, and all documents, exhibits, and lists of witnesses shall be exchanged between the parties. 
c.  The board has the responsibility to interpret the application of appropriate city or department policies and procedures in the case. It does not have the prerogative to formulate or to change policies or procedures. A quorum of the board shall consist of all three members. 
d.  The city employees review board shall render a written decision within 14 calendar days after completion of the hearing and it shall be filed by the chairman with the city manager. The majority decision of the board shall be final and binding in all the determinations and shall be consistent with the provisions of law and written policies. Copies of the decision shall be transmitted to the director of human resources, the employee and the employee's supervisors via the general manager. Either party to the grievance may petition the county circuit court for an order requiring implementation of the decision of the board. 
(5)  Personal face to face meetings are required at steps 1 through 3 as set forth in subsections (1) through (3) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1802, § 25-9, 3-12-2007) 
Sec. 30-59. - Employee review board. 
(a)  The board shall be composed of three members who are citizens of the city and are appointed by the city council. The members shall be appointed for staggered three-year terms and shall elect a chairman annually within two months following either: the annual appointment of new fulltime members, or the anniversary of their appointment. Members shall serve without compensation. In addition to serving as the final appeal board for grievance procedures, the board shall serve as the selection committee for the city employee of the year program. 
(b)  The board shall not be composed of any persons having direct involvement with the grievance being heard by the board or with the complaint or dispute giving rise to the grievance. Managers who are in a direct line of supervision of a grievant and the following relatives of a participant in the grievance process or a participant's spouse are prohibited from serving as board members: spouse, parent, and child, descendants of a child, sibling, niece, nephew and first cousin. No attorney having direct involvement with the subject matter of the grievance, nor a partner, associate, employee or co-employee of such an attorney shall serve as a board member. 
(Ord. No. 1802, § 25-10, 3-12-2007) 
Sec. 30-60. - Employee representation. 
    The employee shall be permitted to be accompanied or represented by an individual of such employee's choice at step 1, part B as set forth in section 30-58(1)b and any subsequent steps in the grievance procedure. The second level supervisor, general manager or city manager may have a witness of choice likewise in attendance at any meeting. If an employee using the grievance procedure elects to have legal counsel representation, the employee shall be responsible for the related expenses. 
(Ord. No. 1802, § 25-11, 3-12-2007) 
Sec. 30-61. - Mediation. 
    Mediation is a voluntary process and employees or supervisors may initiate a request for mediation to the city's human resources director. The human resources director will meet with the employees interested in mediation to explain the process, determine their commitment to reaching a resolution, and to assess the appropriateness of the issue for mediation. If mediation is requested prior to the initiation of a grievance, the employee may request an extension of the initial filing period. If the request for mediation is made during the course of a grievance, the applicable time periods are extended until the conclusion of the mediation process. Upon conclusion of the mediation process and the resulting written agreement that both parties to the complaint or dispute sign, an employee may agree that a written grievance will not be initiated or that a grievance in progress will be concluded. The city manager shall provide an administrative regulation setting forth the mediation procedure. 
(Ord. No. 1802, § 25-12, 3-12-2007) 
Sec. 30-62. - Waiver of time limits. 
    By mutual agreement in writing, the parties to a grievance at any and every step may extend any or all of the time periods established in the procedures. 
(Ord. No. 1802, § 25-13, 3-12-2007) 
Sec. 30-63. - Failure to comply with procedural requirements. 
    After the initial filing of a written grievance, failure of either party to comply with all substantial procedural requirements of the grievance procedure without just cause will result in a decision in favor of the other party on any grievable issue, provided the party not in compliance fails to correct the noncompliance within five work days of receipt of written notification by the other party of the compliance violation. Such written notification by the grievant shall be made to the city manager. Failure of either party without just cause to comply with all substantial procedural requirements at the board hearing shall result in a decision in favor of the other party. Compliance determinations made by the city manager shall be subject to judicial review by filing a petition with the circuit court within 30 days of the compliance determination. 
(Ord. No. 1802, § 25-14, 3-12-2007) 
Sec. 30-64. - Management rights and maintenance and analysis of records. 
(a)  Nothing in the procedure is intended to circumscribe or modify the existing management right of the city to do the following: 
(1)  Direct the work of its employees as well as establish and revise wages, salaries, position classifications and general employee benefits. 
(2)  Hire, promote, transfer, assign and retain employees within the city. 
(3)  Maintain the efficiency of governmental operations. 
(4)  Relieve employees from duties in emergencies. 
(5)  Determine the methods, means and personnel by which operations are to be carried on. 
(b)  Records relating to a grievance, including all written statements, forms, investigations and exhibits, are maintained in the human resources division. Such information is protected by the Privacy Act of Virginia, and access to the records is limited accordingly. The director of human resources shall conduct an annual review of all grievances filed and make a written report by each February 1 to the city manager should a trend, after analysis, require action to minimize the causes of such grievances in the future. 
(Ord. No. 1802, § 25-15, 3-12-2007) 
Secs. 30-65-30-86. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LAYOFFS AND TRANSFERS 

Sec. 30-87. - Use of layoff procedure. 
    The city manager may invoke a layoff procedure when such manager determines that there are an excess number of employees as a result of the abolishment of a position, reorganization of functions, the lack of funds, or the lack of or curtailment of work. 
(Ord. No. 1802, § 25-16, 3-12-2007) 
Sec. 30-88. - Determination of employees to be laid-off. 
(a)  It is the responsibility of the director of human resources to develop layoff registers for each classification in which the city manager has invoked a layoff procedure. Each layoff register shall be divided into three categories and these shall be utilized in the separation of excess employees. These categories are: 
(1)  First category: temporary employees. 
(2)  Second category: probationary employees. 
(3)  Third category: permanent status employees. 
(b)  Within each classification in which a layoff procedure has been invoked, all employees in the first category shall be separated prior to separating any employees from the second category, and similarly all employees in the second category shall be separated prior to separating any permanent status employees in the third category. 
(Ord. No. 1802, § 25-17, 3-12-2007) 
Sec. 30-89. - Development of layoff register. 
(a)  First category. The names of employees in the first category shall be placed on the list in alphabetical order. No layoff rating value shall be assigned to these employees and the order of separation within this category shall be at the determination of the general manager. 
(b)  Second category. The names of employees in the second category shall be placed on the list in alphabetical order. No layoff rating value shall be assigned to these employees and the order of separation within this category shall be at the determination of the general manager. 
(c)  Third category. Each permanent status employee shall have a layoff rating value assigned by the director of human resources which will determine that employee's place within the category. The layoff rating value shall be a combination of months of creditable service with the city and an average performance evaluation score (APES) for the official performance evaluation ratings received within the last five years. The points assigned for months of service shall equal 40 percent of the total score, while the points assigned for the average performance evaluation score shall equal 60 percent of the total point value. The procedure is as follows: 
(1)  Points for service. One point is given for each full month of creditable service with the city. 
(2)  Points for performance evaluation rating. An examination shall be made of the employee's annual performance evaluation ratings and/or the evaluation ratings completed prior to a promotion/demotion action, dating back for no more than five years of creditable service. Each evaluation shall be assigned points as follows: 
a.  Three points for each "exceeds expectations" rating. 
b.  Two points for each "above expectations" rating. 
c.  One point for each "meets expectations" rating. 
d.  Zero points for each "needs improvement or below expectations" rating. 
The total points assigned are added together and then divided by the number of evaluations used to obtain the average performance evaluation score (APES). 
(3)  Formula to calculate the layoff rating value. (Number of months of creditable service x 0.4) + (the sum of points received for performance evaluations within the last five years ;ds; by number of evaluations) x 0.6. 
(4)  Separation of employees in third category. Separation of employees in the third category shall be in the order of those with the least layoff rating value on the layoff register to those with the highest layoff rating value. If two employees have the same layoff rating value, separation shall be at the determination of the general manager, taking into account any special skills or training the employee may possess. 
(Ord. No. 1802, § 25-18, 3-12-2007) 
Sec. 30-90. - Transfer in lieu of layoff. 
(a)  An employee designated as excess shall be transferred to a position in the same class, which may be vacant in another city department or division. If not accepted within five working days of the offer, the employee shall be deemed terminated. An excess employee may request a transfer to another class in the city's classification plan for which there is a vacancy, provided all the qualifications are met. If the vacancy is in a higher classified position, the employee designated as excess will be subject to the selection procedures in the city's administrative regulations. Applications for such transfers are voluntary. 
(b)  If a lateral transfer is not available, an employee shall be transferred to a lower classified position, the employee shall be placed in the new salary level equal to the employee's current rate of pay. This transfer could involve a gradual pay reduction. If not accepted within five working days of the offer, the employee shall be deemed terminated. When the employee's rate of pay prior to transfer exceeds the maximum step of the new, lower salary level, the employee's rate of pay shall be frozen at that existing rate for six months until the pay of the lower salary level matches or exceeds the employee's rate of pay from the time of the transfer. After six months, the employee shall receive a reduction in pay equal to five percent and shall be assigned to a salary level corresponding to this rate of pay, if possible. If the employee's rate of pay following the five percent reduction exceeds the maximum rate of pay for the salary level, the employee's rate of pay shall be frozen again for a second six-month period. At the end of the second six months, the employee's rate of pay shall be reduced again by five percent, and if it still exceeds the maximum rate of pay, it shall be frozen and then reduced by five percent in six month intervals until the maximum rate of pay for that salary level is achieved. The anniversary date shall not change. 
(Ord. No. 1802, § 25-19, 3-12-2007) 
Sec. 30-91. - Reemployment list. 
(a)  If there are no transfer opportunities, an excess employee in the second or third category of the layoff register shall be placed on a reemployment list for that class for a period of one year from layoff. If the excess employee on the reemployment list does not accept the first available permanent status vacancy of the same class as that from which he had been laid off that occurs within the year, the employee shall be removed from the reemployment list and may apply at any time for future city employment subject to the selection procedures in the personnel regulations. 
(b)  Vacancies in lower classes in the same class series shall also be offered during the period the excess employee is on the reemployment list if the excess employee meets all the qualifications. If an employee is offered and rejects an employment opportunity in a lower class in the class series, the employee shall remain eligible for reemployment in such employee's same class as that from which the employee had been laid off, but will be removed from the reemployment list of the class in which an employment opportunity is rejected. An employee who accepts reemployment in a lower graded class shall retain eligibility for reemployment rights within the same class for the one-year period. 
(c)  Temporary positions that become available in that same class will be offered to persons with reemployment rights. If an employee accepts a temporary position, such employee shall remain eligible for reemployment as described in this section. 
(d)  The city manager is authorized to provide severance pay to regular employees at the rate of pay at the time of layoff based on the regular number of hours worked weekly. The amount of severance pay shall be determined by the city manager, but shall not exceed six weeks. Temporary, grant and term employees are excluded form eligibility. Severance pay shall be forfeited by an employee who declines a transfer or reassignment to a position in the same class series where the general terms and conditions of employment are identical to those, which the employee enjoyed in the position held prior to layoff. The city manager shall establish other rules and regulations dealing with the payment of such severance pay. 
(Ord. No. 1802, § 25-20, 3-12-2007) 
Sec. 30-92. - Notification procedures. 
(a)  General managers whose departments are affected by a layoff shall issue a general notice indicating a layoff procedure is underway. This notice is issued when it is not yet determined what individual action shall be taken. 
(b)  Prior to layoff, a permanent employee shall receive at least 30 calendar days' notice. A temporary or probationary employee shall receive at least ten calendar days' notice. 
(c)  The employee's specific notice of layoff shall be accomplished in a written communication from the employee's general manager, notifying such employee of the layoff and the reasons for it. The communication may be either hand-delivered or sent by certified mail to the employee's home address. A copy of the communication shall be forwarded to the human resources office. 
(Ord. No. 1802, § 25-21, 3-12-2007) 
Sec. 30-93. - Job-sharing and reduced hours. 
    General managers whose departments are affected by a layoff procedure shall consider job-sharing and/or reduced working hours in an effort to reduce the number of employees who would otherwise be laid-off. A recommendation on the feasibility of job-sharing and/or reduced working hours shall be forwarded to the division of human resources with an analysis of the impact on city services rendered, fiscal cost comparisons and other pertinent data. The city manager shall either approve or deny the recommendation. 
(Ord. No. 1802, § 25-22, 3-12-2007) 
Secs. 30-94-30-114. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PENSION PLANS 

Sec. 30-115. - City retirement system established. 
    A retirement system is established under the authority of state law. A trust fund is established for post-employment benefits, other than pensions. The general administration and responsibility for the operation of the city's basic and police pension plans and the trust fund for post-employment benefits other than pensions shall be vested in the retirement board of the city. The powers and duties, composition, accountability, term of office, officers, and vacancies shall be established in the city's basic and police pension plan documents and in the trust agreement for post-employment benefits other than pensions. 
(Ord. No. 1802, § 25-23, 3-12-2007; Ord. No. 1903, 8-12-2013) 
Sec. 30-116. - Retirement board; powers and duties. 
    The general administration of and responsibility for the operation of the city's basic and police pension plans (hereafter referred to jointly as the "plans") and the trust fund for post-employment benefits other than pensions shall be vested in the retirement board of the city (hereafter referred to as the "board"). The board's powers and duties shall include, but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Selection of the person or other entity that will handle the investments, administration, and actuarial evaluation of the city's plans, including the other post-employment benefits (OPEB); 
(2)  Review the asset allocation of the pension plans and OPEB plan and the making of recommendations for changes; 
(3)  Review of the investment performance of the plans on a quarterly basis and the annual costs of the plans; 
(4)  The periodic review of the language of the plans as it impacts upon costs and the making of recommendations for change; 
(5)  The receipt and approval or denial of applications for disability retirements; and 
(6)  The discontinuance or reduction of retirement allowances based upon a periodic review of disability retirees to determine whether they have subsequently improved or have obtained other employment. 
(7)  The provisions of this section shall take effect on August 12, 2013. 
(Ord. No. 1802, § 25-24, 3-12-2007; Ord. No. 1903, 8-12-2013) 
Sec. 30-117. - Accountability. 
    The retirement board shall be accountable to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1802, § 25-25, 3-12-2007) 
Sec. 30-118. - Composition of board. 
    The retirement board shall consist of seven members as follows: 
(1)  Three members appointed by the city council, each of whom shall be residents of the city pursuant to City Charter, section 4.14; 
(2)  One member appointed by the city manager; 
(3)  One member who is a member of the police pension plan and who is elected by the police department officers or the officers of the public safety department, should one be established; and 
(4)  Two members who are members of the basic plan elected by those employees who are members of the basic pension plan. 
(Ord. No. 1802, § 25-26, 3-12-2007) 
Sec. 30-119. - Term of office. 
    The terms of office of the retirement board shall be three years. 
(Ord. No. 1802, § 25-27, 3-12-2007) 
Sec. 30-120. - Officers. 
    The retirement board shall elect annually one council appointee member as the chair and one employee elected member as the vice-chair. In the event of a vacancy in the chair, the board shall elect another of the council appointees to fill the remainder of the term. 
(Ord. No. 1802, § 25-28, 3-12-2007) 
Sec. 30-121. - Vacancies. 
    Vacancies for the retirement board shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the office was previously filled. 
(Ord. No. 1802, § 25-29, 3-12-2007) 
Sec. 30-122. - Compensation. 
    The members of the retirement board shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 1802, § 25-30, 3-12-2007) 
Sec. 30-123. - Meetings. 
    The retirement board shall meet on a semiannual basis at a minimum and may meet more frequently as business requires. 
(Ord. No. 1802, § 25-31, 3-12-2007) 
Sec. 30-124. - Authorization to execute plans. 
    The city manager is authorized to execute amendments to the city's plans in order to effectuate the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1802, § 25-32, 3-12-2007) 
Sec. 30-125. - Assistance of city attorney. 
    The retirement board shall have the assistance of the city attorney, as required. 
(Ord. No. 1802, § 25-33, 3-12-2007) 
Chapter 32 - POLICE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Provisions relative to public safety and the police department, §§ 11.01-11.05. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; fire prevention, ch. 18; enforcement provisions relative to motor vehicles and traffic by officers, § 26-4; interference with police department equipment or police dogs § 28-154; security alarm systems, § 12-21 et seq. 
State Law reference- State law as to police generally, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1701 et seq. 

Sec. 32-1. - Performance of functions of public safety; joint fire department. 
(a)  The functions of public safety shall be performed by the police department and such other bureaus, divisions and units as may be provided by ordinance or by orders of the city manager consistent therewith. 
(b)  The city may enter into contractual relationships with neighboring political subdivisions for the support and utilization of a joint fire department which shall be responsible for the protection from fire of life and property within the city, and may, at any time, establish a city fire department for such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 26.01) 
Sec. 32-2. - Police department. 
    The police department shall consist of the chief of police and such other officers and employees of such ranks and grades as may be established by ordinance. The police department shall be responsible for the preservation of the public peace, prevention of crime, apprehension of criminals, protection of the rights of persons and property, and enforcement of the laws of the commonwealth, the ordinances of the city and all rules and regulations made in accordance therewith. The chief of police and the other members of the police force of the city shall have all the powers and duties of police officers as provided by the general laws of the commonwealth. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 26.02) 
Sec. 32-3. - Chief of police. 
    The head of the police department shall be the chief of police and shall be appointed by the city manager. Under the general supervision of the city manager, he shall be in direct command of the police department. He shall appoint all members of the department and assign all members of the department to their respective posts, shifts, details and duties. He shall, with the approval of the city manager, make rules and regulations in conformity with the city Charter, the laws of the commonwealth, and the ordinances of the city concerning the operation of the department, the conduct of the officers and employees thereof, their uniforms, arms and other equipment, their training and the penalties to be imposed for infractions of such rules and regulations. The chief of police shall be responsible for the efficiency, discipline and good conduct of the department. Orders of the city manager relating to the police department shall be transmitted in all cases through the chief of police or, in his absence from the city or incapacity, through an officer of the department designated as acting chief by the city manager. Disobedience to the lawful commands of the chief of police or violation of the rules and regulations made by him with the approval of the city manager shall be ground for removal or other disciplinary action as provided in such rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 26.03) 
Sec. 32-4. - Authority to dispose of lost, abandoned, property, etc. 
    The police department is hereby granted the authority to dispose of all property which has been turned in to the department as lost or stolen, and which has not been claimed, or which was found abandoned by the members of the police department and has not been claimed or any property which has been confiscated by the police department. All such property shall be disposed of in accordance with the directions of the city manager. In all cases each separate item of property shall be retained by the department for a period of at least 90 days from the time it came into the possession of the department before any attempt is made to dispose of it. 
(Code 1973, § 29-1; Code 1982, § 26-1) 
State Law reference- Disposal of unclaimed property, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-1719, 15.2-1721. 
Sec. 32-5. - Unauthorized wearing of uniforms. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use a uniform of the police department except authorized department members. 
(Code 1973, § 29-2; Code 1982, § 26-2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-175. 
Sec. 32-6. - Police department equipment. 
    All police equipment such as weapons, handcuffs and similar equipment shall be owned by the city, issued to police officers and periodically inspected. 
(Code 1973, § 29-6; Code 1982, § 26-3) 
Sec. 32-7. - Protection of city property located outside city. 
(a)  The police department of the city is directed to protect the city's property wherever located in the county, including but not limited to the George Mason Junior-Senior High School and Mount Daniel Elementary School, and the city's water, water lines and appurtenances. 
(b)  In all matters properly related to the protection of such city-owned property, the police are directed to apply the appropriate and pertinent statutes of the state or this Code or other ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 29-7; Code 1982, § 26-4) 
State Law reference- Police jurisdiction over city lands, buildings, etc., Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1124. 
Sec. 32-8. - Impersonating officer. 
    Any person who shall falsely assume or exercise the functions, powers, duties and privileges incident to the office of sheriff, police officer, marshal or other peace officer, or who shall falsely assume or pretend to be any such officer shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1973, § 29-3; Code 1982, § 26-5) 
Sec. 32-9. - Giving false reports to police officers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to give a false report as to the commission of any crime to any sheriff, deputy, member of the state police, police officer or any other law enforcement official with intent to mislead. 
(Code 1973, § 29-4; Code 1982, § 26-6) 
Sec. 32-10. - Interfering with arrests. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to resist, obstruct or in any way interfere with any arrest made or attempted by any police or other officer having authority to make arrests. 
(Code 1973, § 29-5; Code 1982, § 26-7) 
Sec. 32-11. - Off-duty employment of law enforcement officers. 
    City law enforcement officers, to include deputy sheriffs, are authorized to engage in off-duty employment which may occasionally require the use of their police powers in the performance of such employment. The chief of police and sheriff shall promulgate reasonable rules and regulations which shall apply to all off-duty employment of city law enforcement officers within the respective organizations. 
(Code 1982, § 26-8; Ord. No. 1540, 3-11-1996) 
Sec. 32-12. - Trespass notices. 
    The owner or the agent of such owner of any real property within the city may designate the city police department as a person lawfully in charge of the property for the purpose of forbidding another to go on or remain upon the lands, buildings, or premises of the owner, as specified in the designation. Any such designation shall be in writing upon forms approved by the chief of police and notarized, which writing shall be kept on file with the city police department. 
(Code 1982, § 26-9; Ord. No. 1706, 6-25-2001) 
State Law reference- Authority to designate police to enforce trespass violations, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1717.1. 
Chapter 33 - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 
ARTICLE I. - INTENT 

Sec. 33-01. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum standards to promote the maintenance, upkeep and repair of homes and businesses to encourage the prevention and elimination of blighted, unsightly conditions not addressed by the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code. No civil penalty shall be imposed without a warning notice first being issued to the responsible persons. 
(Ord. No. 1872, 3-12-2012) 
ARTICLE II. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 33-1. - Enforcement, applicability and notice. 
(a)  Authorized officials. The departments of development services and police, and officials designated by the city manager, are hereby authorized to take corrective actions and issue a warning notice or a notice of violation for any violation of this chapter pursuant to the procedures in this section. 
(b)  Applicability. With respect to a residential or commercial property or use within the city, no owner or agent of the owner, person, tenant or corporation shall violate any provision of this chapter. 
(c)  Notification and fines. Violations of this section shall be subject to the following process of notice: 
(1)  Whenever a property is found to be in violation of this chapter 33, the process and penalties found in sections 33-9 and 33-10 for a civil infraction shall apply. 
(2)  Manner of notice. Except where expressly provided for elsewhere in chapter 33, the notice required by this section shall be given by first class mail and posting of the property, or by certified mail. In the event the owner or agent of the owner, person, tenant or corporation cannot be located after a reasonable search of public property records, notice by first class mail and posting of the property shall be deemed to have satisfied the notice requirements of this section. The content of the notice itself shall satisfy the provisions of subsection 33-9(i). 
(Ord. No. 1872, 3-12-2012) 
Sec. 33-2. - Tall grass and weeds, brush. 
(a)  All exterior property and premises shall be maintained free from weeds, brush or tall grass in excess of 12 inches. Weeds shall not include cultivated flowers, vegetable and ornamental gardens, trees or shrubs or planned and cultivated habitats for which trimming and mowing is not practical. 
(b)  Noncompliance. In addition to the process and penalties found in sections 33-9 and 33-10, and after proper notice has been given, the City of Falls Church may cause the tall grass, weeds or brush to be removed by city staff or by a licensed contractor, in which case the cost and penalties, if any, shall be collected by the city treasurer's office pursuant to the procedures of that office. 
(Ord. No. 1872, 3-12-2012) 
Sec. 33-3. - Exterior storage. 
    All exterior property and premises shall be maintained free from trash, litter and debris. Further, items including, but not limited to the following, shall be stored within a fully enclosed building or shed or shall be screened from pedestrian view: Lawn mowers and lawn care equipment, ladders, fuel and oil containers, construction equipment, tools, auto parts, tires, appliances, furniture, clothing and items that are not accessory to the primary use of the property. Exception: Exterior storage of tools and equipment customarily used in the seasonal maintenance of residential structures, grounds, gardens and landscaping, provided they are stored in an orderly manner in a side or rear yard or pursuant to the conditions of a permit issued by the City of Falls Church. Properly maintained rain barrels are not subject to the provisions of this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 1872, 3-12-2012) 
Sec. 33-4. - Sidewalks, driveways and parking areas. 
    All private sidewalks, driveways and parking areas on commercial properties shall be kept in a proper state of repair and maintained free of major cracks, holes or dislodged pavers. All private trees, vegetation, shrubs or similar plantings on commercial and residential properties shall be trimmed so as to not obstruct vehicle or pedestrian passage along a public right-of-way or access to a required parking space, nor shall such plantings violate the visibility requirements of section 48-1103. 
(Ord. No. 1872, 3-12-2012) 
Sec. 33-5. - Maintenance of buildings, generally. 
    In order to prevent blight and deterioration, all buildings shall be maintained substantially free of peeling paint and all surfaces shall be primed, painted, stained, treated or sealed; window glazing shall be present and free of cracks; insect screens shall be secure and free from obvious defects; boarded window or door openings on an occupied structure are prohibited; roof coverings shall be substantially free from broken, rotted, split or curled materials; roof gutters shall be properly mounted, kept free of debris and not discharge roof water directly to an abutting property. 
(Ord. No. 1872, 3-12-2012) 
Sec. 33-6. - Fences. 
    Fences shall be primed, painted, stained, sealed, treated or maintained to prevent deterioration. 
(Ord. No. 1872, 3-12-2012) 
Sec. 33-7. - Inoperable motor vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to park, keep or store more than one inoperable vehicle on any private property unless kept within a fully enclosed building or garage. A tarpaulin, tent or other similar temporary or nonrigid structure shall not be deemed to satisfy the requirements of this section. Any inoperable vehicle not required to be kept within an enclosed building or garage shall be kept on a paved driveway in a side or rear yard. In the event this inoperable vehicle is in an extreme state of externally visible disrepair or disassembly, it shall not be kept on the private property longer than 21 calendar days. 
(b)  The following exceptions apply: Filling stations and automobile repair shops which are otherwise permitted under chapter 48, may temporarily store inoperable customer vehicles on the premises, provided they are in the course of being serviced and are parked in a location designated for them by a site plan; salvage yards, if such yard is otherwise permitted, may store them on the premises as regulated by an approved site plan. In the event no site plan exists for a filling station, repair shop or salvage yard, the zoning administrator may impose such restrictions on vehicle storage as are necessary to promote compliance with City Code. 
(c)  In no event shall an inoperable vehicle that constitutes an imminent health, safety or fire hazard be kept or located on any premises. 
(d)  For purposes of this section, "inoperable" shall mean any motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer which is not legally operable on a public street due to one or more of the following: 
(1)  Damage to or removal or deflation of one or more tires or wheels. 
(2)  Damage to or removal of the engine or any other essential part (such as, but not limited to, the transmission, rear end, or windshield) required for the safe operation of the vehicle. 
(3)  Lack of a valid state registration plate or plates. 
(4)  Lack of a valid state inspection certificate, if required to operate the vehicle on a public street in the state in which the vehicle is registered. 
(5)  Any condition which causes the vehicle to be an imminent health, safety, or fire hazard. 
(Ord. No. 1872, 3-12-2012) 
Sec. 33-8. - Rodent and insect harborage. 
    All structures and exterior property shall be kept free from rat and insect infestation. Where an infestation is found it shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes which will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent re-infestation. The City of Falls Church may require proof of extermination by a licensed professional. Conditions which allow standing water to remain more than seven days after a rain are prohibited when mosquitoes are present; this shall not include properly maintained rain barrels. All foundation walls shall be maintained free from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to prevent the entry of rats. When evidence of an infestation is present, all logs, firewood, building materials, lumber, boxes, cartons, barrels, bottles, cans, containers, machinery, junk, raw materials, fabricated goods and similar items which may afford harborage for rats or insects shall be stored dry and either upon paved areas or elevated above the ground so as to permit inspection and extermination procedures. 
(Ord. No. 1872, 3-12-2012) 
Sec. 33-9. - Enforcement, applicability and fines. 
(a)  Applicability. Violations of City Code that reference this section for process, fines, or penalties shall be subject to the provisions found herein. 
(b)  Civil penalties. Violations not resulting in the injury to persons and not corrected by the compliance date specified on a warning notice shall incur the civil penalties provided in section 33-10. The period set for compliance shall not be less than ten calendar days. Violations arising from the same operative set of facts shall not be charged more frequently than once in any ten-day period except where specified elsewhere. 
(c)  Procedure for responding to notice. At any time before the expiration of the date set for compliance on a notice of violation, the person, persons, firm or corporation receiving a civil violation under this section shall either admit responsibility by paying the civil penalty at the city treasurer's office, or shall request a hearing by appearing at the clerk of the court's office. Failure to respond may result in additional fines and penalties as provided for by this section and in the same manner as provided by law for civil infractions. 
(d)  Violations for which a summons is issued, procedure. The authorized official may issue a summons in lieu of a civil violation notice for violations that have gone uncorrected after proper notice has been given and the ten-day period has elapsed. The summons shall be set for hearing according to the procedures of the district court. 
(e)  Violations resulting in injury to persons, procedure. Violations that result in injury to persons shall be deemed a misdemeanor punishable pursuant to section 1-12 of the City Code. 
(f)  Continued violations a separate offense. Each day the violation continues after conviction or the court ordered abatement period has expired, shall constitute a separate offense and the civil penalties found in section 33-10 shall accrue. If the violation remains uncorrected at the time of the conviction, the court shall order the violator to abate or remedy the violation in order to comply with the Code. Except as otherwise provided by the court for good cause shown, the court shall order the violation to be abated within a period of not less than ten days, nor greater than 90 days from the date of conviction. 
(g)  Failure to respond and collection of fines. If a person charged with a violation under this section fails to respond by either failing to request a hearing at the clerk of the court's office or by failing to pay the civil penalty at the city treasurer's office as provided for in subsection (c) above, the city treasurer's office shall collect the fines and penalties, if any, pursuant to the procedures of that office. 
(h)  Cases set for hearing, procedure. When a hearing has been requested for a case, it shall be tried in the General District Court of the City of Falls Church in the same manner and with the same right of appeal as provided for by law. In any trial for a violation authorized by this section, it shall be the burden of the City of Falls Church to show the liability of the violator by a preponderance of the evidence. An admission of liability or finding of liability shall not be a criminal conviction for any purpose. 
(i)  Content of warning and violation notices. Notices issued pursuant to this section shall be on a form that clearly states: "City of Falls Church Warning/Violation Notice", and identifies: 1) the nature of the violation and the Code section cited; and 2) identifies all parties subject to the warning notice, including one or all of the following: The property owner, the owner's agent, the tenant, corporation, or person being held responsible for the violation. The notice shall include a date, not less than ten calendar days following the date of issuance, by which the violation is to be remedied; and shall also state the fine and/or penalties incurred upon failure to correct or respond to the notice. Violation notices issued pursuant to this section shall include a statement that the named parties have the option to admit responsibility or request a hearing as provided for in subsection (c) of this section. Violations for which a summons has been issued shall utilize the procedures established by the court for civil or misdemeanor hearings. 
(Ord. No. 1872, 3-12-2012) 
Sec. 33-10. - Fine schedule. 
    Violations of this section shall be subject to the following schedule of fines: 
(1)  Civil infraction not resulting in injury: First offense $100.00; second and each subsequent offense $150.00, unless otherwise prescribed by Code of Virginis, § 15.2-901 (Removal of trash, cutting of grass and weeds), as amended. 
(2)  Violation not resulting in injury, with summons: Upon conviction not more than $500.00, unless otherwise prescribed by Code of Virginis, § 15.2-901 (Removal of trash, cutting of grass, and weeds) and payment of outstanding fines and penalties, if any; court may order a remedy to correct or abate the violation. 
(3)  Violation resulting in injury: Violations resulting in injury to persons shall be deemed a misdemeanor punishable pursuant to section 1-12 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 1872, 3-12-2012) 
Secs. 33-11-33-35. - Reserved. 
Chapter 34 - SOLID WASTE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1883, adopted Sept. 24, 2012, amended ch. 34 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 34, §§ 34-1-34-8, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from: Code 1982, §§ 13-1- 13-8; Ord. No. 1381, adopted. Nov. 25, 1991; Ord. No. 1420, adopted Nov. 9, 1992; Ord. No. 1428, adopted Dec. 16, 1992; Ord. No. 1526, adopted Sept. 26, 1995; Ord. No. 1667, adopted Feb. 14, 2000; and Ord. No. 1727, adopted Mar. 24, 2003. 
Cross reference- Buildings, ch. 6; condominiums, § 6-48 et seq.; health and sanitation, ch. 20; zoning property maintenance code, ch. 33; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 36; vegetation, ch. 44. 
State Law reference- Virginia Waste Management Act, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1400 et seq.; authority for the collection and disposal of solid waste, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-927, 15.2-928. 

Sec. 34-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned material means any material that is: 
(1)  Disposed of; 
(2)  Burned or incinerated; or 
(3)  Accumulated, stored or treated, but not recycled, before or instead of being disposed of, burned or incinerated. 
    Accumulation means the acquisition or gradual gathering of solid waste or household hazardous waste, not confined in a container intended for disposal. 
    Brush means any woody waste, including tree branches, small tree stumps, and large shrubs, i.e., too large to fit in a 30-gallon paper yard waste bag, all with a branch or trunk diameter of six inches or less. 
    Brush pile means an accumulation of cuttings or dead portions of trees, brush, or bushes placed in a pile or allowed to lie randomly on the ground, not exceeding the amount needed for kindling. 
    Bundle means to tie securely with cord or twine that is strong enough to hold the designated material together. 
    City of Falls Church Recycling Center, means the facility designated and owned by the city at 217 Gordon Road where City of Falls Church residents can place recyclable materials. 
    Commercial means establishments engaged in business operations other than manufacturing. This category includes, but is not limited to, the operation of stores, markets, office buildings, restaurants, and shopping centers. 
    Compost means a mixture of decomposed remnants, containing organic materials designed for use in gardens or agriculture that when mixed into soil, improves soil structure and provide nutrients. 
(1)  Food compost: means compost containing any combination of the following: Fruit, vegetables, coffee grounds, tea bags, dried grass, green grass, weeds, straw, newspaper and sawdust. 
(2)  Yard compost: means compost containing any combination of the following: Brush, dried grass, green grass, straw, weeds, newspaper and sawdust. 
    Compost pile means the intentional and controlled decomposition of organic materials in a humus-like product or mulch to be used as a soil amendment, in a contained area. 
    Construction and demolition (C&D) debris means any waste generated during construction, remodeling, repairs, or demolition of buildings, bridges, pavements, and other structures. This category of debris includes but is not limited to, concrete, asphalt, lumber, steel girders, steel rods, wiring, dry wall, carpets, windows, doors, piping, tree stumps and other miscellaneous items. 
    Discarded material means any material that is: 
(1)  Abandoned material as defined in this section; 
(2)  Recyclable material as defined in this section; or 
(3)  Considered inherently wastelike. 
    Garbage means readily putrescible discarded material composed of animal, vegetable or other organic matter. 
    Hazardous waste means a "hazardous waste" as described by the Virginia Hazardous Waste Management Regulations (9 VAC 20-60). 
    Household hazardous waste means products used in the household which require special disposal or contain ignitable, corrosive, reactive, or toxic ingredients or are otherwise potentially harmful if released into the environment. Examples of household hazardous waste include, but are not limited to, oil-based paints, wood finishing products, some household cleaners, pesticides, herbicides, and some batteries. 
    Litter means any discarded waste material that is not contained within a legal waste receptacle. 
    Mixed containers means the combination of one or more of the following that include, but are not limited to, plastic jars, plastic tubs and containers, aluminum, glass bottles, or glass jugs. 
    Mixed paper means the combination of one or more of the following in the same container that include, but are not limited to, office paper, newspaper, cardstock, magazines, book pages, or other paper products. 
    Municipal solid waste (MSW) means any garbage, refuse, recycling or other discarded material generated by residential, commercial, institutional, and industrial sources such as durable goods, nondurable goods, containers and packaging, food scraps, yard trimming, solid, liquid, or semi-solid material and miscellaneous inorganic wastes. MSW excludes solid wastes from other sources, such as construction and demolition debris, sludge, ash, and industrial process wastes. 
    Organic material means materials derived from living origins; if it once grew or was derived from something which grew. Organic material includes, but it is not limited to, fruits and vegetables, leaves, grass and yard debris, as well as paper items. 
    Principal recyclable material (PRM) means the recyclable material from the following list that comprises the majority of a business or commercial property's waste stream: Newspaper, ferrous scrap metal, nonferrous scrap metal, used motor oil, corrugated cardboard, container glass, aluminum, high-grade office paper, mixed paper, tin cans, cloth, automobile bodies, plastic, clean wood, brush, leaves, grass and other arboreal materials. "Principal recyclable materials" do not include large diameter tree stumps. 
    Recyclable materials means any material which retains useful properties that can be reclaimed after the production or consumption process. 
    Recycling bins means small, less than 25-gallon, open-top containers owned and provided by the city to residents receiving city provided recycling service for placement of recyclable materials. 
    Recycling carts means large, lidded, rolling containers owned and provided by the city to residents receiving city provided recycling service of recyclable materials. 
    Refuse means the fraction of solid waste having the character of solids rather than liquids and which are composed wholly or partially of materials such as garbage, trash, rubbish, litter, or other discarded materials. 
    Refuse carts means large, lidded, rolling containers owned and provided by the city to residents participating in city refuse service for placement of refuse. Carts may be requested in sizes of 35 gallons or 65 gallons. 
    Routes means the routes city-authorized collectors follow to collect materials, and include, but are not limited to, curbsides, city rights-of-ways and other places authorized by the city where persons place materials for pickup by city-authorized collectors. 
    Single stream recycling means a collection program that allows residents to put all recyclable materials (e.g., paper, bottles, cans, etc.) into one collection container without requiring the materials to be sorted or separated. 
    Solid waste means any nonhazardous garbage, refuse, recycling, yard waste, or other discarded material, including solid, semisolid, or contained liquid or gaseous material, resulting from residential, commercial, industrial, or other community activities. 
    Solid waste management plan means a comprehensive, integrated strategy, approved by city council, which sets forth solid waste management goals and objectives, and describes planning and regulatory concepts to be employed by the city, and meets requirements as mandated by the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    Special collection means a bulk collection provided to residential curbside customers receiving city solid waste service. Items to be included in a special collection include items too large or heavy to fit into city provided cart, or yard debris such as brush exceeding six inches in diameter, furniture, moving debris, and household appliances. Solid waste from any work done by a contractor shall not be included with special collections. 
    Yard waste means that fraction of municipal solid waste that consists of grass clippings, leaves, brush, and tree and shrub prunings arising from general landscape maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 1883, 9-24-2012) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-2. - Declaration of policy; intent. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to promote the health and general welfare of the city by regulating the collection and disposal of solid waste in accordance with an integrated, comprehensive strategy for the management of solid waste generated within the city, to be referred to henceforth as the solid waste management plan. The provisions of this chapter shall not affect the right of any person to sell or otherwise dispose of solid waste material as provided in the Code of Virginia Code, § 15.2-933, nor permitted under any other law of the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 1883, 9-24-2012) 
Sec. 34-3. - Residential solid waste collection. 
(a)  Residential solid waste (recycling, refuse, yard waste) service. 
(1)  All residences having solid waste collected by the city are responsible for placing their solid waste curbside, based on a schedule to be determined by the city manager, or the city manager's designee. 
(2)  The city shall issue one recycling cart and one refuse cart to each residential address having solid waste collected by the city with a replacement schedule to be determined by the city manager, or the city manager's designee. The city-issued carts shall remain the property of the city. When full, no single city provided solid waste cart shall exceed 65 gallons in capacity or exceed the gross weight designated by the manufacturer. Materials to be collected include all solid waste that results from normal household activities, excluding household hazardous waste, soil, block, stone, masonry, construction debris, motor oil, cooking oil and automobile parts. Additional special collection, yard waste and recycling requirements are described separately in subsections 34-3(c), 34-3(d) and 34-3(e). All solid waste receptacles shall be placed at the curb by 7:00 a.m. on the collection day or no earlier than 5:00 p.m. the night before the designated collection day and must be returned to the side or rear of the residence by evening on the day of collection or by 7:00 a.m. the day following collection. 
(b)  Disposal charge. Residents receiving city solid waste service shall pay a solid waste disposal charge, to be set by resolution of the city council. The billing schedule, due date for payment, and method of payment shall be determined by the city manager or the city manager's designee. Failure to pay this charge shall be enforced through any civil remedy available by law to the city and described in section 34-9. 
(c)  Special collections. The city shall provide collection of special items not picked up as a part of routine collection service. Only those residents receiving routine city solid waste service shall be provided with such special collection service. The items to be picked up and charges for special collection service shall be set by resolution of the city council. Special collections will be made by request to the department of public works pursuant to collection schedules established by the city manager or the city manager's designee. 
(d)  Yard waste collection. Residents receiving city solid waste service shall also receive collection of yard waste. Yard waste shall be collected on a schedule set by the city manager or the city manager's designee and the following solid waste collection regulations shall apply, unless exempted by the city manager for health and welfare reasons: 
(1)  For seasonal collection only, leaves shall be piled in the right-of-way behind the curb, avoiding sidewalks and storm sewers. Brush, limbs, trash, etc., must not be mixed with the leaves. 
(2)  Brush must be placed in compostable 30-gallon paper yard waste bags, or placed in containers with a capacity less than 30 gallons, or bundled with cord or twine and placed at the curb, avoiding sidewalks and storm sewers, and not in the gutter. Brush must be cut in lengths not exceeding five feet. No single bundle, bag or container shall weigh more than 50 pounds or be too large or bulky to be loaded safely by one person into the collection vehicle. Branch or trunk diameter shall not exceed six inches in diameter. 
(3)  Waste from tree trimming or removal done by a contractor shall not be placed within city right-of-way and will not be picked up by the city. 
(4)  Grass clippings, other small plant material (twigs, ivy, trimmings, etc.), and leaves collected other than during the seasonal collection period must be placed in 30-gallon paper yard waste bags purchased by residents. No single bag shall weigh more than 50 pounds. Yard waste bags shall be placed at the curb, avoiding sidewalks, gutters, and storm sewers. Residents receiving this collection shall pay a service fee to the city. The cost of service shall be set by resolution of the city council. The method of payment shall be determined by the city manager or the city manager's designee. 
(5)  Yard waste that is not bundled or placed in approved bags as outlined in subsections (d)(2) and (d)(4) of this section will not be collected by the city and may be treated as a special collection item as outlined in subsection (c) of this section, with the resident charged accordingly. 
(e)  Recyclable material collection. All residences receiving city refuse collection shall also receive curbside collection of recyclable materials. The schedule for collection and materials to be collected shall be set by the city manager, or the city manager's designee. 
(f)  Removal of recyclable materials. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any recyclable materials from recycling bins, recycling routes, or the city recycling center without permission of the city manager or the city manager's designee, or the person who placed the recyclable materials in the recycling bin or on the recycling route. 
(g)  Cart and bin maintenance. Carts are the property of the city. City-issued carts shall not be removed from the assigned cart address. Damaged carts reported to the city will be fixed or replaced. Carts that are intentionally damaged or removed are the responsibility of the owners or tenants at the assigned address. The owners or tenants will be assessed a replacement fee to be determined by the city manager, or the city manager's designee not to exceed 120 percent of the actual replacement cost. 
(Ord. No. 1883, 9-24-2012) 
Sec. 34-4. - Multifamily solid waste collection. 
(a)  Multifamily solid waste (recycling, refuse) service. Any multifamily residence, town homes, or institution in the city not receiving routine city solid waste collection must provide adequate collection and disposal of solid waste items by contractor(s), subject to subsections 34-6(a), 34-6(b) and 34-6(c). 
(b)  Recyclable material collection. Owners and licensees of all residential apartment and condominium buildings which receive private solid waste collection service must include collection of recyclable materials and refuse. The implementation schedule, frequency of collection, and types of materials to be collected is subject to subsections 34-6(a), 34-6(b) and 34-6(c), solid waste collection by contractor. 
(c)  Recycling program notification. Owners or licensees must provide recycling system users with notification regarding the use and participation in such system upon occupancy and at least once annually thereafter. This provision shall not impose any liability upon any apartment building owner or manager for failure of tenants to comply with the requirements for the separation of recyclable materials, nor upon any collector or transporter of recyclable materials for failure of its customers to comply with such regulations. The building owner, licensee, or designated representative must provide notification to building residents as follows: 
(1)  Information on the recycling collection program must be distributed to all residents at least 30 days prior to program initiation. A second distribution must occur within six months after program implementation. 
(2)  Notification must include a list of acceptable items, how they should be prepared before placing items in recycling areas, where they are to be placed, a schedule of collection days, and contact phone numbers for the information distributor and the hauler of recyclables. 
(3)  Residents must be notified of any changes in the collection program at least two weeks in advance of the effective date. 
(4)  Copies of written notification must be provided to the department of public works at the time of distribution to residents. 
(d)  Special collection. Special collection service will only be provided by the city if solid waste service is also provided by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1883, 9-24-2012) 
Sec. 34-5. - Commercial solid waste collection. 
(a)  Generally. Materials collected shall include solid waste that results from normal commercial activities, excluding hazardous waste, soil, block, stone, masonry, construction debris, antifreeze, motor oil, cooking oil, and automobile parts. Additional special collections and hauling schedule are subject to contract set forth between the commercial owner and solid waste hauler. Commercial solid waste collection is subject to section 34-6, solid waste collection by contractor. 
(b)  Recyclable material collection. All commercial residences shall also receive collection of recyclable materials. At a minimum, the materials to be collected are newspapers, mixed containers, three colors of glass bottles and jars, and aluminum and ferrous metal food and beverage containers. 
(c)  Recycling source separation. Any business operated for profit within the city shall source separate, at a minimum, the principal recyclable material and shall provide for collection of such source separated material(s) for transportation to a recycling center or recycling marketer. The recycling system shall, at a minimum, meet the recycling standards as approved by the city council. Owners or licensees must provide recycling system users with notification regarding the use and participation in such system upon occupancy and at least once annually thereafter. This provision shall not impose any liability upon any commercial building owner or manager for failure of tenants to comply with the requirements for the separation of recyclable materials, nor upon any collector or transporter of recyclable materials for failure of its customers to comply with such regulations. 
(d)  Removal of recyclable materials. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any recyclable materials from recycling containers. 
(e)  Annual report required. All nonresidential solid waste generators and companies that manage solid waste or recyclable materials generated in the city shall report annually by March 1 for the previous calendar year such nonproprietary information regarding waste generation, waste management, and recycling as is necessary to facilitate compliance with Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1411. All reports required by the city shall be based on volume or weight of each material; provided that where such measurements cannot be accurately determined, the report may be based on carefully estimated data. Where estimates are submitted, they must contain sufficient detail to reasonably describe how the estimate was prepared, including, but not limited to, such data as container volume, frequency of collection, percent full when collected, and the type of material collected. When information is withheld as proprietary, the report shall specify the nature of the information withheld and the basis for its proprietary determination. Annual reports shall be submitted on a standardized form to be provided by the government, and shall be certified by a responsible company official. Said reports shall include, but not be limited to, the name and address of the reporting entity, period of time covered by the report, and type and weight/volume of each material reported. Supporting documentation used in preparation of the report shall be retained for audit and clarification of reported data for a period of two years following submission of said report. 
(Ord. No. 1883, 9-24-2012) 
Sec. 34-6. - Solid waste collection by contractor. 
(a)  Generally. Any business, organization, or residence in the city not receiving routine city solid waste collection must provide adequate collection and disposal of solid waste items by contractor(s). Solid waste, including refuse, recycling and yard waste left in the city right-of-way for more than 48 hours will be considered unlawful disposal and will be subject to penalty as outlined in section 34-9. Recycling, refuse and yard waste collection must occur in separate collection vehicles with no exceptions. Daily service hours shall not begin prior to 7:00 a.m. or continue after 7:00 p.m. Collection of designated items must be provided a minimum of once every two weeks. 
(b)  Commercial receptacle requirements. Receptacles provided for solid waste collection must be tightly enclosed and remain closed when not in use, have a capacity of 150 percent of the normal solid waste stream, and consist of such material and construction as cannot harbor rodents, and such that a fire occurring within the receptacle will be self-contained. Open-top roll-off containers may not be used to collect, store, or transport municipal solid waste or any other putrescible items except by permitted use. 
(c)  Sanitation. It shall be the joint responsibility of the customer and contractor to maintain the receptacle and its surrounding area in a clean and sanitary condition, maintained and operated as to prevent spillage of the type of solid waste to be collected therein. 
(Ord. No. 1883, 9-24-2012) 
Sec. 34-7. - Composting on private property. 
(a)  Generally. Residents are allowed to practice composting on their own property. There are two types of compost allowed: Food compost; and yard compost. 
(1)  Food compost consists of food waste such as fruits and vegetables, and excludes dairy products, meat, greases and fats. 
(2)  Yard compost consists of yard waste such as grass clippings, leaves, weeds and straw. 
(b)  Container. All composting must occur in a container. The type of composting determines what type of container may be used. 
(1)  Organic food compost: All food compost shall be contained in a fully enclosed container, with the exception of air vents, to prevent rodents and flies. Acceptable container materials include a container with a tight-fitting lid constructed of wood, concrete, a combination thereof, or in a commercially available compost bin designated for composting organic food compost or food compost. An open compost pile is acceptable providing that the size of the pile does not exceed four feet in length, four feet in width, or four feet in height. 
(2)  Yard compost: All yard compost shall be contained on at least two sides by a container that encourages airflow. Acceptable container materials include wood, wire mesh, an open pile, a combination thereof, or in a commercially available compost bin designated for composting organic yard waste. 
(3)  Container size: The total volume of compost shall not exceed 150 cubic feet in volume and shall not exceed five feet in height. 
(c)  Container location. 
(1)  The compost container(s) shall be located at least five feet from side or rear lot lines and be placed no closer than ten feet to any habitable building, except the dwelling on the property at which the compost container is located. 
(2)  Compost container(s) shall be located and designated so that any liquid seepage from the compost will not run into adjacent properties, private streets, storm sewers, streams or lakes. 
(3)  Compost piles must be located a minimum of five feet from any surface water, or storm sewer opening. 
(d)  Acceptable materials. 
(1)  Food compost: The following materials shall be allowed in a closed, food compost container: Fruit, vegetables, coffee grounds, tea bags, dry leaves, dried grass, green grass, weeds, straw, shredded newspaper and sawdust. 
(2)  Yard compost: The following materials shall be allowed in a yard compost container: Coffee grounds, tea bags, dry leaves, dried grass, green grass, weeds, straw, shredded newspaper and sawdust. 
(e)  Prohibited materials. 
(1)  The following materials shall not be placed in a food or yard compost container: Meat, bones, fats, oils, dairy products and other greasy kitchen wastes, plastics, synthetic fibers, human or pet wastes, diseased plants, or other mixed municipal solid waste. 
(2)  No herbicide or pesticides shall be added to a compost container or pile. 
(f)  Maintenance. Compost containers and piles shall be maintained so as not to create odors, attract rodents, or become a nuisance. The compost shall be periodically turned and watered to incorporate all, to mix wet and dry matter, and to promote a rapid degradation of the composting material. 
(g)  Nuisance. Any compost pile, which is not maintained correctly and enables the spread or harbor of disease, emits unpleasant odors or harmful gas, attracts rodents, vermin or pests, shall constitute a nuisance, and if so determined by the city or their representative considered unlawful and shall be enforced through the civil remedy available by law to the city and described in section 34-9. 
(Ord. No. 1883, 9-24-2012) 
Sec. 34-8. - Unlawful disposal. 
(a)  Household hazardous waste. The city shall provide residents with alternatives for lawful disposal of household hazardous wastes. Residents shall not include household hazardous wastes with routine or special collection materials. 
(b)  Illegal dumping. It shall be unlawful for anyone to dispose of solid or hazardous waste, except in the manners contained herein; for nonresidents to leave solid or hazardous waste for collection inside city limits; or for anyone to use commercial disposal containers (i.e., dumpsters) without lawful permission. 
(c)  Littering. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of litter in or upon any exterior public or private property within the city, including, but not restricted to, any street, sidewalk, park, body of water, vacant or occupied lot, except by placement in a public litter receptacle, or private litter receptacle provided for public use. 
(d)  Accumulation on premises. It shall be unlawful for any person within the city, whether in a commercial area or any other area, or a vacant lot or a developed lot, to allow solid or hazardous waste to accumulate on such premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or dump solid or hazardous wastes onto any streets or lots in the city, public or private. It shall be unlawful for any person to cast, throw, or dump solid or hazardous waste into any streams or drainage areas in the city. 
(e)  Vehicles dropping contents on street. Any person who transports in any vehicle or in any other manner upon any public place any loose material or articles likely to sift, fall, spill, or be blown upon the public way or place shall cover the contents thereof, or shall convey the contents in tightly secured and covered boxes or containers. If any of the contents shall be blown, spilled, fall or become scattered in or upon any public way or place, such person shall immediately cause such contents to be gathered up and removed. 
(Ord. No. 1883, 9-24-2012) 
Sec. 34-9. - Enforcement; administration. 
(a)  Authorization. The director of public works, or the director's designated representative, under the direction of the city manager, is hereby authorized to enforce and administer the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Unauthorized or counterfeit stickers. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to manufacture, possess, sell, use or distribute disposal stickers which have not been authorized by the city for use in solid waste collection of excess refuse and yard waste described within this chapter. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to counterfeit or otherwise produce with intent to deceive, disposal stickers which imitate those stickers duly authorized by the city. 
(c)  Penalties. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this chapter. Any person found to be in violation of sections 34-3, 34-4, 34-5, 34-6, 34-7 or 34-8, shall be subject to a civil penalty of $100.00 for the first violation. This penalty shall be imposed after a warning has been issued that gives the offending individual, owner, lessee, tenant or agent a specified time within which to comply with the chapter. Any person who continues to violate such provision of this chapter shall be subject to a civil penalty of $150.00 for each subsequent violation. No person shall be cited for a violation more than once in any given day, and no person shall be fined more than a total of $3,000.00 for all violations arising out of the same set of facts. Civil penalties shall be imposed by the issuance of a civil summons by the city manager or the city manager's designee. Any person served with a summons shall have 30 days in which either to pay a fine to the city treasurer, or to appeal the violation to the general district court. The city shall also have available to it all lawful remedies to require compliance, including, but not limited to seeking injunctive relief. 
(Ord. No. 1883, 9-24-2012) 
Chapter 35 - STORMWATER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Power to make regulations for the preservation of the safety, health, peace, good order, comfort, convenience, morals, and welfare of the city and its inhabitants, § 2.04. 
State Law reference- Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act, Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:67 et seq.; Virginia Stormwater Management Act, Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:24 et seq.; Erosion and Sediment Control Act, Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:51 et seq.; Flood Damage Reduction Act, § 10.1-600 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 35-1. - Purpose and authority. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to ensure that land is used, developed, and redeveloped in a manner that protects water quality and to prevent the degradation of properties, stream channels, waters, and other natural resources by prohibiting illicit discharges and providing that adequate stormwater management and erosion and sediment control measures are taken before, during, and after the period of land disturbance, development, and construction. 
(b)  This article is adopted pursuant to the authority of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act (Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:67 et seq.), the Virginia Stormwater Management Act (Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:24 et seq.), the Erosion and Sediment Control Act (Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:51 et seq.), and their attendant regulations. 
(c)  In any case where the requirements of this article conflict with any other provision of this Code or existing state or federal regulations, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1915, 3-24-2014; Ord. No. 1928, 9-8-2014) 
Sec. 35-2. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section: 
    Adequate channel means a watercourse that will convey a chosen frequency storm event without overtopping its banks or causing erosive damage to the bed, banks, and overbank sections of the same. 
    Administrator means the VSMP authority including the city staff person or department responsible for administering the VSMP on behalf of the city. 
    Agreement in lieu of a plan means a contract between the city and the owner or permittee that specifies methods that shall be implemented to comply with the requirements of this article for the construction of a single-family residence; such contract may be executed by the city in lieu of an erosion and sediment control plan or a stormwater management plan, or both. 
    Applicant means any person submitting an application for a stormwater management permit, requesting issuance of a permit, or requesting an exemption or exception from the requirements under this article. 
    Best management practice or BMP means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices, including both structural and nonstructural practices, to prevent or reduce the pollution of surface waters and groundwater systems from the impacts of land disturbing activities. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
    Board or SWCB refers to the state water control board. 
    Buffer area means an area of natural or established vegetation managed to protect other components of a resource protection area and state waters from significant degradation due to land disturbances. 
    Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act land disturbing activity means a land disturbing activity, including clearing, grading, or excavation that results in a land disturbance equal to or greater than 2,500 square feet and less than one acre in all areas of the city designated as a Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area in accordance with section 35-10. 
    Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area or CBPA means any land designated by the city pursuant to the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Designation and Management Regulations, 9VAC25-830-70 et seq., and the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act, Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:74. A Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area shall consist of a resource protection area and a resource management area. 
    Clean Water Act or CWA means the Federal Clean Water Act (33 USC § 1251 et seq.) formerly referred to as the Federal Water Pollution Control Act or Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, Public Law 92-500, as amended by Public Law 95-217, Public Law 95-576, Public Law 96-483, and Public Law 97-117, or any subsequent revisions thereto. 
    Common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where separate and distinct construction activities may be taking place at different times on different schedules. 
    Control measure means any best management practice or stormwater facility, or other method used to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants to state waters. 
    Critical root zone or CRZ means the area beneath a tree that may extend well beyond the spread of its branches. The size of the critical root zone is a function of tree type, size, health and it's response to construction stresses. The size of the critical root zone should be adjusted according to the specific factors listed in this definition and site conditions, but generally can be calculated as one foot per inch of diameter at breast height (DBH) of the tree to be preserved. For example, a ten-inch diameter at breast height tree would have a critical root zone of ten feet from the tree trunk in all directions. 
    Dam means a barrier to confine or raise water for storage or diversion, to create a hydraulic head, to prevent gully erosion, or to retain soil, rock or other debris. 
    Denuded refers to a term applied to land that has been physically disturbed and no longer supports vegetative cover. 
    Department refers to the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality. 
    Development means land disturbance and the resulting landform associated with the construction of residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, recreation, transportation, or utility facilities or structures, or the clearing of land for non-agricultural or non-silvicultural purposes. 
    Diameter at breast height or DBH means the diameter of the tree measured outside the bark at a point four feet above the ground. 
    Dike means an embankment to confine or control water, especially one built along the banks of a river to prevent overflow of lowlands; a levee. 
    Director means the director of public works or his designee and is the representative of the city who has been appointed to serve as the agent of the city in administering this article. 
    Discharge, when used without qualification, means the discharge of a pollutant. 
    Discharge of a pollutant means: (1) any addition of any pollutant or combination of pollutants to state waters from any point source; or (2) any addition of any pollutant or combination of pollutants to the waters of the contiguous zone or the ocean from any point source other than a vessel or other floating craft which is being used as a means of transportation. This definition includes additions of pollutants into surface waters from: surface runoff that is collected or channeled by man; discharges through pipes, sewers, or other conveyances owned by a state, municipality, or other person that do not lead to a treatment works; and discharges through pipes, sewers, or other conveyances leading into privately owned treatment works. This term does not include an addition to pollutants by any indirect discharger. 
    Disturbed acreage means that portion of the project that will be disturbed, denuded, graded, cut, or filled. 
    Diversion means a channel with a supporting ridge on the lower side constructed across or at the bottom of a slope for the purpose of intercepting surface runoff. 
    Dripline means a vertical projection to the ground surface from the furthest lateral extent of a tree or shrub's canopy. 
    Erosion impact area means an area of land not associated with current land disturbing activity but subject to persistent soil erosion resulting in the delivery of sediment onto neighboring properties or into state waters. This definition shall not apply to any lot or parcel of land of 10,000 square feet or less used for residential purposes or to shorelines where the erosion results from wave action or other coastal processes. 
    General permit means a state permit authorizing a category of discharges under the Clean Water Act and the Virginia Stormwater Management Act (Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:24 et seq.) within a geographical area. 
    Impervious land cover means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents natural infiltration of water into the soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to: nonvegetated roofs; buildings; streets; parking areas; sidewalks; driveways; swimming pools; recreational surfaces such as tennis courts or basketball courts; and, any concrete, asphalt, or compacted gravel surface. 
    Illicit discharge means any discharge to the stormwater management system that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except discharges pursuant to a VPDES or state permit (other than the state permit for discharges from municipal separate storm sewer), discharges resulting from firefighting activities, or discharges identified by and in compliance with 9VAC25-870-400.D.2.c(3). Examples of prohibited substances, whether liquid or solid, include, but are not limited to: waste, trash and garbage; food and kitchen waste; leakage from dumpsters or trash containers; gasoline, waste oil, lubricants, grease, antifreeze, or any other automotive, motor, or equipment fluids; fertilizers, grass clippings, mulch, and any yard waste; any chemical or solvent; soluble and non-soluble metals; wash water, detergents, and cleaning agents; paints; plastics; soot, ash and sludge; animal waste; eroded soils and sediment; carcasses; chlorinated swimming pool water; and, any material that impedes or interferes with the free flow of stormwater. 
    Land disturbing activity means a manmade change to the land surface that potentially changes its runoff characteristics including any clearing, grading, or excavation except that the term shall not include those exemptions specified in section 35-4. 
    Layout means a conceptual drawing sufficient to provide for the specified stormwater management facilities required at the time of approval. 
    Linear development project means a land disturbing activity that is linear in nature such as, but not limited to: the construction of electric and telephone utility lines, and natural gas pipelines; construction of tracks, rights-of-way, bridges, communication facilities and other related structures of a railroad company; highway construction projects; construction of stormwater channels and stream restoration activities; and, water and sewer lines. Private subdivision roads or streets shall not be considered linear development projects. 
    Minor modification means an amendment to an existing permit before its expiration not requiring extensive review and evaluation, including but not limited to, changes in EPA promulgated test protocols, increasing monitoring frequency requirements, changes in sampling locations, and changes to compliance dates within the overall compliance schedules. A minor permit modification or amendment does not substantially alter permit conditions, substantially increase or decrease the amount of surface water impacts, increase the size of the operation, or reduce the capacity of the facility to protect human health or the environment. 
    Natural channel design concepts means the utilization of engineering analysis based on fluvial geomorphic processes to create, rehabilitate, restore or stabilize an open conveyance system for the purpose of creating or recreating a stream that conveys its bankfull storm event within its banks and allows larger flows to access its floodplain. 
    Natural stream means a tidal or nontidal watercourse that is part of the natural topography. It usually maintains a continuous or seasonal flow during the year and is characterized as being irregular in cross section with a meandering course. Constructed channels such as drainage ditches or swales shall not to be considered as natural streams; however, channels designed utilizing natural channel design concepts may be considered natural streams. 
    Nonpoint source pollution means pollution such as sediment, nitrogen, phosphorus, hydrocarbons, heavy metals, and toxics whose source cannot be pinpointed but rather are washed from the land surface in a diffuse manner by stormwater runoff. 
    Nontidal wetlands means those wetlands, other than tidal wetlands, that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, as defined by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, pursuant to section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act, in 33 CFR 328.3b. 
    Operator means the owner or operator of any facility or activity subject to regulation under this article. 
    Owner means the commonwealth or any of its political subdivisions, including, but not limited to, sanitation district commissions and authorities, and any public or private institution, corporation, association, firm or company organized or existing under the laws of this or any other state or country, or any officer or agency of the United States, or any person or group of persons acting individually or as a group that owns, operates, charters, rents, or otherwise exercises control over or is responsible for any actual or potential discharge of sewage, industrial wastes, or other wastes or pollutants to state waters, or any facility or operation that has the capability to alter the physical, chemical, or biological properties of state waters in contravention of Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.5, the Virginia Stormwater Management Act, or this article. 
    Peak flow rate means the maximum instantaneous flow from a given storm condition at a particular location. 
    Permittee means the person to whom the stormwater management permit is issued, including any owner or operator whose construction site is covered under a state construction general permit. 
    Person means any individual, corporation, partnership, association, state, municipality, commission, or political subdivision of a state, governmental body, including a federal, state or local entity as applicable, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
    Pervious land cover means a surface composed of any material that allows for natural infiltration of water into the soil in varying degrees. 
    Pre-development conditions refers to conditions at the time an applicant becomes subject to the provisions of this article. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time the applicant first becomes subject to the provisions of this article shall establish pre-development conditions. 
    Public road means a publicly owned road designed and constructed in accordance with water quality protection criteria at least as stringent as requirements applicable to the Virginia Department of Transportation, including regulations promulgated pursuant to the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act (Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:67 et seq.), the Virginia Stormwater Management Act (Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:24 et seq.), the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Act (Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:51 et seq.), and their attendant regulations. This definition includes those roads where the Virginia Department of Transportation exercises direct supervision over the design or construction activities, or both, and cases where secondary roads are constructed or maintained, or both, by a local government in accordance with the standards of that local government. 
    Redevelopment means the process of developing land that is developed or has been previously developed. 
    Resource management area or RMA means that component of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area that is not classified as the resource protection area. The term resource management area includes land types that, if improperly used or developed, have the potential for causing significant water quality degradation or for diminishing the functional value of the resource protection area. 
    Resource protection area or RPA means that component of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area as defined in subsection 35-10(b). Resource protection areas consist of sensitive lands that have an intrinsic water quality value due to the ecological and biological processes they perform or are sensitive to impacts which may result in significant degradation to the quality of state waters. 
    Responsible land disturber means an individual from the project or development team, who will be in charge of and responsible for carrying out a land disturbing activity covered by an approved plan or agreement in lieu of a plan who: (a) holds a responsible land disturber certificate of competence; (b) holds a current certificate of competence from the board in the areas of combined administration, inspection, or plan review; (c) holds a current contractor certificate of competence for erosion and sediment control; or (d) is licensed in Virginia as a professional engineer, architect, certified landscape architect or land surveyor pursuant to Article 1 (Code of Virginia, § 54.1-400 et seq.) of Chapter 4 of Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
    Riparian Buffers Modification and Mitigation Guidance Manual means the Riparian Buffers Modification and Mitigation Guidance Manual, published in September 2003, written and published by the Chesapeake Bay Local Assistance Department, now the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality. The intent of the manual is to provide guidance and clarification for tidewater local governments, at their request, regarding the section of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act describing buffer exemptions and modifications. 
    Runoff volume means the volume of water that runs off the site from a prescribed storm event. 
    Sediment basin means a temporary impoundment built to retain sediment and debris with a controlled stormwater release structure. 
    Shrub means any self-supporting woody plant which usually has multiple trunks. For preservation and canopy coverage calculation purposes, a shrub shall measure no less than five feet in height above ground level. 
    Site means the land or water area where any facility or land disturbing activity is physically located or conducted, including adjacent land used or preserved in connection with the facility or land disturbing activity. 
    Stabilized means land that has been treated to withstand normal exposure to natural forces without incurring erosion damage. 
    State means the Commonwealth of Virginia. 
    State permit means an approval to conduct a land disturbing activity issued by the SWCB in the form of a state stormwater individual permit or coverage issued under a state general permit or an approval issued by the SWCB for stormwater discharges from an MS4. Under these state permits, the commonwealth imposes and enforces requirements pursuant to the Clean Water Act and regulations and the Virginia Stormwater Management Act and regulations. 
    State Water Control Law means Chapter 3.1 (Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.2 et seq.) of Title 62.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
    State waters means all waters on the surface and under the ground wholly or partially within or bordering the Commonwealth of Virginia or within its jurisdiction, including wetlands. 
    Stormwater means precipitation that is discharged across the land surface through conveyances to one or more waterways and that may include stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage. 
    Stormwater detention means the process of temporarily impounding runoff and discharging it through a hydraulic outlet structure to a downstream conveyance system. 
    Stormwater management permit means an approval to conduct a land disturbing activity issued by the city for the initiation of a land disturbing activity after evidence of general permit coverage has been provided where applicable and after the city has found that all requirements in this article have been successfully met. 
    Stormwater management plan means a document(s) containing materials describing methods for complying with the requirements of section 35-5. An agreement in lieu of a stormwater management plan as defined in this section shall be deemed to meet the requirements of a stormwater management plan. 
    Stormwater management review team or SMRT means a team composed of city staff, to include but not be limited to, the director, a senior or principal planner from the development services department, the city engineer, and the city arborist. 
    Stormwater management system means the series of structural and nonstructural stormwater infrastructure established to manage the quantity and/or quality of stormwater runoff. The stormwater management system includes, but is not limited to, storm drains, catch basins, inlets, pipes, open channels and ditches, facilities designed to control stormwater volume and velocity, and various best management practices designed to reduce stormwater pollution. 
    Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan or SWPPP means a document that is prepared in accordance with good engineering practices and that identifies potential sources of pollutants that may reasonably be expected to affect the quality of stormwater discharges. A SWPPP required for construction activities under this article shall identify and require the implementation of control measures, and shall include, but not be limited to the inclusion of, or the incorporation by reference of, an approved erosion and sediment control plan, an approved stormwater management plan, and a pollution prevention plan. 
    Stormwater retention means the process by which an impoundment structure stores the total runoff of a given storm and then releases the flow at a controlled rate over an extended period. 
    Subdivision means the same as defined in section 38-1. 
    Substantial alteration means the expansion or modification of a building or development that would result in a disturbance of land exceeding an area of 2,500 square feet in the resource management area only. 
    Total maximum daily load, or TMDL, means the sum of the individual wasteload allocations for point sources, load allocations for nonpoint sources, natural background loadings and a margin of safety. TMDLs can be expressed in terms of either mass per time, toxicity, or other appropriate measure. The TMDL process provides for point versus nonpoint source trade-offs. 
    Tree means any self-supporting woody plant which usually provides one main trunk and produces a more or less distinct and elevated head with many branches. For preservation purposes and canopy coverage calculation purposes, a tree shall measure no less than two inches in DBH. 
    Tree canopy means the branches, leaves, or other foliage from any tree measuring no less than two inches in DBH and shrubs measuring no less than five feet in height. 
    Tree canopy coverage means the area surrounding a tree or shrub located within the dripline. 
    Use means an activity on the land other than development including, but not limited to, commercial, residential, and industrial. 
    Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse means a website of the same name that contains detailed design standards and specifications for control measures that may be used in the Commonwealth of Virginia to comply with the requirements of the Virginia Stormwater Management Act and associated regulations. 
    Virginia Stormwater Management Act means Article 2.3 (Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:24 et seq.) of Chapter 3.1 of Title 62.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
    Virginia Stormwater Management Program or VSMP means a program approved by the state water control board that has been established by a locality to manage the quality and quantity of runoff resulting from land disturbing activities and shall include such items as local ordinances, rules, permit requirements, annual standards and specifications, policies and guidelines, technical materials, and requirements for plan review, inspection, enforcement, where authorized by this article, and evaluation consistent with the requirements of this article. 
    VSMP authority means an authority approved by the state water control board to operate a VSMP. For the purpose of this article, the city is the VSMP authority. 
    Water-dependent facility means a development of land that cannot exist outside of the resource protection area and must be located on the shoreline by reason of the intrinsic nature of its operation. These facilities include, but are not limited to the following: (i) ports; (ii) the intake and outfall structures of power plants, water treatment plants, sewage treatment plants and storm sewers; (iii) marinas and other boat docking structures; (iv) beaches and other public water-oriented recreation areas; and (v) fisheries or other marine resource facilities. 
    Water quality volume means the volume equal to the first one-half inch of runoff multiplied by the impervious surface of the land development project. 
    Woody vegetation means and includes all trees and shrubs. 
(Ord. No. 1915, 3-24-2014; Ord. No. 1928, 9-8-2014) 
Sec. 35-3. - Administration; context of zoning and subdivision ordinances. 
(a)  The director is charged with responsibility for the administration of this article unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. The director, at his or her discretion, may delegate authority to implement all, or specific parts, of this article. 
(b)  The stormwater management review team shall make a recommendation to approve, approve subject to conditions, or disapprove any land disturbing activity that is subject to this article and shall provide their findings to the director. Meetings of the SMRT will be advertised in compliance with applicable provisions of the Virginia Freedom of Information Act (Code of Virginia, § 2.2-3700 et seq.). Public comment will be received at such meetings and outside of these meetings in writing. Property owners within 150 feet of land disturbing activities that are the subject to review under this article will be mailed notification of applicable SMRT meetings at least ten days prior to the meeting date. 
(c)  Administration of the site plan process shall be in accordance with this chapter, pertaining to site plans, or chapter 38, pertaining to subdivision. 
(d)  Permitted uses, conditional uses, special use permits, accessory uses, and special requirements shall be as established by the underlying zoning district, unless specifically modified or superseded by the requirements set forth in this article. 
(e)  Lot size shall be subject to the requirements of the underlying zoning district, provided that any lot shall have sufficient area outside the resource protection area established under this article to accommodate an intended development, in accordance with the criteria in section 35-10, when such development is not otherwise prohibited in the RPA. 
(Ord. No. 1915, 3-24-2014) 
Sec. 35-4. - Stormwater management permit required; exemptions. 
(a)  Stormwater management permit required. Except as provided herein, no person may engage in any land disturbing activity, nor may any grading, building, or other permits for activities involving land disturbing activities be issued, until a stormwater management permit has been issued by the director in accordance with the requirements set forth in this article. 
(b)  Conditions of permit issuance. No stormwater management permit shall be issued by the director until the following have been submitted to and approved by the director as prescribed herein: 
(1)  A site plan in accordance with the provisions of this article and chapter 48 and, if applicable a subdivision plan in accordance with the provision of this article and chapter 38. 
(2)  A general permit registration statement and evidence of general permit coverage, if such general permit registration statement or general permit coverage are required. 
(3)  A stormwater management plan in accordance with section 35-5 and an approved maintenance agreement in accordance with subsection 35-18(d). 
(4)  An erosion and sediment control plan in accordance with section 35-14. 
(5)  A landscape conservation plan in accordance with section 35-17. 
(6)  For all development, redevelopment, or other land disturbing activity within an RPA, or within an environmentally sensitive area as determined by the director, or for an exception under section 35-11, a water quality impact assessment in accordance with section 35-12. 
(c)  Relationship to floodplains. Approval of a stormwater management permit shall not be construed to authorize the construction of any structure within the floodplain or to authorize any filling, grading or other change of the contour of such floodplain area without such permit, authorization or approval as may be required by section 48-612 et seq. 
(d)  Stormwater pollution prevention plan. The permittee must develop prior to the land disturbing activity, implement, and keep at the site for inspection a stormwater pollution prevention plan that meets the requirements set forth in section 35-8 and a pollution prevention plan that meets the requirements set forth in section 35-9. 
(e)  Bonds, maintenance agreement and fees. No stormwater management permit shall be issued by the director until the bond and maintenance agreement requirements pursuant to section 35-18 have been met and the fees required to be paid pursuant to section 35-23 are received. 
(f)  Exemptions for land disturbance of less than 2,500 square feet. A land disturbing activity that results in a land disturbance of less than 2,500 square feet, and is not part of a larger common plan of development or sale that results in a land disturbance of 2,500 square feet or greater, shall be exempt from this article except that the following shall apply: 
(1)  A land disturbing activity located within a resource protection area shall comply with the provisions of section 35-10. 
(2)  A land disturbing activity involving a direct connection to the city's stormwater conveyance system or the installation of a potable water or geothermal well shall obtain a stormwater management permit and may be subject to, at the discretion of the director, the provisions of section 35-5 (stormwater management plan) and section 35-14 (erosion and sediment control plan) or elements thereof. 
(3)  If separate land disturbing activities take place on a single property that cumulatively result in 2,500 square feet or more of land disturbance within a three-year period then the total land disturbance within the three-year period is not exempt under this subsection. 
(g)  Exemptions for land disturbance of less than one acre but 2,500 square feet or greater within the resource management area. A land disturbing activity that results in a land disturbance of less than one acre but greater 2,500 square feet or greater within the resource management area, and is not part of a larger common plan of development or sale that results in a land disturbance of one acre or greater, shall be exempt from section 35-8 (stormwater pollution prevention plan), section 35-9 (pollution prevention plan), and the requirement to obtain a general permit in accordance with subsection 35-4(b)(2) unless otherwise required by the City Code or state or federal law. 
(h)  Additional exemptions. The following shall be exempt from the requirements of this article unless otherwise required by the Falls Church Code or state or federal law: 
(1)  Discharges to a sanitary sewer or combined sewer. 
(2)  Routine maintenance that is performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original construction of a project. The paving of existing road with a compacted or impervious surface and re-establishment of existing associated ditches and shoulders shall be deemed routine maintenance if performed in accordance with this subsection. 
(3)  Conducting land disturbing activities in response to a public emergency where the related work requires immediate authorization to avoid imminent endangerment to human health or the environment. In such situations, the director shall be advised of the disturbance within seven days of commencing the land disturbing activity and compliance with this article shall be required within 30 days of commencing the land disturbing activity. 
(4)  Land disturbances associated with permitted surface or deep mining operations and projects, or oil and gas operations and projects conducted under the provisions of Title 45.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
(5)  Land clearing for agricultural or silvicultural purposes, and related activities, in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:34.C.2. 
(6)  Activities under a state or federal reclamation program to return an abandoned property to an agricultural or open land use. 
(Ord. No. 1915, 3-24-2014; Ord. No. 1928, 9-8-2014) 
Sec. 35-5. - Stormwater management plan. 
(a)  Submittal requirement. A stormwater management plan shall be developed and submitted to the city for all land disturbing activities regulated pursuant to this article, except that the director may execute an agreement in lieu of a stormwater management plan to comply with the requirements of this section for the construction of a single-family residence. Any such agreement in lieu of a stormwater management plan shall be considered a stormwater management plan for the purpose of implementing and enforcing this article. The stormwater management plan shall be implemented as approved or modified by the city. 
(b)  Plan contents. The stormwater management plan must apply the stormwater management technical standards set forth in section 35-6 to the entire land disturbing activity. Individual lots or parcels in new residential, commercial or industrial developments, including those developed under subsequent owners, shall not be considered to be a single land disturbing activity. Instead, the common plan, as a whole, shall be considered to be a single land disturbing activity. The plan must also consider all sources of surface runoff and all sources of subsurface and groundwater flows converted to surface runoff. The plan shall contain maps, charts, graphs, tables, photographs, narrative descriptions, explanations, calculations, and citations to supporting references as appropriate to communicate the information required by this article. At a minimum, the stormwater management plan must contain the following information: 
(1)  Information on the type and location of stormwater discharges; information on the features to which stormwater is being discharged including surface waters, and the pre-development and post-development drainage areas; 
(2)  Contact information including the name, address and telephone number of the owner and the tax reference number and parcel number of the property or properties affected; 
(3)  A narrative that includes a description of current site conditions and final site conditions; 
(4)  A general description of the proposed stormwater management facilities and the mechanism through which the facilities will be operated and maintained after construction is complete; 
(5)  Information on the proposed stormwater management facilities including: 
a.  The type of facilities; 
b.  Location, including geographic coordinates; 
c.  Acres treated; and 
d.  The surface waters into which the facility will discharge. 
(6)  Hydrologic and hydraulic computations, including runoff characteristics; 
(7)  Documentation and calculations verifying compliance with the water quality and quantity requirements of section 35-6; 
(8)  A map or maps of the site that depicts the topography of the site and includes: 
a.  All contributing drainage areas; 
b.  Existing streams, ponds, culverts, ditches, wetlands, other water bodies and floodplains; 
c.  Soil types, forest cover, and other vegetative areas; 
d.  Current land use including existing structures, roads, and locations of known utilities and easements; 
e.  Sufficient information on adjoining parcels to assess the impacts of stormwater from the site on these parcels; 
f.  The limits of clearing and grading, and the proposed drainage patterns on the site; 
g.  Proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, and stormwater management facilities; and 
h.  Proposed land use with tabulation of the percentage of surface area to be adapted to various uses, including but not limited to, planned locations of utilities, roads and easements. 
(c)  Off-site compliance options. If an operator intends to meet the water quality requirements set forth in subsection 35-6(b) through the use of off-site compliance options in accordance with subsection 35-6(c), then a letter of availability from the off-site provider must be included. Approved off-site options must achieve the necessary nutrient reductions prior to the commencement of the land disturbing activity except as otherwise allowed by Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:35. 
(d)  Requirements for those preparing plans. Elements of the stormwater management plans that include activities regulated under Chapter 4 (Code of Virginia, § 54.1-400 et seq.) of Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia shall be appropriately sealed and signed by a professional registered in the Commonwealth of Virginia pursuant to Article 1 (Code of Virginia, § 54.1-400 et seq.) of Chapter 4 of Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
(e)  Construction record drawing. A construction record drawing for permanent stormwater management facilities shall be submitted to the director. The construction record drawing shall be appropriately sealed and signed by a professional registered in the Commonwealth of Virginia, certifying that the stormwater management facilities have been constructed in accordance with the approved plan. 
(Ord. No. 1915, 3-24-2014; Ord. No. 1928, 9-8-2014) 
Sec. 35-6. - Stormwater management technical standards. 
(a)  General stormwater management technical standards. All land disturbing activities regulated pursuant to this article within the city shall comply with the following general technical standards: 
(1)  Land disturbance shall be limited to the area necessary to provide for the proposed use or development. In accordance with an approved grading plan, the limits of land disturbance, including clearing or grading, shall be strictly defined. These limits shall be clearly shown on submitted plans and physically marked on the development site. 
(2)  Existing indigenous vegetation and trees shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable, consistent with the proposed use or development, in accordance with chapters 14 and 44, pertaining respectively to environment and vegetation, and as follows: 
a.  Existing trees over two inches in DBH and shrubs greater than five feet in height shall be preserved outside the approved construction footprint consistent with subsection (a)(1) of this section. Diseased or weakened trees, by age, storm, fire or other injury, may be required to be removed, by the director. 
b.  The regulation of any historic, specimen, street, park, memorial and other public trees shall be regulated in accordance with chapter 44, pertaining to vegetation. This may include the bonding of these types of trees in situations where the critical root zone (CRZ) or canopies extend onto the site. 
c.  Clearing shall be allowed only to provide necessary access, positive site drainage, water quality BMPs and the installation of utilities. 
d.  Tree preservation shall be in accordance with the City of Falls Church Tree Preservation Standards and Specifications. A copy of the approved plan and the specifications shall be kept on-site at all times. 
e.  Prior to clearing and grading, tree preservation fencing, consistent with the City of Falls Church Tree Preservation Standards and Specifications, signs, or other such material may be required by the director. These preservation measures shall be installed to protect the CRZ of any woody vegetation to be preserved on the site, as well as to protect the CRZ of any woody vegetation trees on adjacent properties including rights-of-way that extend onto the site. 
f.  Tree preservation fencing shall remain in place throughout all phases of construction. Fencing shall not be removed until all construction equipment has left the site and written approval is granted by the director. 
g.  Exceptions may be granted to allow access to the site and work area, with specific conditions established by the director. 
h.  The storage of equipment, materials, debris, or fill shall not be allowed within the enclosure of the tree preservation fencing. 
i.  The applicant shall submit, in writing to the director, a verification that all required tree preservation fencing and required preservation measures have been completed. The director shall inspect and approve this verification, within three business days, prior to the issuance of any permits. 
(3)  Natural groundcover, especially woody vegetation, shall be used to the extent that is practicable, as it is most effective in holding soil in place and preventing site erosion. Adaptability to local conditions without the use of harmful fertilizers or pesticides, and the ability to filter runoff, make the use of indigenous vegetation preferable to non-indigenous plantings. 
(4)  Land development shall minimize impervious cover associated with the proposed use or development. Keeping impervious cover to a minimum enhances rainwater infiltration and effectively reduces stormwater runoff potential. 
(b)  Water quality technical standards. All land disturbing activities regulated pursuant to this article within the city shall comply with the following technical standards for water quality: 
(1)  New development. The total phosphorus load of a new development project shall not exceed 0.41 pounds per acre per year as calculated in accordance with this section. 
(2)  Development on prior developed lands. 
a.  Notwithstanding subsections (b)(2)b. through (b)(2)f. below, a regulated land disturbing activity involving a single-family detached residential dwelling shall meet the applicable standard for new development. 
b.  For regulated land disturbing activities disturbing greater than or equal to one acre that result in no net increase in impervious cover from the pre-development condition, the total phosphorus load shall be reduced at least 20 percent below the pre-development total phosphorus load. 
c.  For regulated land disturbing activities disturbing less than one acre that result in no net increase in impervious cover from the pre-development condition, the total phosphorus load shall be reduced at least ten percent below the pre-development total phosphorus load. 
d.  For land disturbing activities that result in a net increase in impervious cover over the pre-development condition, the design criteria for new development shall be applied to the increased impervious area. Depending on the area of disturbance, the criteria of subsections (b)(2)b. or (b)(2)c. above, shall be applied to the remainder of the site. 
e.  In lieu of subsection (b)(2)d., the total phosphorus load of a linear development project occurring on prior developed lands shall be reduced 20 percent below the pre-development total phosphorus load. 
f.  The total phosphorus load shall not be required to be reduced below the applicable standard for new development. 
(3)  Compliance with subsections (b)(1) and (b)(2) above shall be determined using the Virginia Runoff Reduction Method and through the use of stormwater BMPs established in 9VAC25-870-65 or found at the Virginia BMP Clearinghouse website, except as may be limited by the director in accordance the provisions of 9VAC25-870-65.D. 
(c)  Off-site water quality compliance options. 
(1)  The director shall allow operators to utilize off-site compliance options to meet the requirements of subsection (b) above in accordance with 9VAC-870-69 under the following conditions: 
a.  Less than five acres of land will be disturbed; 
b.  The post-construction phosphorus control requirement is less than ten pounds per year; or 
c.  At least 75 percent of the required phosphorus nutrient reductions are achieved on-site. If at least 75 percent of the required phosphorus nutrient reductions cannot be met on-site, and the operator can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director that: (i) alternative site designs have been considered that may accommodate on-site best management practices; (ii) on-site best management practices have been considered in alternative site designs to the maximum extent practicable; (iii) appropriate on-site best management practices will be implemented; and (iv) full compliance with post-development nonpoint nutrient runoff compliance requirements cannot practicably be met on-site, then the required phosphorus nutrient reductions may be achieved, in whole or in part, through the use of off-site compliance options. 
(2)  The director may establish criteria in addition to those established in subsection (c)(1) of this section to allow an operator to use nutrient credits in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:35, to meet required phosphorus reductions. 
(3)  Notwithstanding subsections (c)(1) and (c)(2) this section, off-site options shall not be allowed: 
a.  Unless the selected off-site option achieves the necessary nutrient reductions prior to the commencement of the land disturbing activity. In the case of a phased project, the operator may acquire or achieve off-site nutrient reductions prior to the commencement of each phase of land disturbing activity in an amount sufficient for each phase. 
b.  In contravention of local water quality-based limitations at the point of discharge that are consistent with the determinations made pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.19:7.B, contained in the city's MS4 program plan accepted by the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality, or as otherwise may be established or approved by the SWCB. 
(d)  Water quantity technical standards. All land disturbing activities regulated pursuant to this article within the city shall comply with the following technical standards for water quantity: 
(1)  Channel protection. Concentrated stormwater flow shall be released into a stormwater conveyance system and shall meet the criteria in this section, where applicable, from the point of discharge to a point to the limits of analysis in subsection (d)(1)d. of this section. 
a.  Manmade stormwater conveyance systems. When stormwater from a development is discharged to a manmade stormwater conveyance system, following the land disturbing activity, either: 
1.  The manmade stormwater conveyance system shall convey the post-development peak flow rate from the two-year, 24-hour storm event without causing erosion of the system. Detention of stormwater or downstream improvements may be incorporated into the approved land disturbing activity to meet these criteria, at the discretion of the director. 
2.  The peak discharge requirements for concentrated stormwater flow to natural stormwater conveyance systems in subsection (d)(1)c. shall be met. 
b.  Restored stormwater conveyance systems. When stormwater from a development is discharged to a restored stormwater conveyance system that has been restored using natural design concepts, following the land disturbing activity, either: 
1.  The development shall be consistent, in combination with other stormwater runoff, with the design parameters of the restored stormwater conveyance system that is functioning in accordance with the design objectives; or 
2.  The peak discharge requirements for concentrated stormwater flow to natural stormwater conveyance systems in subsection (d)(1)c. shall be met. 
c.  Natural stormwater conveyance systems. When stormwater from a development is discharged to a natural stormwater conveyance system, the maximum peak flow rate from the one-year, 24-hour storm following the land disturbing activity shall be calculated as follows: 
Q Developed = I.F*(Q Pre-developed *RV Pre-developed )/RV Developed 
Under no condition shall Q Developed be greater than Q Pre-developed nor shall Q Developed be required to be less than that calculated in the equation (Q Forest *RV Forest )/RV Developed ; where: 
I.F. (Improvement Factor) equals 0.8 for sites > 1 acre or 0.9 for sites = 1 acre. 
Q Developed = The allowable peak flow rate of runoff from the developed site. 
RV Developed = The volume of runoff from the site in the developed condition. 
Q Pre-developed = The peak flow rate of runoff from the site in the pre-developed condition. 
Q Forest = The peak flow rate of runoff from the site in a forested condition. 
RV Forest = The volume of runoff from the site in a forested condition. 
d.  Limits of analysis. Unless subdivision c of this subsection is utilized to show compliance with the channel protection criteria, stormwater conveyance systems shall be analyzed for compliance with channel protection criteria to a point where either: 
1.  Based on land area, the site's contributing drainage area is less than or equal to 1.0 percent of the total watershed area; or 
2.  Based on peak flow rate, the site's peak flow rate from the one-year 24-hour storm is less than or equal to 1.0 percent of the existing peak flow rate from the one-year 24-hour storm prior to the implementation of any stormwater quantity control measures. 
(2)  Flood protection. Concentrated stormwater flow shall be released into a stormwater conveyance system and shall meet one of the following criteria as demonstrated by use of acceptable hydrologic and hydraulic methodologies: 
a.  Concentrated stormwater flow to stormwater conveyance systems that currently do not experience localized flooding during the ten-year 24-hour storm event: The point of discharge releases stormwater into a stormwater conveyance system that, following the land disturbing activity, confines the post-development peak flow rate from the ten-year 24-hour storm event within the stormwater conveyance system. Detention of stormwater or downstream improvements may be incorporated into the approved land disturbing activity to meet this criterion at the discretion of the director. 
b.  Concentrated stormwater flow to stormwater conveyance systems that currently experience localized flooding during the ten-year 24-hour storm event: The point of discharge either: 
1.  Confines the post-development peak flow rate from the ten-year 24-hour storm event within the stormwater conveyance system to avoid the localized flooding. Detention of stormwater or downstream improvements may be incorporated into the approved land disturbing activity to meet this criterion at the discretion of the director. 
2.  Releases a post-development peak flow rate for the ten-year 24-hour storm event that is less than the pre-development peak flow rate from the ten-year 24-hour storm event. Downstream stormwater conveyance systems do not require any additional analysis to show compliance with flood protection criteria if this option is utilized. 
c.  Limits of analysis. Unless subsection (d)(2)b.2 of this section is used to comply with the flood protection criteria, stormwater conveyance systems shall be analyzed for compliance with flood protection criteria to a point where: 
1.  The site's contributing drainage area is less than or equal to 1.0 percent of the total watershed area draining to a point of analysis in the downstream stormwater conveyance system; 
2.  Based on peak flow rate, the site's peak flow rate from the ten-year, 24-hour storm event is less than or equal to 1.0 percent of the existing peak flow rate from the ten-year, 24-hour storm event prior to the implementation of any stormwater quantity control measures; or 
3.  The stormwater conveyance system enters a mapped floodplain or other flood-prone area, adopted in accordance with section 48-612 et seq. 
(3)  Increased volumes of sheet flow resulting from pervious or disconnected impervious areas, or from physical spreading of concentrated flow through level spreaders, must be identified and evaluated for potential impacts on down-gradient properties or resources. Increased volumes of sheet flow that will cause or contribute to erosion, sedimentation, or flooding of down gradient properties or resources shall be diverted to a stormwater management facility or a stormwater conveyance system that conveys the runoff without causing down gradient erosion, sedimentation or flooding. If all runoff from the site is sheet flow and the conditions of this subsection are met, no further water quantity controls are required. 
(4)  For the purposes of computing pre-development runoff, all pervious lands on the site shall be assumed to be in good hydrologic condition in accordance with the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) standards, regardless of conditions existing at the time of computation. Pre-development runoff calculations utilizing other hydrologic conditions may be utilized provided that it is demonstrated to and approved by the director that actual site conditions warrant such considerations. 
(5)  Pre-development and post-development runoff characteristics and site hydrology shall be verified by site inspections, topographic surveys, available soil mapping or studies, and calculations consistent with good engineering practices. Guidance provided in the Virginia Stormwater Management Handbook and by the Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse shall be considered appropriate practices. 
(e)  Additional water quantity technical standards in the Four Mile Run watershed. Notwithstanding the requirements of subsection (d), within the Four Mile Run watershed post-development peak runoff during a 100-year frequency storm shall not increase the peak runoff of the Four Mile Run Flood Control Channel as required by the city's contract with the United States Army Corps of Engineers. 
(f)  Design storms and hydrologic methods. 
(1)  The prescribed design storms are the one-year, two-year, and ten-year, 24-hour storms using the site-specific rainfall precipitation frequency data recommended by the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Atlas 14. Partial duration time series shall be used for the precipitation data. 
(2)  All hydrologic analysis shall be based on the existing watershed characteristics and how the ultimate development condition of the subject project will be addressed. 
(3)  The NRCS synthetic 24-hour rain distribution and models, including, but not limited to, TR-55 and TR-20; hydrologic and hydraulic methods developed by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; or, other standard hydrologic and hydraulic methods, shall be used to conduct the analysis described in this section. 
(4)  For drainage areas of 200 acres or less, the rational method may be used for evaluating peak discharges. For drainage areas of 200 acres or less, the modified rational method may be used for evaluating volumetric flows to stormwater conveyances. 
(g)  Impounding structures. Stormwater management wet ponds and extended detention dry ponds that are not covered by the Virginia Impounding Structure Regulations (4VAC50-20 et seq.) shall, at a minimum, be engineered for structural integrity for the 100-year storm event. 
(h)  Additional technical criteria. The following additional technical criteria shall apply as applicable: 
(1)  Stormwater harvesting is encouraged in accordance with 9VAC25-870-74. 
(2)  Linear development projects shall control post-development stormwater runoff in accordance with 9VAC25-870-76. 
(3)  The city may develop comprehensive stormwater management plans in accordance with 9VAC25-870-92. 
(i)  Grandfathering. The following grandfathering provisions established in 9VAC25-870-48 shall apply to subsections (b) through (d) above as applicable: 
(1)  Any land disturbing activity for which a currently valid proffered or conditional zoning plan, preliminary or final subdivision plat, preliminary or final site plan or zoning with a plan of development, or any document determined by the director as being equivalent thereto, was approved by the director prior to July 1, 2012, and for which no coverage under the general permit for discharges of stormwater from construction activities has been issued prior to July 1, 2014, and no land disturbance has commenced prior to July 1, 2014, shall be considered grandfathered and shall not be subject to the technical criteria of section 35-6, but shall be subject to the technical criteria in place at the time of approval for those areas of development that were included in the approval, provided that the director finds that such proffered or conditional zoning plan, preliminary or final subdivision plat, preliminary or final site plan or zoning with a plan of development, or any document determined by the director as being equivalent thereto: (i) provides for a layout as defined in section 35-2; and (ii) the resulting land disturbing activity will be compliant with the requirements of the technical criteria in place at the time of approval. In the event that the director-approved document is subsequently modified or amended in a manner such that there is no increase over the previously approved plat or plan in the amount of phosphorus leaving each point of discharge of the land disturbing activity through stormwater runoff, and such that there is no increase over the previously approved plat or plan in the volume or rate of runoff, the grandfathering shall continue as before. 
(2)  For locality, state and federal projects for which there has been an obligation of locality, state or federal funding, in whole or in part, prior to July 1, 2012, or for which the department has approved a stormwater management plan prior to July 1, 2012, and for which no coverage under the general permit for discharges of stormwater from construction activities has been issued prior to July 1, 2014, and no land disturbance has commenced prior to July 1, 2014, such projects shall be considered grandfathered and shall not be subject to the technical criteria of section 35-6, but shall be subject to the technical criteria in place at the time of approval for those areas of development that were included in the approval. 
(3)  For land disturbing activities grandfathered under subsections (i)(1) and (i)(2) of this section, construction must be completed by within one state permit cycle, or portions of the project not under construction shall become subject to the technical criteria of section 35-6. 
(4)  In cases where governmental bonding or public debt financing has been issued for a project prior to July 1, 2012, such project shall be subject to the technical criteria in place at the time of approval. 
(5)  Nothing in this section shall preclude the operator from constructing to a more stringent standard at his discretion. 
(j)  Exceptions. The director may grant exceptions to the technical requirements of this section, provided that the exception is the minimum necessary to afford relief, reasonable and appropriate conditions are imposed so that the intent of this article are preserved, granting the exception will not confer any special privileges that are denied in other similar circumstances, and exception requests are not based upon conditions or circumstances that are self-imposed or self-created. Economic hardship alone is not sufficient reason to grant an exception from the requirements of this article. 
(1)  Exceptions to the requirement that the land disturbing activity obtain required general permit shall not be given by the director, nor shall the director approve the use of a BMP not found on the Virginia Stormwater BMP Clearinghouse website, or any other control measure duly approved by the Director of the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality. 
(2)  Exceptions to requirements for phosphorus reductions shall not be allowed unless off-site options otherwise permitted pursuant to subsection (c) and 9VAC25-870-69 have been considered and found not available. 
(Ord. No. 1915, 3-24-2014; Ord. No. 1928, 9-8-2014) 
Sec. 35-7. - Stormwater management plan review. 
(a)  Plan review. The director shall review stormwater management plans and shall approve or disapprove a stormwater management plan according to the following: 
(1)  The director shall determine the completeness of a plan in accordance with section 35-5 and shall notify the applicant, in writing, of such determination, within 15 calendar days of receipt. If the plan is deemed to be incomplete, the above written notification shall contain the reasons the plan is deemed incomplete. 
(2)  The director shall have an additional 60 calendar days from the date of the communication of completeness to review the plan, except that if a determination of completeness is not made within the time prescribed in subsection (1) above, then the plan shall be deemed complete and the director shall have 60 calendar days from the date of submission to review the plan. 
(3)  The director shall review any plan that has been previously disapproved, within 45 calendar days of the date of resubmission. 
(4)  During the review period, the plan shall be approved or disapproved and the decision communicated in writing to the person responsible for the land disturbing activity or his designated agent. If the plan is not approved, the reasons for not approving the plan shall be provided in writing. Approval or denial shall be based on the plan's compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(5)  If a plan meeting all requirements of this article is submitted and no action is taken within the time provided above in subsection (a)(2) for review, the plan shall be deemed approved. 
(b)  Plan modifications. Approved stormwater plans may be modified as follows: 
(1)  Modifications to an approved stormwater management plan shall be allowed only after review and written approval by the director. The director shall have 60 calendar days to respond in writing either approving or disapproving such request. 
(2)  The director may require that an approved stormwater management plan be amended, within a time prescribed by the director, to address any deficiencies noted during inspection. 
(Ord. No. 1915, 3-24-2014; Ord. No. 1928, 9-8-2014) 
Sec. 35-8. - Stormwater pollution prevention plan. 
(a)  Plan contents. The SWPPP shall include the content specified by 9VAC25-870-54 and must also comply with the requirements and general information set forth in 9VAC880-70, Section II of the general permit. 
(b)  Plan amendments. The SWPPP shall be amended by the operator whenever there is a change in design, construction, operation, or maintenance that has a significant effect on the discharge of pollutants to state waters which is not addressed by the existing SWPPP. 
(c)  Location and availability of plan for review. The SWPPP must be maintained by the operator at a central location on-site. If an on-site location is unavailable, notice of the SWPPP's location must be posted near the main entrance at the construction site. Operators shall make the SWPPP available for public review in accordance with Section II of the general permit, either electronically or in hard copy. 
(Ord. No. 1915, 3-24-2014; Ord. No. 1928, 9-8-2014) 
Sec. 35-9. - Pollution prevention plan. 
(a)  Plan contents, implementation and amendments. The pollution prevention plan, if required, shall include the content specified by 9VAC25-870-56, shall be developed, implemented, and updated as necessary, and must detail the design, installation, implementation, and maintenance of effective pollution prevention measures to minimize the discharge of pollutants. At a minimum, such measures must be designed, installed, implemented and maintained to: 
(1)  Minimize the discharge of pollutants from equipment and vehicle washing, wheel wash water, and other wash waters. Wash waters must be treated in a sediment basin or alternative control that provides equivalent or better treatment prior to discharge; 
(2)  Minimize the exposure of building materials, building products, construction wastes, trash, landscape materials, fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, detergents, sanitary waste, and other materials present on the site to precipitation and to stormwater; and 
(3)  Minimize the discharge of pollutants from spills and leaks and implement chemical spill and leak prevention and response procedures. 
(b)  Prohibited discharges. The pollution prevention plan shall include effective best management practices to prohibit the following discharges: 
(1)  Wastewater from washout of concrete, unless managed by an appropriate control; 
(2)  Wastewater from washout and cleanout of stucco, paint, form release oils, curing compounds, and other construction materials; 
(3)  Fuels, oils, or other pollutants used in vehicle and equipment operation and maintenance; and 
(4)  Soaps or solvents used in vehicle and equipment washing. 
(c)  Prohibitions on dewatering activities. Discharges from dewatering activities, including discharges from dewatering of trenches and excavations, are prohibited unless managed by appropriate controls. 
(Ord. No. 1915, 3-24-2014; Ord. No. 1928, 9-8-2014) 
Sec. 35-10. - Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas established. 
(a)  Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas. All land within the city is designated as a Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area, which is divided into resource protection areas and resource management areas. 
(b)  Resource protection areas. Resource protection areas shall consist of the following lands described herein that have an intrinsic water quality value due to the ecological and biological processes they perform or are sensitive to impacts which may cause significant degradation to the quality of state waters: 
(1)  Nontidal wetlands connected by surface flow and contiguous to waterbodies with perennial flow; 
(2)  Such other lands considered by the city to meet some or all of the criteria described in subsection (b) of this section, and considered to be necessary to protect the quality of state waters. Other lands to be included within the RPA are waterbodies with perennial flow, all natural stream channels, and manmade open stream channels, as generally identified on the city's Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area (CBPA) Map; and 
(3)  A vegetated buffer area not less than 100 feet in width located adjacent to and landward of the components listed in subsections (b)(1) and (2) of this section, and along both sides of any waterbody with perennial flow. This distance shall be measured from the top of the stream bank or the edge of stream or wetland if there is no bank. Notwithstanding permitted uses, encroachments, vegetation clearing, waivers, nonconformities, exemptions, and exceptions as set forth in this section and section 35-11, the 100-foot-wide buffer area is never reduced in width. 
The 100-foot buffer area shall be deemed to achieve a 75 percent reduction of sediments and a 40 percent reduction of nutrients. 
(c)  Resource management areas. Resource management areas shall consist of all land within the city's corporate boundary that is not designated as resource protection areas. 
(d)  Interpretation of resource protection area boundaries and delineation by the applicant. The city's adopted CBPA Map shows only the general location of the RPA and should be consulted by persons contemplating activities, modifications, or encroachments in the RPA. The specific boundaries of the RPA for each site or parcel shall be determined by the applicant as part of a stormwater management permit, water quality impact assessment, grading plan, demolition permit, building permit, site plan, subdivision plat, or any other application for land disturbance, and delineated on all submitted plans, subject to approval of the director and in accordance with this article. The identification of resource protection area boundaries shall be established by a land surveyor authorized to practice in the commonwealth, and be based on reliable, scientifically valid, and specific information, as approved by the director, from actual field evaluations of the site. The city CBPA Map shall be used only as a guide to the general location of resource protection areas. The accuracy of the RPA boundary delineation submitted by the applicant, when in question, shall be verified by the director. 
(e)  Permitted land disturbing activities within RPAs. A land disturbing activity may be allowed in the resource protection area, subject to completion of a water quality impact assessment as required in section 35-12, and the approval of the director, only if it falls into one of the following use categories and meets all criteria and requirements of this article and those of the underlying zoning district and all other applicable city, state and federal regulations: 
(1)  A new or expanded water-dependent facility may be allowed within a resource protection area provided that: 
a.  It does not conflict with the comprehensive plan; 
b.  Any nonwater-dependent component is located outside of resource protection areas; and 
c.  Access will be provided with the minimum disturbance necessary, and where possible, a single point of access will be provided. 
(2)  Redevelopment shall be permitted in the resource protection area only if there is no increase in the amount of impervious cover and no further encroachment within the resource protection area. 
(3)  Roads and driveways not exempt in section 35-11 are not permitted unless each of the following conditions is met: 
a.  The director makes a finding that there are no reasonable alternatives to aligning the road or driveway in or across the resource protection area; and 
b.  The alignment and design of the road or driveway are optimized, consistent with other applicable requirements, to minimize encroachment in the resource protection area and adverse effects on water quality. 
(4)  Flood control and stormwater management facilities that drain or treat water from multiple development projects or from a significant portion of a watershed may be allowed in resource protection areas, provided that: 
a.  The director has conclusively established that the location of the facility within the resource protection area is the optimum location; 
b.  The size of the facility is the minimum necessary to provide necessary flood control or stormwater treatment, or both; 
c.  The facility must be consistent with a stormwater management program that has been approved in accordance with 9VAC25-870-92 of the Virginia Stormwater Management Program permit regulations; 
d.  All applicable permits for construction in state or federal waters must be obtained from the appropriate state and federal agencies; 
e.  Routine maintenance is allowed to be performed on such facilities to assure that they continue to function as designed; and 
f.  It is not the intent of this section to allow a best management practice that collects and treats runoff from only an individual lot or some portion of the lot to be located within a resource protection area. 
(f)  Removal of vegetation in the resource protection area buffer area. Indigenous vegetation may be removed from the RPA buffer area only as permitted by the director to provide for reasonable sight lines, access paths, general woodlot management, and best management practices, including those that prevent upland erosion and concentrated flows of stormwater, as follows. All requests for vegetation removal shall be submitted in writing to the director for evaluation: 
(1)  Trees may be pruned or removed as necessary subject to the written approval of the director to provide for sight lines and vistas; provided that, where removed, they shall be replaced with other vegetation that is equally effective in retarding runoff, preventing erosion, and filtering nonpoint source pollution from runoff. 
(2)  Any path shall be constructed and surfaced so as to effectively control erosion. 
(3)  Dead, diseased, or dying trees or shrubbery and noxious weeds (such as Johnson grass, kudzu, and multiflora rose) may be removed and thinning of trees may be allowed subject to the written approval of the director, pursuant to sound horticultural practice incorporated into locally adopted standards. 
(4)  For shoreline erosion control projects, trees and woody vegetation may be removed, necessary control techniques employed, and appropriate vegetation established to protect or stabilize the shoreline in accordance with the best available technical advice and applicable permit conditions or requirements. 
(g)  Permitted encroachments into the buffer area. Encroachments into the buffer area may be allowed only in accordance with this section. 
(1)  When the application of the buffer area would result in the loss of a buildable area or a lot or parcel recorded prior to October 1, 1989, encroachments into the buffer area may be allowed by the director, through an administrative process, and in accordance with the following criteria: 
a.  Encroachments into the buffer area shall be the minimum necessary to achieve a reasonable buildable area for a principal structure and necessary utilities; 
b.  Where practicable, a vegetated area that will maximize water quality protection, mitigate the effects of buffer encroachment, and is equal to the area of encroachment into the buffer area shall be established elsewhere on the lot or parcel; and 
c.  The encroachment shall not extend into the seaward 50 feet of the buffer area. 
(2)  When the application of the buffer area would result in the loss of a buildable area on a lot or parcel recorded between October 1, 1989, and March 1, 2002, encroachments into the buffer area may be allowed by the director in accordance with the following criteria: 
a.  The lot or parcel was created as a result of a legal process conducted in conformity with the city's subdivision regulations; 
b.  Conditions or mitigation measures imposed through a previously approved exception shall be met; 
c.  If the use of a best management practice was previously required, the best management practice shall be evaluated to determine if it continues to function effectively, and if necessary, the best management practice shall be reestablished or repaired and maintained as required; and 
d.  The criteria in subsection (g)(1) of this section shall be met. 
(h)  Re-establishment of buffer areas. The buffer area required in subsection (b)(2) of this section shall consist of vegetation that is effective in retarding runoff, preventing erosion, and filtering nonpoint source pollution from runoff. Where such vegetation is not sufficient to meet this purpose, it shall be established in accordance with this section. 
(1)  Where buffer areas are to be established, they shall consist of a mixture of shade trees, understory trees, shrubs and groundcovers. Density of the buffer shall be as described in the Riparian Buffers Modification and Mitigation Guidance Manual Restoration and/or Establishment Tables. 
(2)  Vegetation shall be chosen from the city recommended lists of trees and/or native floodplain species. Wetland plantings, including herbaceous plantings, and/or wetland seed mix shall be used where site conditions warrant. Plant materials and planting techniques shall be in accordance with the City of Falls Church Specifications for Planting. 
(3)  Where invasive plant species are present, the director may require their removal as part of the re-establishment of the buffer area. 
(Ord. No. 1915, 3-24-2014; Ord. No. 1928, 9-8-2014) 
Sec. 35-11. - Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas; administrative waivers, nonconformities, exemptions, and exceptions. 
(a)  Limitations of this section. The administrative waivers, nonconformities, exemptions, and exceptions in this section shall only apply to the requirements of section 35-10. All other requirements of this article shall apply unless otherwise exempted or granted an exception by the director. 
(b)  Nonconforming structures. Any structure or nonagricultural use that was legally established in accordance with the provisions of this Code and was in existence on the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and made nonconforming by operation of this article, may continue and be maintained, but shall not be enlarged or expanded, with the exception that the director may grant a waiver for structures on legal nonconforming lots or parcels to provide for remodeling and alterations to such nonconforming structures. A nonconforming use development waiver shall become null and void if substantial work on the project has not commenced within 12 months of the date of permit issuance. 
(c)  Reconstruction of pre-existing structures. It is not the intent of this section to prevent the reconstruction of pre-existing structures within Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas from occurring as a result of casualty loss, unless otherwise restricted by city ordinance. Such reconstruction shall occur within two years after the destruction or damage and there shall be no increase in the amount of impervious area and no further encroachment into the RPA, to the extent possible by sound engineering practices. 
(d)  Administrative waivers for the expansion of pre-existing structures. An application for the expansion or modification of an existing legal principle structure on legal nonconforming lots or parcels may be approved by the director through an administrative process for additions to the existing legal principal structures, and additions of attached decks, garages, and other customary and incidental structures attached to the principal structure; provided the following findings are made: 
(1)  The request for the waiver is the minimum necessary to afford relief; 
(2)  Granting the waiver will not confer upon the applicant any specific privileges that are denied by this article to other property owners in similar situations; 
(3)  The waiver is in harmony with the purpose and intent of this article and does not result in a net increase in nonpoint source pollution load; 
(4)  The waiver is not based on conditions or circumstances that are self-created or self-imposed; 
(5)  Reasonable and appropriate conditions are imposed, as warranted, that will prevent the waiver from causing a degradation of water quality; 
(6)  Other findings, as appropriate and required by the city are met; and 
(7)  In no case shall this provision apply to accessory structures. Such requests shall be heard by the planning commission through the exceptions process described in subsection (g) of this section. 
(e)  Exemptions for public utilities, railroads, public roads, and facilities. The following shall be exempt provided that all state and federal requirements have been met: 
(1)  Construction, installation, operation and maintenance of electric, natural gas, fiber-optic, and telephone transmission lines, railroads, and public roads and their appurtenant structures. 
(2)  The exemption of public roads and drives is further conditioned on the optimization of the road alignment and design, consistent with other applicable requirements, to prevent or otherwise minimize: 
a.  Encroachment in the resource protection area; and 
b.  Adverse effects on water quality. 
(3)  Construction, installation and maintenance of water, sewer, natural gas, and underground fiber-optic telecommunications and cable television lines owned, permitted, or both, by the city or regional service authority shall be exempt; provided that: 
a.  To the degree possible, the location of such utilities and facilities should be outside resource protection areas; 
b.  No more land shall be disturbed than is necessary to provide for the proposed utility installation; and 
c.  All such construction, installation and maintenance of such utilities and facilities shall be in compliance with all applicable state and federal permits and designed and conducted in a manner that protects water quality. 
(4)  Passive recreation facilities such as boardwalks, trails and pathways; and historic preservation and archaeological activities may be exempt, as determined by the director; provided that any land disturbing activity exceeding an area of 2,500 square feet shall comply with the requirements of section 35-14. 
(f)  Exceptions in Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas. 
(1)  Requests for planning commission review. Requests for exceptions to the requirements of section 35-10, permitted development or uses, modifications and encroachments within resource protection areas, and requests for exceptions to modify nonconforming, or construct new, nonattached accessory structures and uses in the RPA buffer, as noted in subsection (d) of this section, shall be made, in writing, to the director within 30 calendar days of the director's official decision. This request shall identify the impacts of the proposed exception on water quality and on lands within the resource protection area through the performance of a water quality impact assessment, which complies with the provisions of section 35-12. The director will forward the request and the water quality impact assessment to the planning commission for its consideration. The city shall notify the affected public of any such exception requests and the planning commission shall consider these requests in a public hearing in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2204, except only one hearing shall be required. 
(2)  Request for administrative review. Requests for exceptions to provisions other than section 35-10, permitted development or uses, modifications and encroachments within resource protection areas, and subsection (d) of this section. Exceptions to modify nonconforming, or construct new nonattached accessory structures and uses in the RPA buffer, may be made in writing to the director for administrative review. 
(3)  Evaluation criteria for administrative or planning commission review of exceptions as applied to subsections (f)(1) and (2) of this section. The director or the planning commission shall review the request for an exception and the water quality impact assessment and may grant the exception with such conditions and safeguards as deemed necessary to further the purpose and intent of this section, and if the director or the planning commission finds that: 
a.  Granting the exception will not confer upon the applicant any special privileges denied by this article to other property owners in the overlay district; 
b.  The exception request is not based on conditions or circumstances that are self-created or self-imposed, nor does the request arise from conditions or circumstances either permitted or nonconforming that are related to adjacent parcels; 
c.  The exception request is the minimum necessary to afford relief; 
d.  The exception request will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of this article, not injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare, and is not of substantial detriment to water quality; and 
e.  Reasonable and appropriate conditions are imposed which will prevent the exception request from causing a degradation of water quality. 
If the director or the planning commission cannot make the required findings or refuses to grant the exception, the request for an exception together with the water quality impact assessment and the written findings and rationale for the decision shall be returned to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1915, 3-24-2014) 
Sec. 35-12. - Water quality impact assessment. 
(a)  When required. A water quality impact assessment shall be required for any: 
(1)  Proposed land disturbance, development or redevelopment activity within the resource protection area; 
(2)  Buffer encroachment, as provided for in section 35-10; and 
(3)  Other development in resource management areas if regarded as appropriate by the director due to unique site characteristics or the intensity of the proposed use or development and its potential impact on water quality. 
(b)  Agreement in lieu of an assessment. Where a land disturbing activity subject to this section results in less than 2,500 square feet of disturbance, an agreement in lieu of an assessment may be substituted for a water quality impact assessment if executed by the director. 
(c)  Contents. The requirements for the water quality impact assessment will vary depending on the magnitude of the proposed development project. 
(1)  The purpose of the water quality impact assessment is to identify the impacts of proposed development, redevelopment, or land disturbance on water quality, lands within the resource protection area, and other environmentally sensitive lands, and to determine specific measures for mitigation of these impacts. The water quality impact assessment must be of sufficient specificity to demonstrate compliance with the criteria of this article. 
(2)  A water quality assessment shall include a site drawing to scale which shows the following: 
a.  Location of the components of the RPA and the 100-foot buffer area measured from the top of the stream bank or edge of stream when there is no bank. The location of the RPA line shall be prepared and certified by a land surveyor authorized to practice in the commonwealth; 
b.  Location and nature of the proposed encroachment into the RPA buffer area, including: 
1.  Type of paving material; 
2.  Areas of clearing or grading; 
3.  Location of any structures, drives, or other impervious cover; and 
4.  Sewage disposal systems or other utilities. 
c.  Estimation of pre-development and post-development impervious surfaces on the site and stormwater calculations; 
d.  Type and location of proposed best management practices to mitigate the proposed encroachment and the location of existing and proposed runoff outfalls or drainage pathways from the property, including the location of erosion and sediment control devices such as silt fencing, stormwater inlet protection, and temporary soil storage; and 
e.  Pollutant load calculations to display that the vegetative buffer and/or best management practice will reduce the sediment load by 75 percent and nutrient load by 40 percent. 
(3)  Certain water quality impact requirements modifications are as follows: 
a.  Additional hydrogeological and other information may be required by the director if the size and scope of the proposed project is large enough to require additional analysis to ensure the protection of the CBPA. 
b.  Applicants for development and redevelopment of land or land disturbance within the RPA may apply, in writing, to the city engineer for a modification to the application requirements for a water quality impact assessment, described in this section. 
(Ord. No. 1915, 3-24-2014) 
Sec. 35-13. - Water quality impact assessment review. 
(a)  Submission and review. Submission and review requirements for the water quality impact assessment are as follows: 
(1)  Five copies of all site drawings and other applicable information as required by this article shall be submitted to the director for review by the SMRT. 
(2)  All information required in this section shall be certified as complete and accurate by a professional engineer, architect, certified landscape architect or land surveyor licensed in Virginia pursuant to Article 1 (Code of Virginia, § 54.1-400 et seq.) of Chapter 4 of Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
(3)  As part of any water quality impact assessment submittal, the SMRT may require review by the Northern Virginia Regional Commission or the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality. Any comments will be incorporated into the final review by the SMRT, provided that such comments are provided within 30 days of the request. 
(b)  Evaluation. The evaluation procedure for the water quality impact assessment is as follows: 
(1)  Upon the completed review of a water quality impact assessment and the landscape conservation plan, the SMRT will determine if any proposed encroachment into the buffer area is consistent with the provisions of this article and make a recommendation to the director based on the following criteria: 
a.  The necessity of the proposed encroachment and the ability to place improvements elsewhere on the site to avoid disturbance of the buffer area; 
b.  Impervious surfaces are minimized; 
c.  Proposed mitigation measures, including the landscape conservation plan and site design, result in minimal disturbance to all components of the RPA, including the 100-foot buffer area; 
d.  Proposed mitigation measures will work to retain all buffer area functions, pollutant removal, erosion and runoff control; 
e.  Proposed best management practices, where required, achieve the requisite reductions in pollutant loadings; 
f.  The development as proposed, meets the purpose and intent of this section; 
g.  The cumulative impact of the proposed development, when considered in relation to other development in the vicinity, both existing and proposed, will not result in a significant degradation of water quality; 
h.  Within any RPA, the proposed development is water-dependent or redevelopment; and 
i.  The development will not result in significant disruption of the hydrology of the site. 
(2)  The director shall require additional mitigation where potential impacts have not been adequately addressed. Evaluation of mitigation measures will be made based on the criteria listed in this section. 
(3)  The director shall find the proposal to be inconsistent with the purpose and intent of this article when the impacts created by the proposal cannot be mitigated. 
(Ord. No. 1915, 3-24-2014) 
Sec. 35-14. - Erosion and sediment control plan. 
(a)  Plan contents. The erosion and sediment control plan shall be of sufficient detail to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the director, compliance with the provisions of section 35-15 and with the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, whichever is more restrictive. The plan may be contained on a separate sheet or included with the drainage or grading plan submitted as a part of the development plans required in chapter 6, pertaining to buildings, chapter 28, pertaining to subdivisions, or chapter 48, pertaining to zoning. 
(b)  Requirements for those preparing plans. The plan must be prepared and certified by a professional engineer, architect, certified landscape architect or land surveyor licensed in Virginia pursuant to Article 1 (Code of Virginia, § 54.1-400 et seq.) of Chapter 4 of Title 54.1 of the Code of Virginia. 
(c)  Agreement in lieu of a plan. Where a land disturbing activity results from the construction of a single-family residence, an agreement in lieu of a plan may be substituted for an erosion and sediment control plan if executed by the director. 
(d)  Applicability to state agencies. Any state agency that undertakes a project involving a land disturbing activity shall have the erosion and sediment control plan approved by the Virginia Soil and Water Conservation Board or Virginia Department of Environmental Quality, as appropriate. 
(e)  Applicability to multi-jurisdictional activities. Any person whose land disturbing activities involve lands which extend into the jurisdiction of another local erosion and sediment control program shall have either an erosion and sediment plan approved by the Virginia Soil and Water Conservation Board, or Fairfax County or Arlington County or the city. Such persons shall comply with the requirements of section 35-18 concerning an installation and maintenance agreement and bond. 
(f)  Responsibility of owner of the land when activity is conducted by contractor. Whenever a land disturbing activity is proposed to be conducted by a contractor performing construction work pursuant to a construction contract, the preparation, submission and approval of the required erosion and sediment control plan shall be the responsibility of the owner of the land. 
(g)  Wetland mitigation banks. In accordance with the procedure set forth in Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:55.E, any person engaging in the creation and operation of wetland mitigation banks in multiple jurisdictions, which have been approved and are operated in accordance with applicable federal and state guidance, laws or regulations for the establishment, use and operation of mitigation banks pursuant to a permit issued by the state department of environmental quality, the marine resources commission or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, may at the option of that person, file general erosion and sediment control specifications for wetland mitigation banks annually with the Virginia Soil and Water Conservation Board for review and approval consistent with guidelines established by the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality. 
(h)  Responsible land disturber. The responsible land disturber shall be designated prior to land disturbing activity. In addition, as a prerequisite to engaging in the land disturbing activities shown on the approved plan, the person responsible for carrying out the plan shall provide the name of an individual holding a certificate of competence to the program authority, as provided by Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:52, who will be in charge of and responsible for carrying out the land disturbing activity. However, the director may waive the certificate of competence requirement for an agreement in lieu of a plan for construction of a single-family residence. If a violation occurs during the land disturbing activity, then the person responsible for carrying out the agreement in lieu of a plan shall correct the violation and provide the name of an individual holding a certificate of competence, as provided by Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:52. Failure to provide the name of an individual holding a certificate of competence prior to engaging in land disturbing activities may result in revocation of the approval of the plan and the person responsible for carrying out the plan shall be subject to the penalties as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1915, 3-24-2014; Ord. No. 1928, 9-8-2014) 
Sec. 35-15. - Erosion and sediment control technical standards. 
(a)  Applicability of Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Regulations. The more stringent of the erosion and sediment control performance standards contained in this section, or those contained in the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Regulations, 9VAC25-840-40, shall apply to all applications for development, redevelopment, or land disturbance that will disturb 2,500 square feet of land or more. Such standards shall also apply to all applications for development, redevelopment, or land disturbance within RPAs, regardless of the amount of land disturbance. 
(b)  Stabilization of denuded areas and soil stockpiles. 
(1)  Permanent or temporary soil stabilization shall be applied to denuded areas within seven days after final grade is reached on any portion of the site. Temporary soil stabilization shall also be applied within seven days to denuded areas which may not be at final grade but will remain dormant (undisturbed) for longer than 30 days. Permanent soil stabilization shall be applied to areas that are to be left dormant for more than one year. Soil stabilization refers to measures which protect soil from the erosive forces of raindrop impact and flowing water. Applicable practices include vegetative establishment, mulching and the early application of gravel base on areas to be paved. Soil stabilization measures should be selected to be appropriate for the time of year, site conditions, and estimated duration of use. 
(2)  During construction of the project soil stockpiles shall be sterilized or protected with sediment-trapping measures to prevent soil loss. The applicant is responsible for the temporary protection and permanent stabilization of all soil stockpiles on-site as well as soil transported from the project site. 
(c)  Establishment of permanent vegetation. A permanent and appropriate vegetative cover shall be established on denuded areas not otherwise permanently stabilized. Permanent vegetation shall not be considered established until a groundcover is achieved that, in the opinion of the director, is uniform enough to control soil erosion satisfactorily and to survive severe weather conditions. 
(d)  Protection of adjacent properties. Properties adjacent to the site of a land disturbance shall be protected from sediment deposition. This may be accomplished by preserving a well-vegetated buffer strip around the lower perimeter of the land disturbance, by installing perimeter controls such as sediment barriers, filters, dikes, sediment basins or by a combination of such measures. Vegetated buffer strips may be used alone only where runoff in sheet flow is expected. Buffer strips should be at least 20 feet in width. If at any time it is found that a vegetated buffer strip alone is ineffective in stopping sediment movement onto adjacent property, additional perimeter controls must be provided. 
(e)  Timing and stabilization of sediment-trapping measures. Sediment basins and traps, perimeter dikes, sediment barriers and other measures intended to trap sediment on-site must be constructed as a first step in grading and be made functional before upslope land disturbance takes place. Earthen structures such as dams, dikes and diversions must be seeded and mulched immediately after installation. 
(f)  Sediment basins. Stormwater runoff from drainage areas with three acres or greater disturbed area must pass through a sediment basin. The sediment basin shall be designed and constructed to accommodate the anticipated sediment loading from the land disturbing activity. The outfall device or system design shall take into account the total drainage area flowing through the disturbed area to be served by the basin. The director may require sediment basins or traps for smaller disturbed areas where deemed necessary. 
(g)  Cut and fill slopes. Cut and fill slopes must be designed and constructed in a manner which will minimize erosion. Consideration must be given to the length and steepness of the slope, the soil type, upslope drainage area, groundwater conditions and other applicable factors. Slopes which are found to be eroding excessively within one year of permanent stabilization must be provided with additional slope stabilizing measures until the problem is corrected. Any bond may be held until the expiration of one year after permanent stabilization is established or longer, if the director determines further stabilization or measures are required. The following guidelines are provided to aid site planners and plan reviewers in developing an adequate design: 
(1)  Roughened soil surfaces are generally preferred to smooth surfaces on slopes. 
(2)  Diversions should be constructed at the top of long, steep slopes which have significant drainage areas above the slope. Diversion or terraces may also be used to reduce slope length. 
(3)  Concentrated stormwater should not be allowed to flow down cut or fill slopes unless contained within an adequate temporary or permanent channel, flume or slope drain structure. 
(4)  Wherever a slope face crosses a water seepage plain which endangers the stability of the slope, adequate drainage or other protection should be provided. 
(h)  Storm sewer inlet protection. All storm sewer inlets which are made operable during construction shall be protected so that sediment-laden water will not enter the conveyance system without first being filtered or otherwise treated to remove sediment. 
(i)  Working in or crossing watercourses. 
(1)  Construction vehicles should be kept out of watercourses to the extent possible. Where in-channel work is necessary, precautions must be taken to stabilize the work area during construction to minimize erosion. The channel (including bed and banks) must always be restabilized immediately after in-channel work is completed. 
(2)  Where a live (wet) watercourse must be crossed by construction vehicles more than twice in any six-month period during construction, a temporary stream crossing constructed of nonerodible materials must be provided. 
(3)  When work in a live watercourse is performed, precautions shall be taken to minimize encroachment, control sediment transport and stabilize the work area to the greatest extent possible during construction. Nonerodible material shall be used for the construction of causeways and cofferdams. Earthen fill may be used for these structures if armored by nonerodible cover materials. 
(4)  All applicable federal, state and local regulations pertaining to working in or crossing live watercourses shall be met. 
(5)  The temporary crossing shall be removed as soon as possible and the stream shall be restored to its pre-development state, or to a condition of appropriate vegetation, as established by the director. 
(j)  Underground utility construction. 
(1)  The construction of nonexempt underground utility lines shall be subject to the following criteria: 
a.  No more than 100 feet of trench are to be opened at one time. 
b.  Where consistent with safety and space considerations, excavated material is to be placed on the uphill side of trenches. 
c.  Effluent from dewatering operations shall be filtered or passed through an approved sediment-trapping device, or both, and discharged in a manner that does not adversely affect flowing streams or off-site property. 
d.  Restabilization shall be accomplished in accordance with these regulations. 
e.  Applicable safety regulations shall be complied with. 
(2)  Nonexempt utility construction includes the installation, maintenance or repair of all utilities which disturb more than 10,000 square feet except: 
a.  Individual service connections. 
b.  Underground public utility lines under existing hard-surfaced roads, streets or sidewalks, provided such land disturbing activity is confined to the area which is hard-surfaced. 
(k)  Construction access routes. Wherever construction vehicle access routes intersect paved public roads, provisions must be made to eliminate the transport of sediment (mud) by runoff or vehicle tracking onto the paved surface. Where sediment is transported onto a public road surface, the roads shall be cleaned immediately and cleaned thoroughly at the end of each day. Sediment shall be removed from roads by shoveling or sweeping and be transported to a sediment controlled disposal area. Street washing shall be allowed only after sediment is removed in this manner. This provision shall apply to individual subdivision lots as well as to larger land disturbing activities. 
(l)  Disposition of temporary measures. All temporary erosion and sediment control measures shall be disposed of within 30 days after final site stabilization is achieved or after the temporary measures are no longer needed, unless otherwise authorized by the director. Trapped sediment and other disturbed soil areas resulting from the disposition of temporary measures shall be permanently stabilized to prevent further erosion and sedimentation. 
(m)  Maintenance. All temporary and permanent erosion and sediment control practices must be maintained, inspected and repaired as needed to assure continued performance of their intended function. A statement describing the maintenance responsibilities of the permittee shall be included in the approved erosion and sediment control plan. 
(1)  The Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, Second Edition, 1980, or current edition, shall be used by any applicant making a submittal under this article and by the director in review and consideration of the adequacy of any erosion and sediment control plan submitted. 
(2)  This article and the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook, Second Edition, 1980, or current edition, shall be an integral part of the city's erosion and sediment control program and shall comprise the city's Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook. 
(n)  Dormant land use activities. Should a land disturbing activity cease for more than 180 days, the director shall evaluate the existing approved erosion and sediment control plan to determine whether the plan still satisfies local and state erosion and sediment control criteria and to verify that all design factors are still valid. If the director finds the previously filed plan to be inadequate, a modified plan shall be submitted and approved prior to the resumption of land disturbing activity. 
(o)  Exemptions for certain agricultural, horticultural, or forest management activities. Any person who owns, occupies, or operates private agricultural, horticultural, or forest lands shall not be deemed to be in violation of this article for land disturbing activities, which result from the tilling, planting, or harvesting of agricultural, horticultural or forest crops or products or engineering operations such as the construction of terraces, terrace outlets, check dams, desilting basins, floodwater retarding structures, channel improvements, floodways, dikes, ponds, ditches and the like; the utilization of strip cropping, lister furrowing; land drainage; land irrigation, seeding and planting of waste, sloping, abandoned, or eroded lands and grasses; forestation and reforestation; rotation of crops; soil stabilization with trees, grasses, legumes, and other thick growing, soil-holding crops; retardation of runoff by increasing absorption of rainfall; and retirement from cultivation of steep, highly erosive areas and areas now badly gullied or otherwise eroded. 
(p)  Exceptions and modifications. The director may provide an exception or modification of the requirements of this section that are deemed inappropriate or too restrictive for site conditions. Exceptions may be granted under these conditions: 
(1)  At the time of plan submission, an applicant may request a modification to become part of the approved erosion and sediment control plan. The applicant shall explain the reasons for requesting modifications in writing. Specific modifications which are allowed by the director shall be documented in the plan. 
(2)  During construction, the person responsible for implementing the approved plan may request a modification in writing from the director. The director shall respond in writing either approving or disapproving such a request. If the director does not approve a modification within ten days of receipt of the request, the request shall be considered to be disapproved. Following disapproval, the applicant may resubmit a modification request with additional documentation. 
(3)  The director shall consider modification requests judiciously, keeping in mind both the need of the applicant to maximize cost effectiveness and the need to protect off-site properties and resources from damage. 
(4)  The department of public works shall file a quarterly report on significant complaints filed under this section and on any modifications granted. The report shall summarize the complaint, the determination of the director on its merits, and any required corrective action. A copy of the quarterly report shall be transmitted to the planning director who shall transmit it to the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 1915, 3-24-2014; Ord. No. 1928, 9-8-2014) 
Sec. 35-16. - Erosion and sediment control plan review. 
(a)  Plan review. The director shall approve, within 60 days, the erosion and sediment control plan if such plan satisfies the following standards: 
(1)  The development plan shall be fitted to the topography and soils so as to create the least erosion potential. 
(2)  Wherever feasible, allowing for development permitted in the zoning district in which the land is situated, natural vegetation shall be retained and protected. If necessary to accomplish the purposes of this section, the director may increase the coverage restrictions contained in other sections of this chapter to the extent necessary to accomplish the purposes of this section. 
(3)  Provisions shall be made to effectively accommodate the increased runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after development. 
(4)  Sediment basins and similar structural measures shall be installed below high sediment-producing areas to remove sediment from runoff waters from land undergoing development. The owner or his agent shall make provision for regular inspection of these devices after every period of heavy rainfall; if more than 30 percent of the collecting volume is used up, the owner or agent shall cause accumulated silt to be removed therefrom. 
(5)  The plan shall establish the construction schedule and the sequence for installing protective measures and facilities and shall include provisions for the following: 
a.  The smallest practicable area of land shall be exposed at any one time through appropriate planning and sequential phasing at development. 
b.  All erosion and siltation control structures shall be placed prior to or as the first step in grading. 
c.  Special measures shall be provided to protect any disturbed area not paved, sodded or built upon by the November 1 in each year by seeding, mulching or other appropriate means. 
(6)  Conservation practices for erosion and sediment control shall equal or exceed the specifications of those contained in the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook and any amendments thereto. 
(b)  The director shall act on all plans submitted to it within 45 days from receipt thereof by either approving such plan in writing or by disapproving such plan in writing and giving the specific reasons for disapproval. When a plan submitted for approval, pursuant to this article, is found upon review by the director to be inadequate, the director shall specify such modifications, terms, and conditions as will permit approval of the plan and shall communicate these requirements to the applicant. If no action is taken by the director within the time specified in this section, the plan shall be deemed approved and the permit issued; provided, that the bond required in section 35-18 has been deposited. 
(c)  Plan modifications. An approved plan may be changed by the director in the following cases: 
(1)  Where inspection has revealed the inadequacy of the plan to accomplish the erosion and sediment control objectives of the plan, and appropriate modifications to correct the deficiencies of the plan are specified by the director; or 
(2)  Where the person responsible for carrying out the approved plan finds that because of changed circumstances or for other reasons the approved plan cannot be effectively carried out, and proposed amendments to the plan, consistent with the requirements of this article, are agreed to by the director and the person responsible for carrying out the plan. 
(Ord. No. 1915, 3-24-2014) 
Sec. 35-17. - Landscape conservation plan. 
(a)  All development, redevelopment, or land disturbance subject to this article shall include a landscape conservation plan. No stormwater management permit shall be approved without an approved landscape conservation plan. The landscape conservation plan shall include a scaled drawing, shall meet all of the requirements of this section, and shall be prepared and/or certified by a landscape architect, arborist, and/or horticulturalist. 
(b)  Preliminary vegetative survey. The plan shall include a preliminary vegetative survey of all existing trees on the site, measuring at least two inches in DBH and shrubs that are greater than five feet in height. A chart shall be provided showing common and botanical name, size, condition, life expectancy, and required preservation measures of all woody vegetation. All trees shall be identified by an International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) certified arborist. 
(c)  Existing vegetation preservation plan. The plan shall include an existing vegetation preservation component that shall illustrate any grade changes or other work adjacent to trees that would affect them adversely. Specifications shall be provided showing how grade, drainage and aeration will be maintained around vegetation to be preserved to ensure the protection of existing trees and other woody vegetation during clearing, grading and all phases of construction. 
(1)  Locations of tree preservation fencing, root pruning and other required tree preservation measures shall be shown on the plan. 
(2)  Proposed vegetation to be removed to create the desired construction footprint shall be clearly illustrated on the plan and labeled as "to be removed." Vegetation to be preserved outside the building envelope shall be shown on the plan and labeled as "to be preserved." 
(3)  The location of the critical root zone (CRZ) of any vegetation shown on the plan or located on adjacent properties, including city rights-of-way, where the critical root zone (CRZ) extends onto the site, shall be shown on the plan. 
(4)  Tree canopy coverage calculations provided by woody vegetation pre-development and post-development and/or redevelopment on the site shall be shown on the plan along with the driplines. 
(5)  The City of Falls Church Tree Standards and Specifications for Planting shall be included on the plan. 
(6)  Within the RPA buffer, trees and other woody vegetation to be removed for sight lines, vistas, access paths, best management practices, and shoreline stabilization projects shall be shown on the plan. 
(d)  Landscape revegetation plan . The plan shall include a landscape revegetation component that illustrates the proposed locations of vegetation that is required by this article and section 48-1180, tree canopy coverage required on residential lots zoned R1-A, low density and R1-B medium density. 
(1)  A chart shall be provided listing canopy coverage calculations and any required replacement canopy coverage vegetation pursuant to section 48-1180, tree canopy coverage required on residential lots zoned R1-A, low density and/or R1-B medium density. 
(2)  A landscape schedule shall be provided that lists species, size, quantity, root condition and any credited tree canopy coverage pursuant to section 48-1180, shall be shown on the plan. 
(3)  The planting of woody vegetation shall be in accordance with locally approved specifications and these specifications and details shall be included on the plan. 
(4)  Any required RPA buffer shall be clearly delineated and any woody vegetation to be added to establish, supplement or replace existing vegetation within the RPA buffer, as required under this Code, shall be shown on this plan. 
(Ord. No. 1915, 3-24-2014) 
Sec. 35-18. - Bonding requirements; installation and maintenance agreement. 
(a)  When bonds and inspections required pertaining to site plans. All development, land disturbance, and redevelopment in an RPA or RMA shall be subject to the bond and inspection provisions, pursuant to sections 48-1143 and 48-1144, pertaining to site plans. 
(b)  When bonds required pertaining to stormwater management permit. Prior to approval of a stormwater management permit, there shall be executed by the owner or his agent and submitted with the permit an agreement in form and substance as approved by the city to establish the measures provided for on the stormwater management plan and erosion and sediment control plan together with a cash bond to be deposited and held in escrow by the city, and no interest shall be paid by the city for any funds held in escrow. The agreement and bond shall be provided to ensure the installation, maintenance and performance of such measures. The bond shall be in the amount of the estimated cost of such measures as determined by certified cost estimates submitted by the applicant's engineer or land surveyor and approved by the director. The minimum amount of bond to be posted is to be $750.00. In any case where the director rejects any such agreement or bond, the owner or agent of the owner may appeal from such decision first to the city manager and, if not resolved at that level, should then appeal to the city council; provided the owner or agent of the owner has paid to the city the required filing fee. 
(c)  When bond released. After achieving the components required by the erosion and sediment control plan and stormwater management plan for which the city has issued a permit and received a bond as required by this section, the owner or agent of the owner may apply to the director in writing for a certificate of completion and discharge of the unexpended or unobligated portion of such bond. If the work is found by the director to conform to the approved plan provided for in section 35-5 and section 35-101 and other applicable regulations and city ordinances, such director shall issue the certificate and release of bond within 60 days of receipt of the application. 
(d)  Stormwater management system maintenance. The owner of any component of the stormwater management system shall provide adequate maintenance to ensure that the system functions as designed. 
(1)  The owner shall enter into a maintenance agreement with the city that outlines facility-specific maintenance requirements. The maintenance agreement shall run with the land, be set forth in an instrument recorded in the land records, provide for all necessary access to the property for the purposes of maintenance and regulatory inspections, and be enforceable by the city and all other appropriate governmental parties. Maintenance agreement forms shall be prepared in a format acceptable to the director and the city attorney. 
(2)  The maintenance agreement shall be submitted to the director for review and approval prior to the approval of the stormwater management plan in section 35-5 and shall be set forth in an instrument recorded in the land records prior to general permit termination or earlier if required by the director. 
(3)  The maintenance agreement shall require that the owner prepare and submit an annual certification of maintenance to the city. 
a.  Certification shall be made by a registered engineer or licensed surveyor (qualified to perform such routine inspections) using a certification of maintenance form provided by the director. However, the director may specify that other individuals other than a registered engineer or licensed surveyor may provide certification at his discretion. 
b.  Such certification shall state the general condition of the facility and also state whether the infrastructure is functioning properly as originally designed. 
c.  If the facility is not functioning as designed, a plan for proposed remedial actions and a timeline for completion shall be noted in the certification report. The plan and timeline for completion are subject to the approval of the director. If the director determines that the proposed plan and timeline for completion is insufficient to protect the public health, safety and welfare, the owner of the facility must either submit a new plan and timeline, or alternatively, the director may take action in accordance with section 35-22. Once remedial actions have been completed, the owner shall submit a new certification in accordance with this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 1915, 3-24-2014; Ord. No. 1928, 9-8-2014) 
Sec. 35-19. - Appeals and hearings. 
(a)  Appeals. 
(1)  Final decisions of the director under this article shall be in writing and be subject to review by the city manager. Any appeal shall be filed with the city manager within 30 days from the date of any written decision by the director that adversely affects the rights, duties, or privileges of the persons engaging in or proposing to engage in land disturbing activities. 
(2)  All appeals must be written and must contain sufficient information to acquaint the city manager with the facts involved. 
(3)  The city manager, as part of his review, will notify and seek advice and recommendations from appropriate boards and commissions. The city manager shall hear the appeal, and render a written decision within 30 working days of receipt of the notice of appeal. An appeal stays all compliance with the action being appealed, unless the director certifies to the city manager that by reason of stated facts a stay would, in the opinion of the director, cause imminent endangerment to life or property. In such cases, compliance shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be granted by the city manager, or by a court of record, on application and on due cause shown. 
(4)  A final decision of the city manager may be appealed to the city council, provided that a written appeal is filed with the city manager within 30 days after the date of his decision. 
(5)  An appeal by any person aggrieved by any decision of the city council relative to the administration of this article shall be made to a court of record. An appeal shall be made within 30 working days from the date of the issuance of the city council's written decision, by filing with a court of record. 
(b)  Hearings. 
(1)  Any applicant, or person subject to this article aggrieved by any action of the city taken without a formal hearing, or by inaction of the city, may demand in writing a formal hearing by the city council, provided a petition requesting such hearing is filed with the director within 30 days after notice of such action is given by the director. 
(2)  The hearings held under this section shall be conducted by the city council at a regular or special meeting of the city council or by at least one member of the city council designated by the city council to conduct such hearings on behalf of the city council at any other time and place authorized by the city council. 
(3)  A verbatim record of the proceedings of such hearing shall be taken and filed with the city council. Depositions may be taken and read as in actions at law. 
(4)  The city council or its designated member, as the case may be, shall have power to issue subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum, and at the request of any party shall issue such subpoenas. The failure of a witness without legal excuse to appear or testify or to produce documents shall be acted upon by the town whose action may include the procurement of an order of enforcement from the circuit court. Witnesses who are subpoenaed shall receive the same fees and reimbursements for mileage as in civil actions. 
(Ord. No. 1915, 3-24-2014) 
Sec. 35-20. - Monitoring and inspections. 
(a)  General monitoring and inspection requirements. The director shall inspect any land disturbing activity during construction for: 
(1)  Compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(2)  Compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan; 
(3)  Development, updating, and implementation of a stormwater pollution prevention plan and pollution prevention plan; and 
(4)  Development and implementation of any additional control measures necessary to address a TMDL. 
(b)  Entry upon property; enforcement generally. The director may, at reasonable times and under reasonable circumstances, enter any establishment or upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of obtaining information or conducting surveys or investigations necessary in the enforcement of this article. 
(c)  Entry upon property; failure to take action after proper notice. In accordance with a performance bond with surety, cash escrow, letter of credit, any combination thereof, or such other legal arrangement or instrument, the director may also enter any establishment or upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of initiating or maintaining appropriate actions which are required by the permit conditions associated with a land disturbing activity when a permittee, after proper notice, has failed to take acceptable action within the time frame specified. 
(d)  Furnishing materials, plans, specifications, etc. Pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:40, the Director may require every stormwater management permit applicant or permittee, or any such person subject to the requirements of this article, to furnish when requested such application materials, plans, specifications, and other pertinent information as may be necessary to determine the effect of his discharge on the quality of state waters, or such other information as may be necessary to accomplish the purposes of this article. 
(e)  Additional requirements for erosion and sediment control. The director may require at his sole discretion monitoring and reports from the person responsible for carrying out the erosion and sediment control plan, to ensure compliance with the approved plan and to determine whether the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sediment. The owner, permittee, or person responsible for carrying out the plan shall be given notice of the inspection. If the director determines that there is a failure to comply with the plan, notice shall be served upon the permittee or person responsible for carrying out the plan by registered or certified mail to the address specified in the permit application or in the plan certification, or by delivery at the site of the land disturbing activities to the agent or employee supervising such activities. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. Upon failure to comply within the time specified, the permit may be revoked and the permittee or person responsible for carrying out the plan shall be deemed to be in violation of this article and shall be subject to the penalties provided by section 35-22. The owner/occupant as operator shall be given an opportunity to accompany the inspector. The city shall be permitted to inspect the site at any time during the course of the project. Inspections are, at a minimum, to be made at the following times: 
(1)  Immediately following initial installation of erosion and sediment controls; 
(2)  At least once in every two-week period; 
(3)  Within 48 hours following a runoff producing storm event; and 
(4)  At the completion of the project prior to the release of any performance bonds. 
(f)  Post-construction inspection of stormwater management facilities. The director shall, at reasonable times and under reasonable circumstances, inspect post-construction stormwater management facilities required under the provisions of this article on a schedule determined sufficient by the director except that such an inspection shall occur at least once every five years. 
(Ord. No. 1915, 3-24-2014; Ord. No. 1928, 9-8-2014) 
Sec. 35-21. - Prohibition against illicit discharges. 
(a)  Prohibited discharges. It shall be unlawful to: 
(1)  Cause or allow illicit discharges to the stormwater management system or state waters; 
(2)  Cause a connection to the stormwater management system that will or has the potential to allow for an illicit discharge to enter the system; or 
(3)  Violate any permit granted for stormwater discharges. 
(b)  Discharges permitted by a VPDES or VSMP permit or waiver. The prohibition in subsection (a) shall not apply to a discharge permitted under a VPDES or VSMP permit or waiver, provided that, the discharge is in full compliance with all requirements of the VPDES or VSMP permit or waiver as well as any other applicable laws or regulations pertaining to the discharge. 
(c)  Unpermitted or unapproved connections. Causing any new connection to the stormwater management system that is not approved in accordance with a stormwater management permit, or is not otherwise approved by the director if it is not part of a regulated land disturbing activity, shall be considered an illicit discharge for the purpose of this article. 
(d)  Erosion impact areas. Any land identified by the director as an erosion impact area shall be considered to be contributing an illicit discharge and be required to submit for approval and implement an erosion and sediment control plan. This shall be required whether or not there is any construction activity on the site. The plan shall be prepared as specified in section 35-14. 
(e)  Inspections and monitoring. The director shall have the authority to inspect and monitor discharges and sources of potential discharges to the storm drainage system to ensure compliance with this article, including the authority to enter upon private property to inspect or monitor such discharges or sources of potential discharge. The director shall also have the authority to initiate enforcement action in accordance with section 35-22. 
(Ord. No. 1915, 3-24-2014) 
Sec. 35-22. - Failure to comply; penalties and other legal actions. 
(a)  Notice of violation; stop work orders; reimbursement of costs. 
(1)  In addition to all other remedies in this section, if the director determines that the stormwater management permit holder has failed to comply with any plan required under section 35-7, the director shall immediately serve upon the permit holder, by registered or certified mail to the address specified by the permit holder in his permit application, a notice to comply. Such notice shall set forth specifically the measures needed to come into compliance with such plan or plans and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the permit holder fails to comply within the time specified, he may be subject to revocation of the permit and/or the cash bond may be used by the city at the direction of the director to correct the noted deficiencies. Any person may file a complaint under this section. Upon receipt of a sworn complaint of a substantial violation of this section, the director may, in conjunction with or subsequent to a notice to comply as specified above, issue a stop work order requiring that all or part of the land disturbing activities permitted on the site be stopped until the specified corrective measures have been taken or, if land disturbing activities have commenced without an approved plan, as provided in section 35-4, requiring that all of the land disturbing activities be stopped until an approved plan or any required permits are obtained. Where the alleged noncompliance is causing or is in imminent danger of causing harmful erosion of lands or sediment deposition in waters within the watersheds of the commonwealth, such an order may be issued whether or not the alleged violator has been issued a notice to comply as specified above. Otherwise, such an order may be issued only after the alleged violator has failed to comply with a notice to comply. The order shall be served in the same manner as a notice to comply, and shall remain in effect for seven days from the date of service pending application by the director or the alleged violator for appropriate relief to the circuit court. If the alleged violator has not obtained an approved plan or any required permits within seven days from the date of service of the order, the director may issue an order to the owner requiring that all construction and other work on the site, other than corrective measures, be stopped until an approved plan and any required permits have been obtained. Such an order shall be served upon the owner by registered or certified mail to the address specified in the permit application or the land records of the locality in which the site is located. The owner may appeal the issuance of an order to the circuit court. Any person violating or failing, neglecting or refusing to obey an order issued by the director may be compelled in a proceeding instituted in the circuit court to obey same and to comply therewith by injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate remedy. Upon completion and approval of corrective action or obtaining an approved plan or any required permits, the order shall immediately be lifted. 
(2)  If the city takes action upon failure to do so by the permittee, the city may collect from the permittee for the difference should the amount of the reasonable cost of such action exceed the amount of the surety held. Furthermore, he could be deemed to be in violation of this article and upon conviction could be subject to the penalties provided by this article. 
(3)  In the event that the violation of the approved landscape conservation plan was an encroachment or evidence of an encroachment into a tree preservation area, the applicant shall submit a mitigation plan subject to the approval of the director. This plan shall list remedial measures and the time within which such measures shall be completed by the applicant to ensure the continued preservation of the existing trees. This may include, but is not limited to, pruning, vertical mulching, and aerating. Bonding of the existing vegetation, in accordance with chapter 44, article II, division 5, may be required by the director. 
(4)  The director may require the replacement of any vegetation damaged in violation of the approved landscape conservation plan as part of the mitigation plan. The size, species and quantity of the replacement trees shall be calculated by the director based on the value of the trees removed as calculated by the latest formula published by the International Society of Arboriculture. The required replacement trees shall be included in the "mitigation plan" submitted by the applicant. Bonding of the replacement vegetation, in accordance with subsection 48-1143(b), may be required by the director. 
(b)  Failure to comply with stormwater management permit. 
(1)  If the director determines that there is a failure to comply with the conditions of the stormwater management permit or determines there is an unauthorized discharge, notice shall be served upon the permittee or person responsible for carrying out the permit conditions by any of the following: verbal warnings and inspection reports, notices of corrective action, consent special orders, and notices to comply. Written notices shall be served by registered or certified mail to the address specified in the permit application, or by delivery at the site of the development activities to the agent or employee supervising such activities. 
a.  The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the permit conditions and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. Upon failure to comply within the time specified, a stop work order may be issued in accordance with subsection b. or the permit may be revoked by the director. The director may also pursue enforcement in accordance with this section. 
b.  If a permittee fails to comply with a notice issued in accordance with this section within the time specified, the director may issue an order requiring the owner, permittee, person responsible for carrying out an approved plan, or the person conducting the land disturbing activities without an approved plan or required permit to cease all land disturbing activities until the violation of the permit has ceased, or an approved plan and required permits are obtained, and specified corrective measures have been completed. 
Such orders shall become effective upon service on the person by certified mail, return receipt requested, sent to his address specified in the land records of the locality, or by personal delivery by an agent of the director. However, if the director finds that any such violation is grossly affecting or presents an imminent and substantial danger of causing harmful erosion of lands or sediment deposition in waters within the watersheds of the commonwealth or otherwise substantially impacting water quality, it may issue, without advance notice or hearing, an emergency order directing such person to cease immediately all land disturbing activities on the site and shall provide an opportunity for a hearing, after reasonable notice as to the time and place thereof, to such person, to affirm, modify, amend, or cancel such emergency order. If a person who has been issued an order is not complying with the terms thereof, the director may institute a proceeding for an injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate remedy in accordance with subsection (3). 
(2)  In addition to any other remedy provided by this article, if the director or his or her designee determines that there is a failure to comply with the provisions of this article, the director may initiate such informal and/or formal administrative enforcement procedures in a manner that is consistent with general standards of due process, involving notice, hearing, chance to remedy or to explain and justify, ability to examine and cross examine witnesses, and ability to present witnesses and evidence. 
(3)  Any person violating or failing, neglecting, or refusing to obey any rule, regulation, ordinance, order, or any permit condition issued by the director or any provisions of this article may be compelled in a proceeding instituted in any appropriate court by the city to obey same and to comply therewith by injunction, mandamus or other appropriate remedy. 
(4)  Violations in this section shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $32,500.00 for each violation within the discretion of the court. Each day of violation of each requirement shall constitute a separate offense. 
a.  Violations for which a penalty may be imposed under this subsection shall include, but not be limited to: (i) no state permit registration; (ii) no SWPPP; (iii) an incomplete SWPPP; (iv) no SWPPP available for review; (v) no approved erosion and sediment control plan; (vi) failure to install stormwater BMPs or erosion and sediment controls; (vii) stormwater BMPs or erosion and sediment controls improperly installed or maintained; (viii) operational deficiencies; (ix) failure to conduct required inspections; (x) incomplete, improper, or missed inspections; and (xi) discharges not in compliance with the requirements of 9VAC25-880-70 of the general permit. 
b.  The director may issue a summons for collection of the civil penalty and the action may be prosecuted in the appropriate court. 
c.  In imposing a civil penalty pursuant to this subsection, the court may consider the degree of harm caused by the violation and also the economic benefit to the violator from noncompliance. 
d.  Any civil penalties assessed by a court as a result of a summons issued by the city shall be paid into the treasury of the city to be used for the purpose of minimizing, preventing, managing, or mitigating pollution of the waters of the city and abating environmental pollution therein in such manner as the court may, by order, direct. 
(5)  Notwithstanding any other civil or equitable remedy provided by this section or by law, any person who willfully or negligently violates provisions subject to this section or who willfully or negligently violates any order of the director, any condition of the stormwater management permit, or any order of a court shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by confinement in jail for not more than 12 months or a fine of not less than $2,500.00 nor more than $32,500.00, or both. 
(c)  Failure to comply with Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area requirements. In addition to any other penalties that may apply in this section, any person, whether as an owner, lessee, principal, agent, employee or otherwise, who violates any of the provisions of section 35-10 or section 35-11, or permits any such violation, or fails to comply with any of the requirements shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day upon which such violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. Furthermore, the director, through the city attorney, may apply to the circuit court of the county for injunctive relief to enjoin a violation or a threatened violation of this division. 
(d)  Failure to comply with erosion and sediment control requirements. In addition to any other penalties that may apply in this section, the following additional penalties may be applied to a person who violates the provisions of section 35-14: 
(1)  Violators under this section shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(2)  Any person who violates any regulation or order of the board, any condition of a permit, any provision of its program, or any provision of this article shall, upon a finding of an appropriate general district court, be assessed a civil penalty in accordance with the schedule listed under subsection (d)(9) of this section. A civil action for such violation may be brought by the locality wherein the land lies. In any trial for a scheduled violation, it shall be the burden of the locality to show the liability of the violator by a preponderance of the evidence. An admission or finding of liability shall not be a criminal conviction for purpose. Any civil penalties assessed by a court shall be paid into the treasury of the locality wherein the land lies, except that where the violator is the locality itself, or its agent, the court shall direct the penalty to be paid into the state treasury. 
(3)  The city may apply to the circuit court in any jurisdiction wherein the land lies to enjoin a violation or a threatened violation, under section 35-14, without the necessity of showing that an adequate remedy at law does not exist. 
(4)  In addition to any criminal or civil penalties provided under this section, any person who violates any provision of this article may be liable to the program authority, or the board, as appropriate, in a civil action for damages. 
(5)  Without limiting the remedies which may be obtained in this section, any person violating or failing, neglecting or refusing to obey any injunction, mandamus or other remedy obtained pursuant to this section shall be subject, in the discretion of the court, to a civil penalty not to exceed $2,000.00 for each violation. A civil action for such violation or failure may be brought by the locality wherein the land lies. Any civil penalties assessed by a court shall be paid into the treasury of the locality wherein the land lies, except that where the violator is the locality itself, or its agent, the court shall direct the penalty to be paid into the state treasury. 
(6)  With the consent of any person who has violated or failed, neglected or refused to obey any regulation or order of the board, or any condition of a permit or any provision of this article, the board, the director or plan approving or permit issuing authority may provide, in an order issued by the board or plan approving or permit issuing authority against such person, for the payment of civil charges for violations in specific sums, not to exceed the limit specified in subsection (d)(5) of this section. Such civil charges shall be instead of any appropriate civil penalty which could be imposed under subsections (d)(2) or (5) of this section. 
(7)  Upon request of the city, the attorney for the commonwealth shall take legal action to enforce the provisions of this article. Upon request of the board, the attorney general shall take appropriate legal action on behalf of the board to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(8)  Compliance with the provisions of this article shall be prima facie evidence in any legal or equitable proceeding for damages caused by erosion or sedimentation that all requirements of law have been met and the complaining party must show negligence in order to recover any damages. 
(9)  Any violations of any regulation or order of the board, any provision of its program, any condition of a permit, or any provision of this article shall be subject to a civil penalty. The civil penalty for any one violation shall be not less than $100.00, nor more than $1,000.00. Each day during which the violation is found to have existed shall constitute a separate offense. In no event shall a series of specified violations arising from the same operative set of facts result in civil penalties which exceed a total of $10,000.00, except that a series of violations arising from the commencement of land disturbing activities without an approved plan for any site shall not result in civil penalties which exceed a total of $10,000.00. Adoption of such an ordinance providing that violations are subject to a civil penalty shall be in lieu of criminal sanctions and shall preclude the prosecution of such violation as a misdemeanor under subsection (d)(1). 
(10)  Any person who violates any regulation or order of the board, any condition of a permit, any provision of its program, or any provision of this article shall, upon a finding of an appropriate general district court, be assessed a civil penalty in accordance with the schedule. A civil action for such violation may be brought by the locality wherein the land lies. In any trial for a scheduled violation, it shall be the burden of the locality to show the liability of the violator by a preponderance of the evidence. An admission or finding of liability shall not be a criminal conviction for any purpose. Any civil penalties assessed by a court shall be paid into the treasury of the locality wherein the land lies, except that where the violator is the locality itself, or its agent, the court shall direct the penalty to be paid into the state treasury. 
(Ord. No. 1915, 3-24-2014; Ord. No. 1928, 9-8-2014) 
Sec. 35-23. - Fees. 
(a)  Erosion and sediment control review and inspection fee. An erosion and sediment control review and inspection fee of $100.00, plus $20.00 per acre, or any fraction thereof, shall be paid to the city at the time of submission of plans to the director. 
(b)  Stormwater management permit fee. A stormwater management permit fee shall be paid to the city at the time of submission for a stormwater management permit. No stormwater management permit shall be issued or effective until the fee is paid. 
(1)  Fees associated with an initial stormwater management permit issuance shall be in accordance with the table titled "Stormwater Management Fees - Initial Permit Issuance." When a site or sites has been purchased for development within a previously permitted common plan of development or sale, the applicant shall be subject to fees in accordance with the disturbed acreage of their site or sites in the aforementioned table. 
(2)  Fees for the modification or transfer of general permit registration statements issued by the state board shall be imposed in accordance with the table titled "Stormwater Management Fees - Modifications or Transfers." If the general permit modifications result in changes to stormwater management plans that require additional review by the city, such reviews shall be subject to the fees set out in the aforementioned table. The fee assessed shall be based on the total disturbed acreage of the site. In addition to the modification fee, modifications resulting in an increase in total disturbed acreage shall pay the difference in the initial permit fee paid and the permit fee that would have been applied for the total disturbed acreage in accordance with subsection (b)(1). 
(3)  General permit coverage maintenance fees shall be paid to the city on or before April 1 of each year in accordance with the table titled "Stormwater Management Fees - Permit Maintenance." No permit will be re-issued or automatically continued without payment of the required fee. General permit coverage maintenance fees shall be applied until the permit coverage is terminated. Permit maintenance fees shall apply to expired permits that have been administratively continued. 
(4)  Persons whose coverage under the general permit has been revoked shall apply to the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality for an individual permit for discharges of stormwater from construction activities. 
(5)  Fees shall not be assessed to the following: 
a.  Permittees who request minor modifications to general permits as defined in section 35-2. Permit modifications at the request of the permittee resulting in changes to the stormwater management plan that require additional review by the director shall not be exempt pursuant to this subsection. 
b.  Permittees whose general permits are modified or amended at the initiative of the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality, excluding errors in the registration statement identified by the director or errors related to the acreage of the site. 
(6)  All incomplete payments will be deemed as nonpayments, and the applicant shall be notified of any incomplete payments. Interest shall be charged for late payments at the underpayment rate set forth in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-15, and is calculated on a monthly basis at the applicable periodic rate. A ten percent late payment fee shall be charged to any delinquent account, defined as over 90 days past due. The city is entitled to all remedies under the Code of Virginia in collecting any past due amount. 
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FEES - INITIAL PERMIT ISSUANCE: Total Fee Portion Paid to DEQ 1 Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act Land Disturbing Activity (sites equal to or greater than 2,500 SF and less than 1 acre within Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas but not subject to General Permit coverage) $290.00 $0 General/Stormwater Management - Small Activity (areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage less than 1 acre; except for single-family detached residential structures) $290.00 $81.00 General/Stormwater Management - Small Single-Family Detached Residential Activity (single-family detached residential structures within or outside a common plan of development or sale with land disturbance acreage less than 5 acres) $209.00 $0 General/Stormwater Management - Small Activity (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal or greater than 1 acre and less than 5 acres) $2,700.00 $756.00 General/Stormwater Management - Large Activity (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal or greater than 5 acres and less than 10 acres) $3,400.00 $952.00 General/Stormwater Management - Large Activity (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal or greater than 10 acres and less than 50 acres) $4,500.00 $1,260.00 General/Stormwater Management - Large Activity (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal or greater than 50 acres and less than 100 acres) $6,100.00 $1,708.00 General/Stormwater Management - Large Activity (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal or greater than 100 acres) $9,600.00 $2,688.00  
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FEES - MODIFICATIONS OR TRANSFERS: Total Fee General/Stormwater Management - Small Activity (areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage less than 1 acre, except for single-family detached residential structures) $20.00 General/Stormwater Management - Small Single-Family Detached Residential Activity (single-family detached residential structures within or outside a common plan of development or sale with land disturbance acreage less than 5 acres $20.00 General/Stormwater Management - Small Activity (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal or greater than 1 acre and less than 5 acres) $200.00 General/Stormwater Management - Large Activity (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal or greater than 5 acres and less than 10 acres) $250.00 General/Stormwater Management - Large Activity (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal or greater than 10 acres and less than 50 acres) $300.00 General/Stormwater Management - Large Activity (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal or greater than 50 acres and less than 100 acres) $450.00 General/Stormwater Management - Large Activity (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal or greater than 100 acres) $700.00 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FEES - PERMIT MAINTENANCE: Total Fee Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act Land Disturbing Activity (sites equal to or greater than 2,500 SF and less than 1 acre within Chesapeake Bay Preservation Areas but not subject to General Permit coverage) $50.00 General/Stormwater Management - Small Activity (areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage less than 1 acre, except for single-family detached residential structures) $50.00 General/Stormwater Management - Small Single-Family Detached Residential Activity (single-family detached residential structures within or outside a common plan of development or sale with land disturbance acreage less than 5 acres $50.00 General/Stormwater Management - Small Activity (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal or greater than 1 acre and less than 5 acres) $400.00 General/Stormwater Management - Large Activity (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal or greater than 5 acres and less than 10 acres) $500.00 General/Stormwater Management - Large Activity (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal or greater than 10 acres and less than 50 acres) $650.00 General/Stormwater Management - Large Activity (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal or greater than 50 acres and less than 100 acres) $900.00 General/Stormwater Management - Large Activity (sites or areas within common plans of development or sale with land disturbance acreage equal or greater than 100 acres) $1,400.00  
1  This is the portion of the total fee that is paid to the Virginia Department of Environmental Quality. If the project is completely administered by the Department such as may be the case for a state or federal project or projects covered by individual state permits, the entire applicant fee shall be paid to the Department. 
(Ord. No. 1915, 3-24-2014; Ord. No. 1928, 9-8-2014) 
Secs. 35-24-35-50. - Reserved. 
Chapter 36 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of city over streets and sidewalks, §§ 2.03, 2.04. 
Cross reference- Buildings, ch. 6; condominiums, § 6-48 et seq.; solid waste, ch. 34; motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 26; permit for parades and processions, § 26-13; bicycles, § 26-105 et seq.; noise, § 14-49 et seq.; alcoholic beverage on city property, § 28-92; use of alcoholic beverages in public places, § 28-93; debris, etc., in streets, § 28-155; games in streets, § 28-156; coasting prohibited, § 28-158; outdoor lighting, § 14-127; motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 26; utilities, ch. 42; subdivisions, ch. 38; sidewalk improvements in subdivisions, § 38-80; vehicles for hire, ch. 46; trees and shrubs, § 44-20 et seq.; planting of trees, shrubs and weeds along streets and public easements, § 44-24; underground utilities, § 42-231 et seq.; zoning, ch. 48. 
State Law reference- Authority of city with regard to streets and sidewalks, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-967; streets and alleys generally, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2000 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 36-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City manager means the city manager or the duly appointed representative of the city manager. 
    Duly appointed representative city manager's duly appointed representative shall be understood to mean the director of public works. 
    Improved means opened, graded, constructed, maintained or repaired. 
    Planting means anything that is put or set in the ground for growth. 
    Road means any land, street, alley, avenue, appurtenant structure or right-of-way construction on any public right-of-way in the city, including those dedicated for public use. 
    Structure means an assembly of materials forming a construction for occupancy or use, including, among others, buildings, gospel and circus tents, reviewing stands, platforms, staging observation towers, water tanks, open sheds, shelters, fences and display signs. 
(Code 1973, § 33-1; Code 1982, § 32-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 36-2. - House numbering. 
(a)  For purposes of applying numbers to residences and other buildings now or to be hereafter erected within the corporate limits of the city, the city shall be divided throughout by Washington and Broad Streets in four sections to be known for purposes of address and location as north, south, east and west. 
(b)  Beginning in each of the sections, north, south, east and west, as the case may be in any and all streets and running from Broad and Washington Streets, the unit and ten digits for all buildings to be numbered shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  On the right side of all streets and avenues, the numbers are to be even and, beginning at zero, increased by two for each 50 feet linear measure on the property line. 
(2)  On the left side of all streets and avenues, the numbers are to be odd and, beginning at one, increased by two for each 50 feet linear measure on the property line. 
(c)  The building inspector shall maintain a map which shall designate and control the numbering of buildings. 
(Code 1973, § 33-2; Code 1982, § 32-2) 
Cross reference- Housing, ch. 22. 
Sec. 36-3. - Vision at intersections. 
    It shall be unlawful, at any intersections, to have any plantings or structures which might obstruct vision as set forth in section 48-1103(c). 
(Code 1973, § 33-3; Code 1982, § 32-3) 
Sec. 36-4. - Obstructions. 
    No person shall, except with the consent of the city manager, obstruct any street, curb, sidewalk, street right-of-way or the free passage thereof. The city manager may direct the removal of such obstruction at the expense of the person responsible. 
(Code 1973, § 33-4; Code 1982, § 32-4) 
Sec. 36-5. - Private lampposts, signs, etc. 
    No private lamppost or other lamp support, light or sign shall be installed over any street or sidewalk, except as provided for in the zoning and outdoor lighting regulations. 
(Code 1973, § 33-5; Code 1982, § 32-5) 
Sec. 36-6. - Barbed wire fences. 
    No person shall construct any fence of barbed wire or similar material or place any such barbed wire or similar material along the line of any street or sidewalk or lot line within the corporate limits of the city, except in commercial areas when approved by the city manager. Any such barbed wire or similar material so erected or placed shall be removed at once, as directed by the city manager at the expense of the offender. 
(Code 1973, § 33-6; Code 1982, § 32-6) 
Sec. 36-7. - Assessments for construction of sidewalks. 
    Assessment for the construction of sidewalks upon any accepted street within the corporate limits of the city shall be made in compliance with the state requirements, as set out in Code of Virginia, § 15.1-239 et seq. 
(Code 1973, § 33-7; Code 1982, § 32-7) 
Cross reference- Sidewalk improvement in subdivisions, § 38-80. 
Sec. 36-8. - Assessments for construction of driveways. 
    All driveways on any city right-of-way necessary for entrance to any private property shall be constructed and maintained at the expense of the owner of the private property and under the direction and supervision of the department of public works. The cost of constructing and maintaining such driveways shall be assessed and collected in the same manner as other costs or taxes are assessed and collected. 
(Code 1973, § 33-8; Code 1982, § 32-8) 
Sec. 36-9. - Gates opening onto streets and sidewalks. 
    No gate shall be hung so as to open over any sidewalk or street unless, by reason of the contour of the land, it shall be impracticable for such gate to open otherwise, in which event the consent of the city manager must be secured before such gate is hung, and such gate shall be provided at all times with a spring, weight or other device which will cause it to remain closed when not in use. 
(Code 1973, § 33-9; Code 1982, § 32-9) 
Sec. 36-10. - Use of coasters, roller skates, etc. 
    No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device, shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk. 
(Code 1973, § 33-10; Code 1982, § 32-10) 
Cross reference- Coasting, § 28-158. 
Sec. 36-11. - Interfering with or damaging street lights, markers or signs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, without legal authority, to extinguish, obstruct, damage or interfere with any streetlight, marker or sign within the city. 
(Code 1973, § 33-11; Code 1982, § 32-11) 
Sec. 36-12. - Emergency closing of streets. 
    Whenever, in the judgment of the city manager, an emergency shall exist, construction or repair work upon any street or part thereof shall require or other conditions affecting traffic shall necessitate, the city manager is hereby authorized and empowered to close temporarily any street or any part thereof within the city. Streets shall be closed by placing or causing to be placed suitable barriers so marked and lettered and so lighted by night that it may be clearly apparent at all times that such street or highway, or part thereof, is closed to vehicular traffic. It shall be unlawful for any person to move such barriers or to operate a motor vehicle over such streets. 
(Code 1973, § 33-12; Code 1982, § 32-12) 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic generally, ch. 26. 
Sec. 36-13. - Temporary one-way streets. 
    The city manager is hereby authorized, during the course of any street construction or repair within the city or in the event of any temporary emergency which in the judgment of the city manager requires such action, to declare any street or part thereof to be a one-way street for the term of the construction, repair or other emergency. The city manager may cause to be placed suitable notices for the guidance of vehicular traffic. The city manager may make such rules as may be necessary for the regulation of traffic in the respective directions. The city manager may make all necessary arrangements for the proper policing of same. 
(Code 1973, § 33-13; Code 1982, § 32-13) 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic generally, ch. 26. 
Sec. 36-14. - Permitting land to wash upon sidewalks, streets. 
    Owners of land or persons in control of land abutting upon streets shall protect such land so as to prevent sand, gravel, earth, trash or other like things from falling or being washed upon the streets, driveways or sidewalks. 
(Code 1973, § 33-14; Code 1982, § 32-14) 
Sec. 36-15. - Burning. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to burn, on any public street, alley or sidewalk of the city, any box, plank, packing, straw, paper, debris, trash, rubbish, leaves or any other substance or material. 
(Code 1973, § 33-15; Code 1982, § 32-15) 
Sec. 36-16. - Distribution of handbills, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, or cause to be distributed, handbills, circulars, cards or other advertising matter of any kind on the streets or on any utility poles, or on the sidewalks of the city by: 
(1)  Depositing such matter in or upon any automobile or other vehicle which may be located in the street or parking lots; 
(2)  Depositing them in the streets or on the sidewalks; or 
(3)  Placing them in doorways or other places opening directly on or abutting a street or sidewalk. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, or cause to be distributed, handbills, circulars, cards or other advertising matter by depositing or casting same in such a manner as to cause litter on the porches, in the vestibules or in the front yards of private residences in the city. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prevent the distribution of envelopes containing the articles mentioned herein or of newspapers, by depositing same on the porches or in the vestibules of private residences, or by placing them in doorways or other places fronting directly on the streets or sidewalks. 
(Code 1973, § 33-16; Code 1982, § 32-16) 
Sec. 36-17. - Snow or ice removal. 
(a)  Whenever snow or ice shall fall and/or lie on the sidewalks of the city, it shall be the duty of each tenant in possession or, if there is none, the owner to clean the snow or ice from the sidewalk in front of the place possessed or owned by such person, as the case may be. The tenant in possession or owner shall clean the snow or ice within 12 hours after the snow shall have ceased to fall or the ice accumulate, unless same is at night; and if at night, then within 12 hours after sunrise the next day. In those instances where the abutting property is not used for residential purposes, the snow or ice shall be removed within six hours after the snow shall have ceased to fall or the ice accumulate, unless the same is at night; and if at night, then within six hours after sunrise the next day. It will be unlawful for any person to move into any city street any snow or ice that has fallen or accumulated on the property of such person. 
(b)  Violation of the provisions of this section shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.00 for the first offense within any five-year period. In instances where the abutting property is used for residential purposes, a second offense within a five year period shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $200.00; and for a third offense within a five-year period, by a fine not to exceed $500.00. In instances where the abutting property is used for commercial purposes, a second offense within a five-year period shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $300.00; for a third offense within a five-year period, by a fine not to exceed $750.00. 
(Code 1973, § 33-17; Code 1982, § 32-17; Ord. No. 1044, 4-11-1983; Ord. No. 1369, 9-9-1991) 
Secs. 36-18-36-37. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - IMPROVEMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Subdivisions, ch. 38. 

Sec. 36-38. - Subdivision plats. 
    All subdivision plats shall be submitted as required under chapters 38 and 48, pertaining to subdivision and zoning respectively. 
(Code 1973, § 33-18; Code 1982, § 32-18) 
Sec. 36-39. - Bond; issuance of permit. 
(a)  Before issuing any permit, the city manager shall require the posting of a performance bond issued by a reputable insurance company, surety or bonding company. The performance bond shall be in the amount estimated by the director of public works to cover the entire project, which shall include all underground utilities, storm sewers, streets, curbs and gutters, sidewalks and any other items of street improvement specified in the plans and specifications. 
(b)  When the required final approval has been granted and the approved plans and specifications have been placed on file in the office of the city manager and the proper bond posted as specified, the city manager shall then issue a permit for the improvement. 
(Code 1973, § 33-19; Code 1982, § 32-19) 
Sec. 36-40. - Term of permit. 
    A permit shall be valid for six months from the date that it is issued; except the city manager may renew any permit for good reason shown. 
(Code 1973, § 33-20; Code 1982, § 32-20) 
Sec. 36-41. - Inspections. 
    Inspection service shall be maintained at all times by the city to ensure the approved standards of the city are maintained as given in the approved plans and specifications for the project are complied with. 
(Code 1973, § 33-21; Code 1982, § 32-21) 
Sec. 36-42. - Construction standards. 
    All road construction in the city shall conform to the requirements as set forth in the state department of highway, road and bridge specifications of July 1, 1978, and the Virginia Department of Highways Road Design and Standards, 1978 edition, hereafter referred to as the city road construction standards. 
(Code 1973, § 33-22; Code 1982, § 32-22) 
Sec. 36-43. - Data sheets. 
    The city manager shall maintain a data sheet, giving all information of the required public utilities; the dates of completion; the names of the indemnity or surety companies; the amount of the bond; space for notations of inspections and approval or rejection. These data sheets shall be supplied to each department as a reminder and a guide, and a copy shall be attached to the bond and periodically brought up to date to reflect the necessary information. 
(Code 1973, § 33-23; Code 1982, § 32-23) 
Sec. 36-44. - Final approval of construction. 
(a)  Final approval by the city manager shall be granted only after a field inspection of the completed construction. 
(b)  Final approval by the city manager shall constitute eligibility for maintenance by the city, but in no sense shall require it. 
(Code 1973, § 33-24; Code 1982, § 32-24) 
Sec. 36-45. - Acceptance by city. 
    When a project has been constructed in accordance with the engineering and material requirements of the city road construction standards, upon recommendation of the city manager, the council can accept such street for maintenance and incorporation into the street system of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 33-25; Code 1982, § 32-25) 
Sec. 36-46. - Street name. 
    A city street name shall be assigned to any road accepted by the council, and it shall be added to the official list of the city streets on file in the office of the building inspector. 
(Code 1973, § 33-26; Code 1982, § 32-26) 
Secs. 36-47-36-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 36-66. - Permit; fees. 
(a)  No person shall damage, destroy, cut or dig in or on or drill or excavate under any part of any street, sidewalk or other public property within the corporate limits for the purpose of installing, connecting, locating, relocating or repairing any pipe, main, conduit, cable, wire, pole, sign or support or for any other purpose, unless and until such person has obtained a permit from the department of public works. 
(b)  Fees for excavating shall be as established by the city council which shall schedule fees by resolution. 
(Code 1973, § 33-27; Code 1982, § 32-27) 
Sec. 36-67. - Standards. 
    All excavations into any road in the city shall be done in accordance with section 36-42. 
(Code 1973, § 33-28; Code 1982, § 32-28) 
Sec. 36-68. - Roadway closure. 
    Unless specifically authorized by the city manager, no excavation shall be made in such a manner as to close more than one-half of any roadway. The first section of the excavation shall be filled and placed in proper condition for travel before the second section is excavated. 
(Code 1973, § 33-29; Code 1982, § 32-29) 
Sec. 36-69. - Restoration. 
    Subject to approval by the city manager, all public and private property shall be restored to condition as good as or better than before excavation or other work was commenced. All portions of any street excavated shall be put in condition as good as or better than before excavation was made. The excavation shall be backfilled with approved material and thoroughly rammed (and puddle, if required) within 48 hours after making any connections or repairs. The ramming shall be done in six-inch layers. All rubbish and foreign material shall be removed within the time designated for the completion of the work. 
(Code 1973, § 33-30; Code 1982, § 32-30) 
Sec. 36-70. - Correction of dangerous conditions by city. 
    Should any excavation or trench become dangerous to persons or property for any reason or interfere with traffic in any unnecessary manner, the necessary filling, shoring, repairs and like work may be done by the department of public works and the costs charged to and collected from the holder of the permit in the case. 
(Code 1973, § 33-31; Code 1982, § 32-31) 
Secs. 36-71-36-98. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TEMPORARY STORAGE SITES 

Sec. 36-99. - Requirements. 
    No permit is issuable under the provisions of this chapter without a provision for temporary storage of equipment and materials to be used in the work, if such storage is necessary in the performance of the work. The applicant for such permit shall exhibit a written permission or lease to use any land for a storage site, private or public, detailing the terms, but not necessarily the consideration therefor. The permit shall limit the use of a storage site to a certain day but for good cause, such use may be extended. Such application shall be accompanied by a corporate bond or cash deposit in the principal sum of $100,000.00, conditioned upon the removal of equipment and materials and the restoration of the grounds. A further condition of the bond or deposit shall provide that in event there is a default, after ten days' notice, the city may make such removals and restorations and be compensated therefor by the surety or from the cash deposit. In the event no necessity for storage was foreseen at the time of application for a permit but such need arose subsequently thereto, the permittee shall apply for an amended permit to meet the conditions imposed by this section. Failure to so apply within three days from the beginning of such temporary storage shall be cause for a cease and desist order directed to the use of such storage site. The director of public works is authorized to initiate a suit for the restraining order to obtain compliance with the conditions set out in this section. 
(Code 1982, § 32-32; Ord. No. 599) 
Secs. 36-100-36-126. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SAFETY STANDARDS FOR UNDERGROUND INSTALLATION OF UTILITIES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 42; underground utilities, § 42-231 et seq. 

Sec. 36-127. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to enumerate the policies of the city and utility operators serving the city for use in the effective prevention of construction-related accidents resulting in and/or from utility line disruptions. 
(Code 1982, § 32-33; Ord. No. 651) 
Sec. 36-128. - Goals and objectives. 
    This article is enacted in order to: 
(1)  Facilitate the protection of persons and property from death or injury which may result from the destruction of, disruption of, or damage to underground utility lines during excavation or demolition. 
(2)  Protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the community by preventing the interruption of essential services resulting from the destruction of, disruption of, or damage to underground utility lines during excavation or demolition. 
(Code 1982, § 32-34; Ord. No. 651) 
Sec. 36-129. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this article are intended to encompass: 
(1)  All utility operators serving any portion of or maintaining any utility line within, the city, and the representatives thereof. 
(2)  All contractors performing demolition or excavation on any private property, public right-of-way, or public easement within the city. 
(Code 1982, § 32-35; Ord. No. 651) 
Sec. 36-130. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Blasting means the use of an explosive to excavate. 
    Contractor means any person, including a subcontractor, who contracts with an operator or property owner, public or private, for the purpose of engaging in excavation, demolition or blasting. 
    Demolition means the razing of any structure above the existing grade, or the demolition of any structure below the existing grade. 
    Emergency means any condition which may cause an interruption of essential services resulting from the destruction of, disruption of, or damage to underground utility lines. The term "emergency" is classified as less severe than the term "hazardous." 
    Excavate means the movement or removal of earth, using mechanized equipment or blasting, and includes auguring, backfilling, digging, ditching, drilling, grading, plowing-in, pulling-in, ripping, scraping, trenching and tunneling. 
    Hazardous means any condition which may cause an interruption of essential services and, in addition, may result in death or injury to persons or property due to destruction of, disruption of, or damage to underground utility lines. The term "hazardous" is classified as more severe than the term "emergency." 
    Mechanized equipment means powered equipment used to excavate, and includes equipment used for plowing-in or pulling-in cable or pipe. 
    Operator means any person who furnishes or transports any of the following materials or services by means of a utility line: 
(1)  Flammable, natural, toxic, or, corrosive gas. 
(2)  Petroleum, petroleum products and hazardous liquids. 
(3)  Electricity. 
(4)  Sanitary sewer. 
(5)  Communications. 
(6)  Water. 
    Property owner means any person who owns fee title to or leases a given area of land, excluding, however, any recorded easement or right-of-way. 
    Utility line means any underground conduit and its related facilities, including pipe or cable, by which an operator furnishes or transports materials or services. 
    Working days means Monday through Friday, excluding, however, any public and legal holidays. 
(Code 1982, § 32-36; Ord. No. 651) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 36-131. - Violations. 
(a)  Whoever violates any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a criminal penalty not to exceed 30 days' imprisonment or by a fine not to exceed $300.00, or both. Each day a violation of this article shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  If, during excavation or demolition, an underground utility line is damaged by any person who has failed to comply with any provision of this article, any permit acquired through the city to perform work related to such excavation or demolition (including permits for building, grading, blasting, plumbing, electrical and/or mechanical) may be revoked and any fees paid to the city for such permit may be forfeited. In order to continue work, a new application for a permit must be filed; plans of the proposed excavation or demolition must be reexamined; the location of all existing utility lines must be verified in writing by each operator having facilities in the area of proposed excavation or demolition; and new fees, if forfeited, must be paid. 
(c)  Any person who is convicted of a violation of any provision of this article which resulted in damage to an existing utility line shall be subject to suspension or revocation of any license or permit to perform related work for a period not to exceed 12 months, if so convicted two or more times within a 12-month period. Furthermore, no subsequent permits or licenses to perform such related work shall be issued to such convicted persons during that suspension or revocation period. 
(Code 1982, § 32-37; Ord. No. 651) 
Sec. 36-132. - Applicability of existing ordinances. 
(a)  No provision of this article shall exclude any person from complying with the requirements and provisions of any existing ordinances including those of this Code, the State Corporation Commission, and the Office of Pipeline Safety of the U.S. Department of Transportation or the U.S. Department of Labor. 
(b)  In cases of conflict between this article and any other parts of this Code, this article takes precedence. 
(Code 1982, § 32-38; Ord. No. 651) 
Sec. 36-133. - Administration and enforcement. 
    The administrative authority of this article shall be the director of the department of public works and such duly appointed agents as may be authorized by the director, any one of whom may perform the tasks and may make inspections required by this article and may take steps as may be reasonably necessary to enforce its provisions. 
(Code 1982, § 32-39; Ord. No. 651) 
Sec. 36-134. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The requirements of this section shall not apply to any property owner who, without the aid of a contractor, is performing work within the boundaries of such owner's property which does not require the acquisition of any permit issued by the city. 
(b)  The requirements of section 36-135 shall not apply to any person acting as or for the operator of a damaged line in making repairs to its own underground facilities or repairs to the streets or alleys themselves in a condition of emergency when such repairs must be made within a shorter period of time than that provided for in section 36-135(a); provided this exemption from obtaining information shall not excuse the person making the excavation from any liability for damages caused by the negligence of such person. 
(Code 1982, § 32-40; Ord. No. 651) 
Sec. 36-135. - Demolition or excavation-Prior notice. 
(a)  Contractors shall notify all operators who maintain underground utility lines in the area of the proposed excavation or blasting at least two working days, but not more than ten working days, prior to commencement of such excavation or demolition. This notification shall consist at least of the following: 
(1)  The contractor's name and telephone number. 
(2)  The name of the person for whom the proposed work is being done. 
(3)  The date and approximate time work is to commence. 
(4)  The location and approximate depth of proposed work. 
(5)  The nature of work to be done. 
(6)  The contractor's field representative or field contact, if any. 
(7)  Any special remarks. 
(b)  The telephone number to be utilized for serving notice to operators as required in subsection (a) of this section shall be located at least on the approved site plan, subdivision plan, or engineering plan which is to be at the site during excavation or demolition as required in section 36-136(c). 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any contractor to commence excavation or demolition on any property without first receiving clearance for excavation from each operator as provided in section 36-137(a). 
(Code 1982, § 32-41; Ord. No. 651) 
Sec. 36-136. - Same-Performance. 
(a)  Verification that rough grading is to within six inches of finished grade must be provided to the operator in writing by the contractor or property owner before such operator shall commence excavation for the installation of its utility lines. 
(b)  When excavation approaches the estimated location of any existing utility line which shall have been previously located horizontally as provided in section 36-137(a), the exact location of such existing utility line must be determined by adequately exposing same by hand digging within the proposed limits of excavation before excavation may resume. To prevent damage to such exposed existing utility line or the protective coating, proper supports shall be provided where required. 
(c)  Any contractor performing excavation or demolition is required to have an approved site plan, subdivision plan or engineering plan indicating the plan view of all known existing and proposed utility lines, with the exception of house service laterals, at the site during excavation or demolition. 
(d)  Any person who is designated to operate mechanized equipment for the purpose of excavation or demolition shall not perform such excavation or demolition until such person has examined the plan provided in subsection (c) of this section. 
(e)  The act of obtaining information, as required by this article, shall not excuse any person making any excavation or demolition from doing so in a careful and prudent manner, nor shall it excuse such person from liability for any damage resulting from negligence of such person. 
(Code 1982, § 32-42; Ord. No. 651) 
Sec. 36-137. - Excavation. 
(a)  An operator who has received notification of a proposed excavation pursuant to section 36-135(a) and who has received, if applicable, verification of site grading pursuant to section 36-136(a) shall provide clearance for excavation to the contractor before such excavation may commence by: 
(1)  At least one hour prior to the commencement of the proposed excavation, horizontally locating its utility lines at the site, and notifying the contractor that this marking has been accomplished; or 
(2)  Notifying the contractor that the proposed excavation will not affect its existing utility lines. 
(b)  Horizontal location of utility lines at the site of excavation shall consist of a permanent marking system approved by the department of public works, or the state corporation commission, or a temporary marking system approved by the city manager, clearly and definitely indicating the horizontal location of the operator's facilities. 
(c)  To expedite horizontal location of utility lines, each operation shall: 
(1)  Provide locating services to mark all facilities affected by the excavation. 
(2)  Provide to designing engineers horizontal location data on its utility lines prior to the field survey for designing new work so such information on existing utility lines may be included in survey notes. 
(3)  Have the option to allow the locating crew of another operator to horizontally locate such facilities provided clearance to do so has been given in writing. 
(4)  Indicate the horizontal location of their utility lines on a site map, if requested by the contractor. 
(d)  When trenches excavated for the installation of gas pipelines are backfilled, a continuous tape or similarly effective device shall be installed after tamping 18 inches above all direct burial plastic mains and 12 inches above services, stubs and stub extensions. The tap shall be not less than three inches wide, brilliant in color and imprinted with words clearly defining the utility line as "gas." The tape shall be impregnated with metal so that locating equipment can readily pick it up. The remainder of the backfill may then be placed. 
(e)  When repairs are made to underground gas pipelines, and/or the tape and related requirements, as provided in subsection (d) of this section, have been disrupted or severed during excavation, such tape shall be installed or replaced at the completion of repairs prior to backfilling. 
(Code 1982, § 32-43; Ord. No. 651) 
Sec. 36-138. - Demolition. 
    An operator who received notification of a proposed demolition, pursuant to section 36-135(a), shall ensure clearance for demolition by: 
(1)  Disconnecting, or causing to be disconnected, as agreed upon by the operator and contractor, all of its utility lines to the structure to be demolished, as well as capping where necessary. 
(2)  Advising the contractor of the appropriate means of ensuring adequate protection for its other utility lines in the vicinity which might be subject to unusual stress during the demolition. 
(3)  Notifying, or causing to be notified, the contractor that such disconnection has been accomplished or that its utility lines will not be affected by such demolition. 
(Code 1982, § 32-44; Ord. No. 651) 
Sec. 36-139. - Standards and procedures. 
(a)  The horizontal location of all existing underground utility lines and those underground utility lines proposed by any operator shall be indicated on all site plans, subdivision plans, or engineering plans prior to city approval. 
(b)  Depending upon the size and importance of the utility line to be affected, the affected operator shall determine whether or not an inspection by its representative at the site of excavation is necessary during the crossing of its utility lines. 
(c)  Meetings shall be scheduled by the city manager to be held at least quarterly. Those in attendance shall be the utility operator, the contractor, and the city representatives. Proposed projects of excavation or demolition, problems incurred on excavation projects during the previous time period and any other information pertaining to the operation of this article may be discussed. 
(d)  Preconstruction meetings between contractors and utility operators should be scheduled prior to all excavation projects. 
(Code 1982, § 32-45; Ord. No. 651) 
Sec. 36-140. - Responsibilities of contractor. 
(a)  Communication between the job site and the contractor's base office shall be maintained at all times through the use of a two-way radio system or some other means approved by the director of public works. 
(b)  When any person damages a utility line or its protective coating or accidentally exposes or severs a utility line during excavation or demolition, an emergency condition shall be deemed to exist and the operator of such utility line shall be directly notified at that time. 
(c)  When any gas or flammable liquid utility line is severed or damaged to the extent that there is escapement of its contents, a hazardous condition shall be deemed to exist and the operator of such utility line and the director of public works of the city shall be immediately notified. 
(d)  Contractors shall display in plain sight on the instrument or control pane, or dash of all trucks and mechanized equipment operated by them, the current telephone number which is to be utilized to serve a hazardous condition notice as required in subsection (c) of this section. 
(e)  The telephone numbers to be utilized in serving an emergency condition notice as required in subsection (b) of this section shall be located at least on the approved site plan, subdivision plan, or engineering plan which is to be at the site during excavation or demolition as required by section 36-136(c). 
(f)  It shall be unlawful to backfill around a damaged utility line, as described in subsection (b) or (c) of this section until the operator of such utility line has been notified of such incident and has repaired the damage and/or has given clearance to backfill in writing. 
(g)  During an emergency or hazardous condition, it shall be lawful to excavate without using blasting, if notification, as required in section 36-135(a), is given as soon as reasonably possible. 
(Code 1982, § 32-46; Ord. No. 651) 
Sec. 36-141. - Responsibilities of operator. 
(a)  All operators shall make available on a 24-hour basis adequate emergency response crews including answering personnel, radio dispatchers, appliance service personnel, and utility repair crews capable of performing all work tasks necessary to cope with emergency or hazardous situations. The number of emergency work crews shall be determined by the operator based upon reasonable response time (one hour maximum to emergency scene during other than work hours) and the number and frequency of experiences recorded. 
(b)  All reports of hazardous conditions received by operators shall be reported immediately to the director of public works for the city. All reports of hazardous conditions received by the director of public works shall be reported immediately to the appropriate operator. 
(c)  Emergency shutoff valves shall be provided for all new gas service line installations such that: 
(1)  All gas services supplying inside meters shall be equipped with an outside shutoff at the curb or property line. Access shall be through a stopcock box, the top of which is flush with the surrounding grade. 
(2)  Steel or copper services to outside meters shall be equipped with an outside shutoff, as provided in subsection (c)(1) of this section, and an aboveground shutoff at the meter. 
(3)  Plastic services to outside meters shall be equipped with an outside shutoff at the meter. 
(d)  The decision to shut off a utility line during a hazardous condition shall be vested in an appropriate representative of the utility company concerned. When time permits, the city manager or designated representative shall be notified before the operator decides whether or not to shut off a utility line during a hazardous condition. 
(e)  When adequate operator emergency response crews are not available during a hazardous condition, the operator involved shall employ the director of public works to take the necessary action to shut off specific utility line valves or breakers serving the area. 
(1)  In order to facilitate this, the department of public works shall have knowledge of and access to emergency shutoff valves and breakers. In addition, effective 90 days after the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the appropriate staff of that department shall be trained in the use of implements employed to shut off a utility line during a hazardous condition. Information and training is to be provided by and through the cooperation of utility representatives. 
(2)  Only the appropriate utility line representatives shall be permitted to reopen any valve or breaker which was closed during such a hazardous condition and only after a thorough check has indicated that it is safe to place the affected lines back into service. 
(3)  The provisions of this subsection shall not be mandatory upon the operators of flammable, natural, toxic, or corrosive gas transmission pipelines. 
(Code 1982, § 32-47; Ord. No. 651) 
Secs. 36-142-36-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PUBLIC PARKING LOTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 26. 

Sec. 36-166. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Parking lot means any surface area used for pedestrian ways, loading and standing spaces, aisles, entrances or exits on private property maintained for the parking of motor vehicles, excepting on a street, alley or other public place, where such parking is permitted upon payment of compensation or is made available free of charge to employees, patrons, clients or customers of any place of business or institution. The term "parking lot," as used in this article, also embraces the definitions for the terms "parking lot" and "public parking lot" found in section 48-2. 
(Code 1982, § 32-48; Ord. No. 618) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 36-167. - Required maintenance. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or extend to public use a parking lot in the city which is in disrepair by reason of potholes, excavations or broken surfaces which constitute a hazard to the health and safety of users or which may reasonably cause damage to vehicles operated thereon. 
(Code 1982, § 32-49; Ord. No. 618) 
Sec. 36-168. - Notice of violation. 
    Wherever a parking lot is in disrepair, the director of public works shall give the owner or agent written notice. Such notice shall require the correction of such disrepair within 30 days. 
(Code 1982, § 32-50; Ord. No. 618) 
Sec. 36-169. - Failure to make repairs; assessment of costs. 
    If correction of any disrepair of a parking lot complained of is not made by the owner or agent within the required 30 days, the director of public works shall cause the disrepair to be corrected, and the cost shall be assessed against the owner of such parking lot. 
(Code 1982, § 32-51; Ord. No. 618) 
Sec. 36-170. - Assessment to constitute lien. 
    The assessment provided in section 36-169, if not promptly paid, shall constitute a lien on such property. Such lien shall be promptly recorded in the land records of the county by the city treasurer and such lien and costs of its recording shall be collected in the same manner as tax liens. 
(Code 1982, § 32-52; Ord. No. 618) 
Secs. 36-171-36-193. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY USE FEE 

Sec. 36-194. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Access lines includes residence and business telephone lines and other switched common lines connecting a customer's or end user's premises located in the city to the end office switch, but does not include local, state and federal government lines, access lines used to provide service to users as part of the state universal service plan, interstate and intrastate dedicated WATS lines, special access lines, off-premises extensions, and official lines used by certificated providers of telecommunications services for administrative, testing, intercept and verification purposes, or commercial mobile radio service lines. 
    Certificated provider of telecommunications services or certificated provider means a public service corporation holding a certificate issued by the State Corporation Commission of Virginia to provide local exchange or inter-exchange telephone service. 
    Public rights-of-way use fee means a fee charged and billed monthly to the ultimate end user of each access line of a certificated provider of local exchange telephone service, the rate of which fee shall be established annually by the Virginia Department of Transportation in the manner specified in Code of Virginia, § 56-468.1. 
(Code 1982, § 32-53; Ord. No. 1617, 8-10-1998) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 36-195. - Public rights-of-way use fee. 
(a)  Pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 56-468.1, as amended, the city elects to adopt the public rights-of-way use fee provided for by said code section. Accordingly, there is hereby imposed upon each access line of every certificated provider of telecommunications services a public rights-of-way use fee in the amount to be calculated annually by the state department of transportation under Code of Virginia, § 56-468.1 C. 
(b)  Every certificated provider that provides local exchange telephone service to end users in the city shall collect the public rights-of-way use fee on a per-access-line basis by adding the fee to each end user's monthly bill for local exchange telephone service. 
(c)  Until the end user pays the public rights-of-way use fee to the certificated provider, the fee shall constitute a debt of the user that is owed to the city. Whenever an end user fails or refuses to pay the fee, the certificated provider shall notify the city treasurer of the end user's identity and the total amount of fees that the user has refused or failed to pay. Such notification of unpaid use fees shall be provided to the city treasurer within two months after the end of each calendar quarter. 
(d)  After an end user pays the public rights-of-way use fee to the certificated provider, the collected fee shall be deemed to be held in trust by the provider until remitted to the city treasurer. Within two months after the end of each calendar quarter, the certificated provider shall remit directly to the city treasurer all public use fees that it has collected from end users during the quarter. 
(e)  Every certificated provider shall keep complete records showing all public rights-of-way use fees collected in each calendar quarter. Such records shall be kept open for inspection by the city treasurer or designee. 
(Code 1982, § 32-54; Ord. No. 1617, 8-10-1998) 
Sec. 36-196. - Purpose; other allowable fees. 
    The public rights-of-way use fee shall be in lieu of, and not in addition to, the permit inspection and other fees of general application imposed under this Code on certificated providers of telecommunications services. No certificated provider of telecommunications services shall be required to pay such permit or inspection fees or any other city fees (except for zoning, subdivision, site plan and comprehensive plan fees of general application) as a condition of, or as compensation for, its use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Code 1982, § 32-55; Ord. No. 1617, 8-10-1998) 
Sec. 36-197. - Other requirements. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall relieve any certificated provider from complying with the requirements and restrictions imposed by this Code, or by other law or regulations, regarding its use of and activities within public rights of way in the city, including but not limited to the placement, construction, repair, maintenance and removal of its facilities; provided that any permit or other permission required by this Code or city regulations that is sought by a certificated provider shall be granted or denied within 45 days of the submission of a complete application, and that any denial shall be accompanied by a written explanation of the reasons for the denial and the actions required to cure the denial. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall affect the amount payable by a certificated provider for the right to locate towers, place facilities, or otherwise use property of the city other than public rights-of-way. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall affect the authority of the city to impose a franchise fee upon cable television franchisees, or the obligation of such franchisees to pay the franchise fee imposed upon them pursuant to chapter 10. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall affect the authority of the city to impose a franchise fee upon persons who locate facilities or otherwise use public rights-of-way for purposes other than the provision of local exchange or inter-exchange telephone service or the provision of cable television service. 
(Code 1982, § 32-56; Ord. No. 1617, 8-10-1998) 
Chapter 38 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Power of city as to land subdivision, §§ 17.26 through 17.35. 
Cross reference- Planning department, § 2-90 et seq.; buildings, ch. 6; condominiums, § 6-48 et seq.; housing, ch. 22; outdoor lighting, § 14-127 et seq.; water recreation facilities, § 8-425 et seq.; utilities, ch. 42; streets and sidewalks, ch. 36; street improvements, § 36-38 et seq.; underground utilities, § 42-231 et seq.; zoning, ch. 48. 
State Law reference- Land subdivision and development, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2240 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alley means a minor public street, primarily designed to serve as access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on some other street. 
    Condominium means the ownership of single units in a multiunit organization, consisting of land and building, in which the owner has title to own such unit and, with the owners of other units, has an individual, undivided interest in the common areas and facilities that serve the development. 
    Condominium project means a real estate development, plan or project, whereby a group of apartments, rooms, offices or other commercial or noncommercial units, existing or proposed, whether the unit involves a single structure attached to or detached from other units or is in one or more multiple unit structures on single or contiguous parcels of real estate are offered or proposed to be offered for sale. 
    Cooperative means the individual ownership of stock in a corporation with the right, through a proprietary lease, to occupy a unit in an apartment building or other multiunit development. 
    Cul-de-sac means a local street with only one outlet and having an appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement. 
    Easement means a grant by a property owner of the use of land for a specific purpose. 
    Street means a strip of land subject to vehicular or pedestrian traffic and providing direct or indirect means of access to property, including but not limited to road, lane, drive, trail, court, place, terrace, alley, avenue, highway, boulevard or any other thoroughfare. 
    Street, public, means an existing or platted street graded and paved or to be graded and paved, and dedicated for the use of the general public. 
    Street width means the shortest distance between the lines which delineate the right-of-way of a street. 
    Subdivision means a division of land into two or more lots for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or building development, including all changes in street or lot lines or the consolidation of two or more lots or parcels. 
(Code 1982, § 31-1; Ord. No. 961, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 38-2. - Authority. 
    This chapter was adopted pursuant to the terms and provisions of the Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2240 et seq. and the Charter of the city, section 17.26 et seq. 
(Code 1982, § 31-2; Ord. No. 961, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982) 
Sec. 38-3. - Applicability; plats required; recordation. 
    Any tract of land lying wholly or partly within the corporate limits of the city shall be subdivided, as provided for in this chapter, and a plat of such subdivision with reference to known or permanent monuments shall be made in accordance with the regulations set forth in this chapter. A copy of the plat shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of the circuit court. 
(Code 1982, § 31-3; Ord. No. 961, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982) 
Sec. 38-4. - Approval of plat required. 
    No person shall sell or transfer any land in a subdivision, nor shall a permit for the erection of a structure or the installation of public improvements be granted for any area laid out wholly or partly within the corporate limits of the city, until a final subdivision plat, prepared in accordance with the regulations set forth in this chapter, shall have been approved by the planning commission and recorded with the clerk of the circuit court, unless such subdivision was lawfully created prior to the adoption of this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 31-4; Ord. No. 961, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982) 
Sec. 38-5. - Recordation of plat subject to approval. 
    The clerk of the circuit court shall not file or record any plat or any copy required by this chapter to be recorded, unless such plat or copy shall have been approved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Recordation shall not be valid unless such approval is evidenced on the plat or copy and unless the plat is presented for recordation prior to expiration of the validity period of plat approval, all in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 31-5; Ord. No. 961, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982) 
Secs. 38-6-38-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REQUIREMENTS FOR PLATS 

Sec. 38-29. - Submission of plats. 
    Copies of all plats required by the provisions of this article shall be submitted to the office of the planning department. The number of copies required for submission shall be determined by the planning director. 
(Code 1982, § 31-6; Ord. No. 961, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982) 
Sec. 38-30. - Preliminary and final plats required. 
(a)  Preliminary survey documents. As the first step in the subdivision process, the applicant shall provide an accurate survey of existing features on and around the site, as provided for in section 48-1135(1). 
(b)  Preparation. Preliminary and final plats or combined preliminary-final plats shall be required and every such plat shall be prepared by a registered surveyor or registered engineer duly authorized by the state to prepare such plates. 
(Code 1982, § 31-7; Ord. No. 961, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1334, 11-12-1990) 
Sec. 38-31. - Conditions for approval of plat. 
    No plat of any subdivision shall be approved unless the land included within the subdivision is suitable for the various purposes for which it is intended to be used, and in particular, unless all land intended as building sites can be used safely for building purposes without danger from flood or other inundation or from any other menace to health, safety or public welfare. However, when plans for elimination of such dangers are approved by the planning commission and the accomplishments thereof are provided for in the same manner as set forth for the other physical improvements in article IV of this chapter, or in some other manner acceptable to the commission, such subdivision may be approved. 
(Code 1982, § 31-8; Ord. No. 961, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982) 
Sec. 38-32. - Preliminary plats. 
    Preliminary plats shall be submitted to the planning commission for preliminary approval provided the provisions of this chapter are complied with in the preparation and submittal. Approval of preliminary plats shall be valid for a period of six months from the date and such approval shall not be considered to be acceptance of such plats for recordation. 
(Code 1982, § 31-9; Ord. No. 961, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982) 
Sec. 38-33. - Final plats. 
(a)  Final plats shall be submitted to the planning commission for approval. In the case of minor adjustments to property lines which do not involve the creation of any new lots or parcels, and which are in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and chapter 48, pertaining to zoning, the planning commission may delegate approval authority to the planning director to approve such plats, following appropriate review by the other city departments. 
(b)  Approval of each final plat shall be evidenced on the plat by the signatures of the chair or vice-chair of the planning commission and the date of approval of the plat by the commission or planning director, provided: 
(1)  Such plats conform to the preliminary plats, if any, as approved, to the provisions of this article, and to the requirements of the planning commission's approval action, if any; and 
(2)  All physical improvements required by the provisions of article IV of this chapter for the subdivision so platted shall have been installed at the expense of the subdivider, except that in lieu of actual installation of the physical improvements, the subdivider shall have submitted an acceptable form of agreement and/or bond with surety in amount equal to the total cost of such improvements guaranteeing that the required improvements will be installed within a designated reasonable length of time. Bond, surety and choice of guarantee shall be established by the director of public works, according to the nature and extent of the improvements required. 
(c)  Approval of the final plats of subdivisions or sections shall not be deemed the acceptance by the city of any street, alley or other public space shown on the plats and shall be null and void if copies of the plats are not offered for recordation within six months after the date of approval, unless an application for extension of time is requested in writing and granted by the director of planning. Evidence of such recordation shall be provided by the subdivider to the directors of planning and public works to issuance of other permits required for development or occupancy of the property involved. 
(Code 1982, § 31-10; Ord. No. 961, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982) 
Sec. 38-34. - General regulations. 
    The following shall be considered minimum requirements and shall be varied only for specific reasons, stated of record by the planning commission in connection with the final approval of the plat to which related: 
(1)  Master plan conformance. Proposed subdivision within the corporate limits of the city shall conform to such parts of the official master plan of the city, as exist at the time of approval of the final plats. 
(2)  Subdivision names. The names of new subdivisions or renaming of subdivisions shall not duplicate or too closely approximate the names of existing subdivisions or place names within the city. Applicants shall submit the proposed name to the historical commission in care of the planning department for review and comment on appropriateness. The historical commission shall report its recommendation within 14 days of the transmittal to the historical commission, in writing to the planning commission. Conflict in project naming shall be resolved by the planning commission. 
(3)  Street names. Names of new streets shall not duplicate existing or platted street names unless the new street is a continuation of or in alignment with an existing or platted street. Street names may be provided by the planning commission, subject to approval by the city council. 
(4)  Building sites. Building sites shall have frontage on existing or recorded public streets and shall have the dimensions and areas in the provisions of this Code relative to zoning. Orientation of houses shall be shown for all new lots. 
(5)  Easements. Easements for utilities and other public use purposes of appropriate widths for the purpose intended shall be provided. 
(6)  Street layout. Streets shall be provided to give access to adjoining acreage and to connect with the principal streets in adjoining subdivisions or to connect with existing or proposed streets, as determined by the planning commission. Reserve strips intended to protect the use of dead-end and boundary streets are prohibited. Cul-de-sac streets shall not exceed 400 feet in length and shall be provided with a turnaround with a minimum right-of-way radius of 50 feet. Blocks in general shall not be longer than 1,000 feet between street intersections unless warranted by some unusual condition. Only two new pipestem lots shall be permitted to be subdivided from any existing lot. 
(7)  Street right-of-way. Street right-of-way width shall conform to the master plan and the applicable provisions of the chapter pertaining to zoning. No street right-of-way shall be less than 50 feet wide, except where permitted by this chapter. When a subdivision abuts one side of any street the subdivider shall not be required to dedicate more than one-half of any right-of-way necessary to make the street comply with the maximum width fixed for same. 
(8)  Public open spaces. Due consideration shall be given the allocation of suitable areas for schools, parks and playgrounds to be dedicated for public use or reserved for the common use of all residents of the proposed subdivision. In the interest of public welfare, the planning commission may require that at least five percent of the area of every subdivision, exclusive of streets, be set aside for recreational purposes. Where the tract contains less than ten acres, such reservation for open space may be combined with similar reservations in adjoining tracts. 
(9)  Trees. Whenever deemed necessary by the planning commission in consultation with the city arborist, street trees and/or additional screening shall be planted in a manner as approved by the city arborist. All trees to be preserved shall be shown on the final plat. 
(Code 1982, § 31-11; Ord. No. 961, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1792, § 31-11, 8-14-2006) 
Secs. 38-35-38-56. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PREPARATION OF PLATS 

Sec. 38-57. - Conformance with article provisions; exception. 
    Preliminary and final plats of a subdivision shall be prepared in accordance with the regulations set forth in this article, except that in the case of small subdivisions the preliminary and final plats may be combined at the discretion of the planning director, provided that the information required for both plats is included, and the size of the plat and drafting standards conform to the requirements for final plats. 
(Code 1982, § 31-12; Ord. No. 961, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982) 
Sec. 38-58. - Preliminary plats. 
    Preliminary plats shall be drawn to a scale of not smaller than one inch equals 50 feet and may be of one or more sheets as necessary to show the following information: 
(1)  Name of subdivision, owner, subdivider, surveyor or engineer; date of drawing, number of sheets, north point and scale. 
(2)  Location of proposed subdivision by an insert map, at a scale of not less than two inches equals one mile, indicating adjoining roads and streets, their names and numbers, subdivisions and other landmarks. 
(3)  A boundary survey or existing survey of record, provided such survey shows a closure error of not more than 1 in 2,500; total acreage, acreage of subdivided area, number, location and approximate areas and dimensions of all building sites; existing buildings within the boundaries of the tract, name of owners and their property lines within the boundaries of the tract and adjoining such boundaries. 
(4)  All existing platted and proposed streets and easements, their names, numbers and width; location of all building setback lines, existing utilities, watercourses, their names, proposed method of water supply and sewage disposal and other pertinent data. 
(5)  Topography with two-foot-contour intervals, or lesser intervals, when required by the director of public works. 
(6)  Location of all historic trees and specimen trees, as defined in chapter 44 and, further, location of other trees that, in the opinion of the public works director or planning commission, should be preserved. 
(7)  Elevation of existing and proposed ground surfaces at all street intersections and points of major grade change along centerlines of streets, together with proposed grade lines connecting therewith when required by the director of public works. Elevations shall be used based on the National Geodetic Survey (NGS) datum. Benchmark evaluations and descriptions are available at the office of the director of public works for areas contiguous to the Tripps Run watershed. 
(Code 1982, § 31-13; Ord. No. 961, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982) 
Sec. 38-59. - Final plats. 
    Final plats shall be drawn in ink on reproducible medium to a scale of 50 feet to the inch or larger, on a sheet not less than 81/2 inches by 14 inches or, if larger, not to exceed 24 inches by 36 inches and shall show the following information: 
(1)  Name of subdivision, city and state, owner, north point, the scale and date of drawing and number of sheets. If shown on more than one sheet, match lines shall clearly indicate where the several sheets join. An oblong space three inches by five inches high shall be reserved for the use of the approving authority. 
(2)  Location of proposed subdivision by an insert map at a scale of not less than two inches equal to one mile indicating adjoining roads and their names and numbers, subdivisions and other landmarks. 
(3)  A boundary survey with an error of closure within the limit of one in 10,000 related to the true meridian and showing the location of all monuments and type of material. The survey may be related to N.G.S. state grid north, if the coordinates of two adjacent corners of the subdivisions are shown. 
(4)  Certificate signed by the surveyor or engineer setting forth the source of title, of the owner of the land subdivided and the place of record of the last instrument in the chain of title. 
(5)  A statement to the effect that the subdivision, as appears in this plat, is with the free consent and in accordance with the desire of the owners, proprietors and trustees, if any, which shall be signed by the owners, proprietors and trustees, if any, and shall be duly acknowledged before some officer authorized to take acknowledgement of deeds. 
(6)  When the subdivision consists of land acquired from more than one source of title the outlines of the various tracts shall be indicated by dashed lines and identification of the respective tracts shall be placed on the plat. 
(7)  The accurate location and dimensions by bearings and distances with all curve data of all lot and street lines and centerlines of streets, boundaries of all easements, parks, school sites or other public areas; location of all building setback lines and the number and area of all building sites; all existing and platted streets, their names, numbers and width; watercourses and their names; names of owners and their property lines, both within the boundaries of the subdivision adjoining such boundaries. 
(8)  All dimensions shown in feet and decimals of a foot to the closest 1/100 of a foot; all bearings in degrees, minutes and seconds to the nearest ten seconds. 
(9)  The data for all curves along street frontages shall be shown in detail at the curve or in a curve data table containing the following: central angle, radius, arc, tangent, chord and chord bearing. 
(10)  Other information which may be required by the planning commission which relates to common ownership of land or to matters related to zoning. 
(Code 1982, § 31-14; Ord. No. 961, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982) 
Secs. 38-60-38-76. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 38-77. - Conformance with article provisions. 
    The improvements required in subdivisions lying in whole or in part within the corporate limits of the city which include or involve any public street, any extension of the city sewer or water systems or any right-of-way connecting two public streets or any easements shall be made by the subdivider in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1982, § 31-15; Ord. No. 961, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982) 
Sec. 38-78. - Standards and specifications for grading and surfacing. 
    All grading and surfacing shall be done and all curbs and gutters, sidewalks, storm and sanitary sewers, water and gas mains, underground electric power and communication lines, and all other items pertaining to the development of any street or alley shall be installed in strict accordance with the standards and specifications as specified by the director of public works. All underground utilities such as water, sewer, gas and electric power and communication lines shall be in place prior to final surfacing and acceptance of the street by the city. 
(Code 1982, § 31-16; Ord. No. 961, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982) 
Sec. 38-79. - Drainage systems. 
    A drainage system shall be provided for as required by the director of public works, including culverts, lead and outlet drains, headwalls and any other structures that are necessary to provide adequate drainage of both natural water and stormwater for all streets and surrounding properties. 
(Code 1982, § 31-17; Ord. No. 961, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982) 
Sec. 38-80. - Sidewalks. 
(a)  Commercial areas. All streets which abut property which has business, industrial or transitional zoning designations shall have sidewalks. 
(b)  Residential areas. 
(1)  All streets abutting property which has multifamily, cluster of townhouse zoning designations shall have sidewalks. 
(2)  On all other streets abutting residentially zoned property, sidewalks shall be provided as follows: 
a.  Where sidewalks presently exist on the same side of the block; 
b.  Where safety considerations such as significant vehicular traffic or the need for safe pedestrian pathways to nearby public uses require them, such as schools, churches, parks, public transportation stops, and shopping. 
The procedures and policy as set out in the sidewalk policy shall be used here. 
(c)  City manager to provide traffic counts in vicinity of proposed construction. The city manager shall provide hourly and daily traffic counts current within six months, in the vicinity of the proposed construction. Additionally, a current map showing existing sidewalks and relationships to nearby public facilities and activities shall be provided. Nonbinding guidelines with respect to traffic density are as follows: 
(1)  Average weekday traffic (AWT) under 500 and AWT under 60 during peak hour, no sidewalk needed absent special circumstances. 
(2)  AWT between 500 and 5,000 and AWT between one and ten vehicles per minute during peak hour, sidewalk needed on one side. 
(3)  AWT above 5,000 and AWT above ten vehicles per minute during peak hour, sidewalks needed on both sides of the street. 
(Code 1982, § 31-18; Ord. No. 961, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1175, 3-9-1987) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 36; assessment for construction of sidewalks, § 36-7. 
Sec. 38-81. - Sanitary sewer and water systems. 
    Sanitary sewer and water systems shall be designed as required by the director of public utilities to service all lots in the proposed subdivision and shall be installed and connected to the municipal sewer and water systems with a connection for each lot and building site. 
(Code 1982, § 31-19; Ord. No. 961, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982) 
Sec. 38-82. - Street signs. 
    Street signs of a design approved by the director of public works shall be installed at all street intersections. Street addresses shall be assigned by the director of public works. Street address numbers and/or letters shall be at least three inches high and shall be placed on each improved lot by the owner in a location visible from the appropriate street or drive. 
(Code 1982, § 31-20; Ord. No. 961, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982) 
Sec. 38-83. - Monuments. 
    Monuments shall be placed in the ground at all corner and angle points in the outer lines of the subdivision, at all corner and angle points of property lines and at all tangent points of street intersections and at all points of angles and curvature in the right-of-way lines of all streets within the subdivision. At designated points in the outer lines of the subdivision and at least two points in each block such monuments shall be of stone or concrete not less than four inches square or four inches in diameter and at least 30 inches long. In all other locations the monuments shall be iron pipe not less than one-fourth inch or more than one inch in diameter. The top of all stone and concrete monuments shall be set not less than one inch or more than four inches above the finished grade of the ground surface at their respective locations. 
(Code 1982, § 31-21; Ord. No. 961, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982) 
Sec. 38-84. - Plans and specifications. 
(a)  All improvement plans and specifications shall conform to city requirements. 
(b)  Before the development of any required improvement in any subdivision is begun, the owner or proprietor shall file with the director of public works a complete plan and profile prepared by a surveyor or engineer duly certified to perform such services. The plan shall be drawn to a scale of 25 feet to the inch and the profile shall be drawn to a horizontal scale of 25 feet to the inch and a vertical scale of five feet to the inch, or as designated by the director of public works. On the plan shall be shown the location of the following: sidewalks, curb and gutter, storm and sanitary sewers, water and gas main, underground electric power and communication lines, parking spaces and all other contemplated improvements. On the profile shall be shown the proposed centerline grade of the street and alley, the size, depth and rate of grade of storm and sanitary sewers, the size and approximate depth of water and gas mains, and the approximate depth of electric power and communication lines. The director of public works may further require cross sections of the street or alley, same to be taken at each 50-foot station or other interval at all street intersections and any other points which may be required to establish properly the grade of the street. 
(Code 1982, § 31-22; Ord. No. 961, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982) 
Sec. 38-85. - As-built plans to be filed. 
    Upon completion of the work on any required improvements and before acceptance or approval of same by the city, the owner shall file with the director of public works the required number of copies of the plan and profile of the improvements upon which shall be shown the actual location, as constructed, of all manholes, house connections, controls or cut-off valves, catchbasins, electric distribution transformers, switch gear, meter and telephone pedestals, air-conditioning apparatus, and any and all changes in the approved plans which may have been permitted by the city. 
(Code 1982, § 31-23; Ord. No. 961, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982) 
Sec. 38-86. - Inspection during installation. 
    Periodic inspection during the installation of the physical improvements shall be made by a duly authorized city official to ensure conformity with the approved plans and specifications. The subdivider shall notify the proper administrative officers when each phase of the installation is completed and ready for inspection. 
(Code 1982, § 31-24; Ord. No. 961, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982) 
Sec. 38-87. - Approval. 
    Upon completion of installation of the required improvements and approval of the as-built plan, the subdivider will be issued a certificate of approval by the director of public works. Such certificates shall operate as evidence for the release of any agreement or bond which may have been furnished for the guarantee of satisfactory installation of such improvements or parts thereof. 
(Code 1982, § 31-25; Ord. No. 961, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982) 
Sec. 38-88. - Acceptance. 
    The installation of improvements in subdivisions, as required by this article, shall in no case serve to bind the city to accept such improvements for the maintenance, repair or operation, but such acceptance shall be subject to the existing regulations concerning the acceptance of each type of improvement. 
(Code 1982, § 31-26; Ord. No. 961, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982) 
Sec. 38-89. - Vacation of plats. 
    Vacation of plats shall take place in accordance with section 17.33 of the city Charter, except the planning commission shall approve any consolidation of lots or parcels or the adjustment of property lines in accordance with this chapter, provided such consolidation or adjustment does not involve the loss of any public rights in any recorded streets, alleys, easements or other land devoted to or designated for public use. 
(Code 1982, § 31-27; Ord. No. 961, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982) 
Chapter 40 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of city to tax, § 2.02. 
Cross reference- Finance, ch. 16. 
State Law reference- Dog license tax, Code of Virginia, § 3.2-6530; local alcoholic beverages license tax, Code of Virginia, § 4.1-233; authority to levy taxes and assessments, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1104; authority to impose taxes and fees for local improvements, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2404; motor vehicle license tax, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-752; addition license fee for Falls Church, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-753; local license tax on auctioneers, Code of Virginia, § 54.1-605; taxation generally, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1 et seq.; retain sales and use tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-600 et seq.; local tax on real estate, mineral lands, tangible personal property and merchants' capital, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3000, 58.1-3500 et seq.; real property taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3200 et seq.; business, professional, occupational license taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3700 et seq.; local recordation tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3800 et seq.; local estate tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3805 et seq.; miscellaneous local taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3812 et seq.; local enforcement, collection, etc., Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3900 et seq.; real estate tax liens, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3930. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 40-1-40-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMISSIONS TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Admissions tax, Va. Const., art. X, § 1, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3817. 

Sec. 40-16. - Levied. 
(a)  There is hereby levied a tax upon the sale of theater tickets within the city. Each person operating a motion picture theater within the city shall collect a tax of ten percent of the price of each admission ticket. 
(b)  There is hereby levied a tax upon each game of bowling played within the city. Each person operating a bowling establishment shall pay a tax of $0.05 upon each game played. The term "bowling establishment" shall mean any establishment which is set up with alleys or lanes in which pins are set up in a triangular pattern at one end of an alley or lane and balls rolled at them from the other end, the object being to knock down as many pins as possible with each ball. This includes any establishment commonly referred to as duckpin or tenpin establishments. The term "game" means ten frames for each person. 
(c)  The amount of amusement tax listed in subsections (a) or (b) of this section shall be computed for each month and shall become due and payable on the 20th day of each month following the month in which tickets or games are sold. The tax shall be paid to the city treasurer. Such tax shall be considered delinquent if not paid when due. To all taxes so delinquent, there shall be added and collected as a part thereof a penalty of ten percent for the first month of delinquency with an additional penalty of five percent per month imposed so long as the total penalty imposed does not exceed 25 percent. In addition, interest at ten percent per annum shall be due on said taxes and penalty from the first day of the month following the date said taxes and penalty became due and payable. 
(Code 1973, § 36-1; Code 1982, § 33-1; Ord. No. 1298, 4-23-1990; Ord. No. 1310, 5-29-1990; Ord. No. 1945, 1-11-2016; Ord. No. 1961, 8-8-2016) 
Secs. 40-17-40-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PERSONAL PROPERTY TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to tax personal property, machine and tolls, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3500 et seq. 

Sec. 40-31. - Personal property exempt from taxes. 
(a)  There is hereby exempt from taxation the following classes of household goods and personal effects: 
(1)  Bicycles. 
(2)  Household and kitchen furniture, including gold and silver plates, plated ware, watches and clocks, sewing machines, refrigerators, automatic refrigerating machinery of any type, vacuum cleaners and all other household machinery, books, firearms and weapons of all kinds. 
(3)  Pianos, organs, phonographs and record players, and records to be used and all other musical instruments of whatever kind, radio and television instruments and equipment. 
(4)  Oil paintings, pictures, statuary, curios, articles of virtue and works of art. 
(5)  Diamonds, cameos or other precious stones and all precious metals used as ornaments or jewelry. 
(6)  Sporting and photographic equipment. 
(7)  Clothing and objects of apparel. 
(8)  All other tangible personal property used by an individual or a family or household incident to maintaining an abode. 
(b)  The classification set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall apply only to such property owned and used by an individual or by a family or household incident to maintaining an abode. 
(Code 1973, § 36-2; Code 1982, § 33-2) 
State Law reference- Household goods, etc., city may exempt, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3504. 
Sec. 40-32. - Tax levied. 
    For each and every calendar year beginning January 1 and ending December 31 of each such year, unless otherwise changed by the council, there is hereby imposed and levied on all tangible personal property, except household goods and personal effects as classified by the Code of Virginia and including motor vehicles and delivery equipment, and on machinery and tools used in manufacturing, mining, processing and reprocessing, radio or television broadcasting or dairy business, with a tax situs in the city. The amount of the tax shall be set each year by the city council. 
(Code 1982, § 33-3(a); Ord. No. 673; Ord. No. 926; Ord. No. 950; Ord. No. 989, 11-9-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1032, 11-22-1982; Ord. No. 1060, 11-14-1983; Ord. No. 1158, 10-14-1986; Ord. No. 1248, 1-9-1989; Ord. No. 1400, 5-11-1992; Ord. No. 1467, 2-28-1994; Ord. No. 1753, 3-9-2004) 
Sec. 40-33. - Proration. 
    The tax shall be levied and collected on all motor vehicles, trailers and boats which have acquired a situs in the city, as of January 1 of each tax year for the entire year and on those motor vehicles, trailers and boats which have acquired a situs in the city after January 1 of each year for the balance of such tax year. Such tax shall be prorated on a monthly basis, a period of more than one-half of a month shall be counted as a full month, and a period of less than one-half of a month shall not be counted. Relief from taxation is hereby granted and an appropriate prorated refund is authorized when a motor vehicle, trailer or boat loses its situs within the city after January 1 or the situs date, if such tax has already been paid. When any person sells or otherwise transfers title to a motor vehicle, trailer or boat with a situs in the city after January 1 or situs date (the day on which the property acquired situs in the city), the tax shall be relieved, prorated on a monthly basis, and the appropriate amount of tax already paid shall be refunded. When any person, after January 1 or situs date, acquires a motor vehicle, trailer or boat with a situs in the city, the tax shall be assessed on the motor vehicle, trailer or boat for the portion of the tax year during which the new owner owns the motor vehicle, trailer or boat acquiring a situs after January 1. An exemption from this tax and any interest or penalties arising thereunder shall be granted for any tax year or portion thereof during which the property was legally assessed by another jurisdiction in the commonwealth and such tax on the assessed property was paid and not refunded in whole or in part. 
(Code 1982, § 33-3(b); Ord. No. 673; Ord. No. 926; Ord. No. 950; Ord. No. 989, 11-9-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1032, 11-22-1982; Ord. No. 1060, 11-14-1983; Ord. No. 1158, 10-14-1986; Ord. No. 1248, 1-9-1989; Ord. No. 1400, 5-11-1992; Ord. No. 1467, 2-28-1994; Ord. No. 1753, 3-9-2004) 
Sec. 40-34. - Duty of taxpayer to file return; penalty assessment. 
(a)  Except as provided in this article, every person assessable with city taxes on tangible personal property (including mobile homes, motor vehicles, boats and trailers) or machinery and tools shall list such property on the forms obtained from the commissioner of revenue and return the list to the commissioner of revenue on or before May 1 of each year in which such property is assessable for taxation by the city. 
(b)  With respect to any motor vehicle, boat or trailer which becomes owned or held by a resident or citizen of the city or located within the territorial boundaries of the city or otherwise acquires a situs for taxation after January 1 of any given year, the owner of such property shall file the form listing the property with the commissioner of revenue within 60 days after the property has become subject to taxation under the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Returns on motor vehicles for which there is no change of status are not required. Except for vehicles for which returns are not required, whenever returns on motor vehicles, boats and trailers, mobile homes and on other tangible personal property and machinery and tools, as required by this section to be filed with the commissioner of revenue have not been filed on or before the due dates for filing such returns, there shall be a penalty of ten percent of the amount of tax assessable on the property involved, or $10.00, whichever is the greater; provided, however, that the penalty shall in no case exceed the amount of tax due. Such penalty when so assessed shall become a part of the tax and shall be collected in the same manner as is provided by law for the collection of taxes. 
(d)  The commissioner of revenue may grant reasonable extensions of time, not to exceed a total of 60 days in any tax year, for filing returns on business tangible personal property, machinery and tools whenever good cause exists. Each request for an extension shall be in writing and, if personally delivered to the commissioner of revenue, it shall be received no later than May 1 of each year; if the request is mailed, it shall be postmarked no later than May 1. The commissioner of revenue shall keep a record of each such extension. If any taxpayer fails to file his return within the extended time, his case shall be treated the same as if no extension had been granted. 
(Code 1982, § 33-3(c); Ord. No. 673; Ord. No. 926; Ord. No. 950; Ord. No. 989, 11-9-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1032, 11-22-1982; Ord. No. 1060, 11-14-1983; Ord. No. 1158, 10-14-1986; Ord. No. 1248, 1-9-1989; Ord. No. 1400, 5-11-1992; Ord. No. 1467, 2-28-1994; Ord. No. 1753, 3-9-2004) 
Sec. 40-35. - When taxes due. 
(a)  The taxes levied on tangible personal property, on machinery and tools, and on mobile homes, motor vehicles, boats and trailers, except motor vehicles, boats and trailers which become subject to said tax after August 31, shall be due and payable to the treasurer on or before October 5 of the year for which they are levied and shall be considered delinquent after that date. To all of said taxes so delinquent, there shall be added and collected as part thereof a penalty of ten percent or $10.00, whichever is greater; provided, however, the penalty shall in no case exceed the amount of tax due. If, after 60 days from the payment due date the taxes remain unpaid in whole or in part, there shall be added to the amount due an additional penalty of 15 percent of the unpaid tax assessed. In addition thereto, interest at ten percent per annum shall be due on said taxes and penalty from the first day of the month following the date said taxes and penalty become due and payable. 
(b)  The taxes levied on motor vehicles, boats and trailers which become subject to taxation between September 1 and December 16 of any given year shall be due and payable not more than 30 days after the date of the tax bill. Such taxes shall be considered delinquent if not paid on or before the 30th day from the date of the tax bill. To all said taxes so delinquent, there shall be added and collected as a part thereof a penalty of ten percent or $10.00, whichever is the greater; provided, however, the penalty shall in no case exceed the amount of the tax due. If, after 60 days from the payment due date the taxes remain unpaid in whole or in part, there shall be added to the amount due an additional penalty of 15 percent of the unpaid tax assessed. In addition, interest at ten percent per annum shall be due on said taxes and penalty from the first day of the month following the date said taxes and penalty became due and payable. 
(Code 1982, § 33-3(d); Ord. No. 673; Ord. No. 926; Ord. No. 950; Ord. No. 989, 11-9-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1032, 11-22-1982; Ord. No. 1060, 11-14-1983; Ord. No. 1158, 10-14-1986; Ord. No. 1248, 1-9-1989; Ord. No. 1400, 5-11-1992; Ord. No. 1467, 2-28-1994; Ord. No. 1753, 3-9-2004; Ord. No. 1961, 8-8-2016) 
Secs. 40-36-40-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RETAIL SALES TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Retail sales and use tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-600 et seq.; local levy, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-605. 

Sec. 40-52. - Levied. 
    There is hereby levied and imposed, in addition to all other taxes and fees of every kind now imposed, a general retail sales tax at the rate of one percent to provide revenue for the general fund of the city, and the proceeds of such tax shall be allocated by the budget ordinances of each fiscal year. The rate of the tax shall be added to the rate of the state retail sales tax imposed by Code of Virginia, § 58.1-600 et seq., the Virginia Retail Sales and Use Tax Act, and shall be subject to all the provisions of such article, and all amendments thereof, and the rules and regulations published with respect thereto. 
(Code 1973, § 36-3; Code 1982, § 33-4) 
State Law reference- Extent and conditions on local sales tax levy, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-605. 
Secs. 40-53-40-68. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BANK FRANCHISE TAX[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Bank franchise taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1200 et seq. 

Sec. 40-69. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bank means any incorporated bank, banking association, savings bank that is a member of the Federal Reserve System, or trust company organized by or under the authority of the laws of the state, and any bank or banking association organized by or under the authority of the laws of the United States, doing business or having an office in the state or having a charter which designates any place within the state as the place of its principal office, and any bank which establishes and maintains a branch in this state under Code of Virginia, § 6.1-44.1 et seq., or Code of Virginia, § 6.1-44.15 et seq., whether such bank or banking association be authorized to transact business as a trust company or not, and any joint stock land banks or any other bank organized by or under the authority of the laws of the United States upon which the state is authorized to impose a tax. The term "bank," shall exclude all corporations organized under the laws of other states and doing business in this state; it shall exclude corporations organized not as banks under the laws of this state; and it shall exclude all natural persons and partnerships. 
    Bank holding company means any corporation that is organized under the laws of the state, is doing business in the state, and is a bank holding company under the provisions of the Federal Bank Holding Company Act of 1956. 
    Net capital means a bank's net capital computed by adding together its capital, surplus, undivided profits and one half of any reserve for loan losses net of applicable deferred tax to obtain gross capital and deducting:: 
(1)  The assessed value of real estate, as provided in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1206; 
(2)  The book value of tangible personal property under Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1206; 
(3)  The pro rata share of government obligations set forth in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1206; 
(4)  The capital accounts of any bank subsidiaries under Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1206; 
(5)  The amount of any reserve for marketable securities valuation which is included in capital, surplus and undivided profits as defined hereinabove to the extent that such reserve reflects the difference between the book value and the market value of such marketable securities on December 31 next preceding the date for filing the bank's return under Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1207; and 
(6)  The value of good will described under Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1206 A.5. 
(Code 1973, § 36-4; Code 1982, § 33-5; Ord. No. 812; Ord. No. 918) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-1201, 58.1-1205. 
Sec. 40-70. - Tax levied. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed upon each bank located within the city a franchise tax on net capital equaling 80 per centum of the state rate of taxation on each $100.00 of net capital. There shall be no deduction in respect to shares owned by exempt institutions. 
(b)  In the event that any bank located within the city is not the principal office but is a branch extension or affiliate of the principal office, the tax hereby imposed upon such branch shall be imposed upon only such proportion of the taxable value of the net capital as the total deposits of such bank, or offices located inside the city bears to such bank's total deposits as of the end of the preceding year. 
(Code 1973, § 36-5; Code 1982, § 33-6; Ord. No. 812; Ord. No. 918) 
State Law reference- Authority to levy 80 percent of the tax levied by the state, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1208; tax on branch banks, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1211. 
Sec. 40-71. - Filling requirements; payment of tax; penalty for failure to comply. 
(a)  On or after January 1 of each year, but not later than March 1 of any such year, all banks whose principal offices are located within the city shall prepare and file with the commissioner of revenue a return in duplicate, as provided by Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1207 which shall set forth the tax on net capital computed pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1200 et seq. The return shall be in a form prescribed by the state department of taxation. The city commissioner of the revenue shall certify a copy of the bank's return and schedules and shall forthwith transmit such certified copy to the state department of taxation. 
(b)  In the event that the principal office of a bank is located outside the city and such bank has branch offices located within the city, in addition to the filing requirements set forth in subsection (a) of this section, any bank conducting such branch business shall file with the commissioner of the revenue a copy of the real estate deduction schedule, apportionment and other items which are required by Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-1207, 58.1-1211, and 58.1-1212. Additionally, a copy of the real estate deduction schedules and the apportionment under Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1211 shall be filed with the appropriate assessing officer of each political subdivision imposing a tax on the filing bank. Such return shall set forth the tax on net capital owing to each such political subdivision as computed under this article and shall include the listing of the real estate, as assessed for the prior year, as well as a description of the total of the obligations of the United States and the average percentage thereof on the four dates prescribed in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1206 A.3. Every bank, on or before June 1 of each year, shall pay into the treasurer's office of the city all taxes imposed, pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1982, § 33-7(a)-(c); Ord. No. 918) 
State Law reference- Filing of return and payment of tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1207. 
Sec. 40-72. - Penalty. 
    Any bank which fails to comply with any provision in this article shall be subject to a penalty of five percent of the tax due. If the state commissioner is satisfied that such failure is due to providential or other good cause, such return and payment of tax shall be accepted exclusive of such penalty, but with interest determined in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-15. Any bank which shall fail or neglect to comply with any provision of this article shall be fined not less than $100.00 or more than $500.00, which fine shall be recovered upon motion, after five days' notice in the circuit court. The motion shall be in the name of the commonwealth and shall be presented by the attorney for the commonwealth of Arlington County. 
(Code 1982, § 33-7(d); Ord. No. 918) 
Secs. 40-73-40-87. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TAX ON CIGARETTE SALES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- State cigarette tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1000 et seq.; authority to levy city cigarette tax and permitted provisions of ordinance providing for the administration and enforcement of such tax, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3830-58.1-3832. 

Sec. 40-88. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Board or NVCTB means the Northern Virginia Cigarette Tax Board. 
    Carton means any container, regardless of material used in its construction, in which packages of cigarettes are placed. 
    Cigarette means any product that contains nicotine, is intended to be burned or heated under ordinary conditions of use, and consists of or contains: 
(1)  Any roll of tobacco wrapped in paper or in any substance not containing tobacco; 
(2)  Tobacco in any form that is functional in the product which, because of its appearance, the type of tobacco used in the filler, or its packaging and labeling, is likely to be offered to, or purchased by, consumers as a cigarette; or 
(3)  Any roll of tobacco wrapped in any substance containing tobacco which, because of its appearance, the type of tobacco used in the filler, or its packaging and labeling, is likely to be offered to, or purchased by, consumers as a cigarette described in subsection (1) of this definition. 
The term "cigarette" includes roll-your-own tobacco. The term "roll-your-own tobacco" means any tobacco which, because of its appearance, type, packaging, or labeling is suitable for use and likely to be offered to, or purchased by, consumers as tobacco for making cigarettes. For purposes of this definition, 0.09 ounces of roll-your-own tobacco shall constitute one individual cigarette. 
    Cigarette machine operator means any individual, partnership or corporation engaged in the sale of packages of cigarettes from vending machines. 
    City manager means the city manager of the City of Falls Church, Virginia or any of his duly authorized deputies or agents. 
    Dealer means and includes every manufacturer's representative, wholesaler, retailer, cigarette machine operator, public warehouseman or other person who shall sell, receive, store, possess, distribute or transport cigarettes within or into the city. 
    Package means and includes any container, regardless of the material used in its construction, in which separate cigarettes are placed without such cigarettes being placed into any container within the package. Packages are those containers of cigarettes from which they are consumed by their ultimate user. Ordinarily a package contains 20 cigarettes; however, the term "package" includes those containers in which fewer or more than 20 cigarettes are placed. 
    Person means and includes any individual, firm, unincorporated association, company, corporation, joint stock company, group, agency, syndicate, trust or trustee, receiver, fiduciary, partnership and conservator. The term "person," as applied to a partnership, unincorporated association or other joint venture, means the partners or members thereof, and as applied to a corporation, includes all the officers and directors. 
    Place of business means and includes any place where cigarettes are sold, placed, stored, offered for sale or displayed for sale or where cigarettes are brought or kept for the purpose of sale, consumption or distribution, including vending machines, by a dealer within the city. 
    Registered agent means and includes every dealer and other person who shall be required to report and collect the tax on cigarettes under the provisions of this article. 
    Retail dealer means and includes every person who, in the usual course of business, purchases or receives cigarettes from any source whatsoever for the purpose of sale within the city to the ultimate consumer; or any person who, in the usual course of business, owns, leases or otherwise operates within his own place of business, one or more cigarette vending machines for the purpose of sale within the city of cigarettes to the ultimate consumer; or any person who, in any manner, buys, sells, stores, transfers or deals in cigarettes for the purpose of sale within the city to the ultimate consumer, who is not licensed as a wholesaler or vending machine operator. 
    Sale or sell means and includes every act or transaction, regardless of the method or means employed, including barter, exchange or the use of vending machines or other mechanical devices or a criminal or tortuous act whereby either ownership or possession, or both, of any cigarettes shall be transferred within the city from a dealer as herein defined to any other person for a consideration. 
    Stamp means a small gummed piece of paper or decal used to evidence provision for payment of the tax as authorized by the Northern Virginia Cigarette Tax Board, required to be affixed to every package of cigarettes sold, distributed, or used within the city. 
    Store or storage means and includes the keeping or retention of cigarettes in this city for any purpose except sale in the regular course of business. 
    Use means and includes the exercise of any right or power over any cigarettes or packages of cigarettes incident to the ownership or possession of those cigarettes or packages of cigarettes including any transaction where possession is given or received or otherwise transferred, other than a sale. 
    User means any person who exercises any right or power over any cigarettes or packages of cigarettes subject to the provisions of this article incident to the ownership or possession of those cigarettes or packages of cigarettes or any transaction where possession is given or received or otherwise transferred, other than a sale. 
    Wholesale dealers means any individual, partnership or corporation engaged in the sale of packages of cigarettes for resale into or within the city. 
(Code 1973, § 36-6; Code 1982, § 33-8; Ord. No. 670; Ord. No. 826; Ord. No. 1082, 9-24-1984; Ord. No. 1782, 1-9-2006) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Definitions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1000. 
Sec. 40-89. - Levy and rate. 
    In addition to all other taxes of every kind now or hereafter imposed by law, there is hereby levied and imposed by the city upon every person who sells or uses cigarettes within the city, an excise tax equivalent to $0.85 for a package containing 20 cigarettes and $0.0425 for each cigarette contained in packages of fewer or more than 20 cigarettes sold or used within the city. The tax shall be paid and collected in the manner and at the time hereinafter prescribed; provided, that the tax payable for each cigarette or cigarette package sold or used within the city shall be paid but once. The tax hereby levied shall not apply to free distribution of sample cigarettes in packages containing five or fewer cigarettes. 
(Code 1973, § 36-7; Code 1982, § 33-9; Ord. No. 670; Ord. No. 691; Ord. No. 736; Ord. No. 826; Ord. No. 1297, 4-23-1990; Ord. No. 1508, 4-24-1995; Ord. No. 1542, 4-22-1996; Ord. No. 1762, 5-24-2004; Ord. No. 1775, 7-1-2005; Ord. No. 1782, 1-9-2006; Ord. No. 1806, 7-1-2007; Ord. No. 1954, 4-25-2016) 
Note- Ord. No. 1954, adopted Apr. 25, 2016 has an effective date of July 1, 2016. 
State Law reference- Authority to levy cigarette tax, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3830-58.1-3832. 
Sec. 40-90. - Methods of collection. 
    The tax imposed by this section shall be evidenced by the use of a tax stamp and shall be paid by each dealer or other person liable for the tax under a reporting method deemed by the board to carry out the provisions of this article. The stamps shall be affixed in such a manner that their removal will require continued application of water or steam. Each dealer or other person liable for the tax is hereby required, and it shall be his duty, to collect, pay the tax and report all packages of cigarettes on forms prescribed for this purpose by the board: 
(1)  The quantity of NVCTB-stamped cigarettes sold or delivered to: 
a.  Each registered agent appointed by the board for which no tax was collected; 
b.  Each manufacturer's representative; and 
c.  Each separate person and place of business during the preceding calendar or fiscal month; and 
(2)  The quantity of NVCTB stamps on hand, both affixed and unaffixed on the first and the last day of the preceding calendar or fiscal month and the quantity of NVCTB stamps or NVCTB stamped cigarettes received during the preceding calendar or fiscal month; 
(3)  The quantity of cigarettes on hand to which the NVCTB stamp had not been affixed on the first and last day of the preceding calendar or fiscal month and the quantity of cigarettes received during the preceding calendar or fiscal month to which the NVCTB stamp had not been affixed; and 
(4)  Such further information as the administrator for the board may require for the proper administration and enforcement of this article for the determination of the exact number of cigarettes in the possession of each dealer or user. 
a.  Each dealer or other person liable for the tax shall file such reports with the board and pay the tax due to the board prior to the due date, and shall furnish copies of all cigarette tax reports submitted to the state department of taxation. 
b.  When, upon examination and audit of any invoices, records, books, cancelled checks or other memoranda touching on the purchase, sale, receipt, storage or possession of tobacco products taxed herein, any dealer or other person liable for the tax is unable to furnish evidence to the board of sufficient tax payments and stamp purchases to cover cigarettes which were sold, used, stored, received, purchased or possessed by him, the prima facie presumption shall arise that such cigarettes were received, sold, used, stored, purchased or possessed by him without the proper tax having been paid. The board shall, from the results of such examination and audit (based upon such direct or indirect information available), assess the tax due, impose a penalty of ten percent and may impose interest of three-quarters percent per month of the gross tax due. 
c.  When any dealer or other person liable for the tax files a false or fraudulent report or fails to file a report or fails to perform any act or performs any act to evade payment of the tax, the board shall administratively assess the tax due and impose a penalty not to exceed 50 percent of the tax due and interest of three-quarters percent per month of the gross tax due. 
d.  The dealer or other person liable for the tax shall be notified by certified mail of such deficiency and such tax, penalty and interest assessed shall be due and payable within ten days after notice of such deficiency has been issued. Every dealer or other person liable for the tax shall examine each package of cigarettes to ensure the NVCTB stamp has been affixed prior to offering them for sale. 
e.  Any dealer or other person liable for the tax who shall receive cigarettes not bearing the NVCTB stamp shall, within one hour of receipt of such cigarettes, commence and with all reasonable diligence continue to affix the NVCTB stamp to each and every package of cigarettes until all unstamped packages of cigarettes have been stamped and before offering such cigarettes for sale. Any dealer or other person liable for the tax who has notified the board that he is engaged in interstate or intrastate business shall be permitted to set aside such part of his stock as may be legally kept for the conduct of such interstate or intrastate business (that is, cigarettes held for sale outside the jurisdiction of the board) without affixing the stamps required by this section. Any such interstate or intrastate stock shall be kept entirely separate and apart from the NVCTB-stamped stock, in such a manner as to prevent the commingling of the interstate or intrastate stock with the NVCTB stock. Any dealer or other person liable for the tax found to have had untaxed cigarettes which have been lost, whether by negligence, theft or any other unaccountable loss, shall be liable for and shall pay the tax due thereon. 
f.  It shall also be the duty of each dealer or other person liable for the tax to maintain and keep for a period of three years, not including the current calendar year, records of all cigarettes received, sold, stored, possessed, transferred or handled by him in any manner whatsoever, whether the same were stamped or unstamped, to make all such records available for audit, inspection and examination at all reasonable times, as well as the means, facilities and opportunity for making such audit, inspection or examination upon demand of the board. 
(Code 1973, § 36-8; Code 1982, § 33-10; Ord. No. 670; Ord. No. 826; Ord. No. 1782, 1-9-2006) 
Sec. 40-91. - Registered agents. 
(a)  Any dealer or other person liable for the tax who shall sell, use, store, possess, distribute or transport cigarettes within or into the city shall first make application to the board to qualify as a registered agent. Such application blank, which shall be supplied upon request, shall require such information relative to the nature of the business engaged in by said applicant, as the board deems necessary for the administration and enforcement of this article. There is a yearly registration fee for all wholesale dealers and all cigarette machine operators. Applicant shall provide a surety bond to the board of 150 percent of his average monthly tax liability with a surety company authorized to do business in the commonwealth. Such bond shall be so written that, on timely payment of the premium thereon, it shall continue in force from year to year. Any applicant whose place of business is outside the city shall automatically, by filing his application, submit himself to the board's legal jurisdiction and appoint the administrator for the board as his agent for any service of lawful process. Upon receipt of the properly completed required application forms, and the required surety bond executed, the board shall determine whether the said applicant qualifies to be a registered agent. The board will issue to said qualified applicant a yearly registered agent permit to qualify him to purchase, sell, use, store, possess, distribute or transport within or into the city, NVCTB-stamped cigarettes. 
(b)  Registered agents shall agree to the reporting and payment requirements placed upon him by this section and the rules and regulations as from time to time may be promulgated by the board. When any registered agent's monthly report and payment of the tax is not received within the dates prescribed, the board shall impose a late reporting penalty of ten percent of the gross tax due or $10.00 whichever is greater, but in no event more than $1,000.00. The board also may require such registered agent to provide proof that he has complied with all applicable laws of the commonwealth to legally conduct such business and to file financial statements showing all assets and liabilities. The board may revoke or suspend any registered agent's permit due to failure to file tax reports in a timely manner, nonpayment of taxes due, or if the cigarette tax surety bond should become impaired for any reason. 
(c)  All money collected as cigarette taxes under this section shall be deemed to be held in trust by the dealer collecting the same until remitted to the board. 
(d)  Registered agents must account for all NVCTB authorized tax stamps purchased. Periodic audits may be conducted to determine any unaccounted variance between the number of stamps purchased and the number of stamps reported and an assessment will be made for all unaccounted for stamps. Any assessment of registered agents located outside the jurisdictions of the board will be based upon the average sales of packages of cigarettes by jurisdiction during the audit period. For registered agents located within the jurisdictions of the board, any assessment will be based upon the tax rate of the jurisdiction in which they are located. In addition, there will be a penalty for nonreporting of ten percent of the gross tax due. 
(Code 1973, § 36-9; Code 1982, § 33-11; Ord. No. 670; Ord. No. 826; Ord. No. 1082, 9-24-1984; Ord. No. 1782, 1-9-2006) 
State Law reference- Authority to provide for administration and enforcement, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3832. 
Sec. 40-92. - Requirements for retail dealers. 
(a)  Retail dealers who shall sell, offer for sale, store, possess, distribute, purchase, receive or transport cigarettes for the purpose of sale within the city shall purchase cigarettes only from registered agents giving or supplying the business trade name and business address of the location where the cigarettes will be placed for sale to the public. Cigarettes purchased for personal use cannot be brought into a business for resale. Only properly registered and licensed retail stores may sell cigarettes to the public. To be properly registered and licensed, a retail store must first have a valid state sales and use tax certificate and valid retail business license. Cigarettes must be purchased and stored separately for each business location. All copies of cigarette purchase invoices/receipts must be retained by the retailer for a period of three years and shall be made available to agents of the NVCTB upon request for use in conducting audits and investigations. All copies of cigarette purchase invoices/receipts must be stored at the business retail location for a period of one year from date of purchase. Failure to provide cigarette invoices/receipts may result in confiscation of cigarettes until receipts can be reviewed by the board to verify the proper tax has been paid. It is the responsibility of each retail location to ensure that all cigarettes placed for sale or stored at that location are properly taxed and stamped. Cigarettes found without the NVCTB stamp or the proper jurisdictional tax paid will be seized by the agents of the board. 
(b)  Retail dealers must make their place of business available for inspection by tobacco revenue agents to ensure that all cigarettes are properly tax-stamped and all cigarette taxes are properly paid. 
(Code 1973, § 36-10; Code 1982, § 33-12; Ord. No. 670; Ord. No. 826; Ord. No. 1082, 9-24-1984; Ord. No. 1782, 1-9-2006) 
Sec. 40-93. - Presumption of illegality; seizure of contraband goods, sealing/seizing of machines. 
(a)  If any cigarette machine operator or other person liable for the tax imposed by this article is found to possess any cigarettes without the jurisdictional tax paid or the proper tax stamp affixed, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that any such operator of other person shall be in possession of untaxed cigarettes in violation of this section. 
(b)  If any cigarettes are placed in any vending machines within the city, then there shall be a rebuttable presumption that such cigarettes were placed in that machine for sale within the city. If a vending machine located within the city contains cigarettes upon which the NVCTB tax stamp has not been affixed, or on which the jurisdictional tax has not been paid, or containing cigarettes placed so as to not allow visual inspection of the NVCTB tax stamp through the viewing area, as provided for by the vending machine manufacturer, then there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the machine contains untaxed cigarettes in violation of this section. 
(c)  Any cigarettes, vending machines, cigarette tax stamps or other property found in violation of this section shall be declared contraband goods and may be seized by the board. In addition to any tax due, the dealer or other person liable for the tax possessing such untaxed cigarettes or tax stamps shall be subject to civil and criminal penalties herein provided. 
(d)  In lieu of seizure, the board may seal such vending machines to prevent continued illegal sale or removal of such cigarettes. The removal of such seal from a vending machine by any unauthorized person shall be a violation of this article. Nothing in this section shall prevent the seizure of any vending machine at any time after it is sealed. 
(e)  All cigarette vending machines shall be plainly marked with the name, address and telephone number of the owner of said machine. 
(Code 1973, § 36-11; Code 1982, § 33-13; Ord. No. 670; Ord. No. 826; Ord. No. 1782, 1-9-2006) 
Sec. 40-94. - Illegal acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any dealer or other person liable for the tax: 
(1)  To perform any act or fail to perform any act for the purpose of evading the payment of any tax imposed by this article or of any part thereof, or to fail or refuse to perform any of the duties imposed upon him under the provisions of this article or to fail or refuse to obey any lawful order which may be issued under this article; 
(2)  To falsely or fraudulently make, or cause to be made, any invoices or reports, or to falsely or fraudulently forge, alter or counterfeit any stamp, or to procure or cause to be made, forged, altered or counterfeited any such stamp, or knowingly and willfully to alter, publish, pass or tender as true any false, altered, forged or counterfeited stamp or stamps; 
(3)  To sell, offer for sale, or distribute any cigarettes upon which the NVCTB tax stamp has not been affixed or upon which the jurisdictional tax has not been paid; 
(4)  To possess, store, use, authorize or approve the possession, storage or use of any cigarette packages upon which the NVCTB tax stamp has not been affixed or upon which the jurisdictional tax has not been paid; 
(5)  To transport, authorize or approve the transportation of any cigarette packages in quantities of more than 60 packages into or within the city upon which the NVCTB tax stamp has not been affixed or upon which the jurisdictional tax has not been paid, if they are: 
a.  Not accompanied by a receipt/bill of lading or other document indicating the true name and address of the consignor or seller and the consignee or purchaser and the brands and quantity of cigarettes transported; 
b.  Accompanied by a receipt/bill of lading or other document which is false or fraudulent in whole or part; or 
c.  Accompanied by a receipt/bill of lading or other document indicating: 
1.  Consignee or purchaser in another state or the District of Columbia who is not authorized by the law of such other jurisdiction to receive or possess such tobacco products on which the taxes imposed by such other jurisdiction have not been paid unless the tax on the jurisdiction of destination has been paid and said cigarettes bear the tax stamps of that jurisdiction; or 
2.  Consignee or purchaser in the commonwealth but outside the taxing jurisdiction who does not possess a state sales and use tax certificate and, where applicable, any licenses issued by the commonwealth or local jurisdiction of destination; 
(6)  To reuse or refill with cigarettes any package from which cigarettes have been removed, for which the tax imposed has been theretofore paid; 
(7)  To remove from any package any stamp with intent to use or cause the same to be used after same has already been used or to buy, sell, or offer for sale or give away any used, removed, altered or restored stamps to any person, or to reuse any stamp which had theretofore been used for evidence of the payment of any tax prescribed by this article or to sell, or offer to sell, any stamp provided for herein; 
(8)  To sell, offer for sale or distribute any loose or single cigarettes; or 
(9)  To perform any act that violates the resolutions promulgated by the board. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person or individual to transport, possess, store, use, authorize or approve the possession, storage or use of any cigarette in quantities of more than 60 packages upon which the NVCTB tax stamp has not been affixed or upon which the jurisdictional tax has not been paid. 
(Code 1973, § 36-12; Code 1982, § 33-14; Ord. No. 670; Ord. No. 826; Ord. No. 1782, 1-9-2006) 
Sec. 40-95. - Establishment of the Northern Virginia Cigarette Tax Board. 
(a)  The resolution adopted by the city council dated September 23, 1974, pertaining to the establishment of the Northern Virginia Cigarette Tax Board (herein referred to as NVCTB) is hereby continued in effect and made a part of this article by reference. 
(b)  Any inconsistencies between the powers granted to the board in the resolution adopted by the city council dated September 23, 1974, and herein incorporated by reference and the powers granted to the board in section 40-96 shall be resolved in favor of those provisions in section 40-96. 
(c)  The board's fiscal year shall be from July 1 through June 30. 
(Code 1982, § 33-15; Ord. No. 826; Ord. No. 1782, 1-9-2006) 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Authority to grant powers to be exercised by a joint authority, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3832.9, 15.2-1300. 
Sec. 40-96. - Powers of the Northern Virginia Cigarette Tax Board. 
    The Northern Virginia Cigarette Tax Board may delegate any of its powers to its administrator or employees and may adopt regulations regarding the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(1)  The board shall be granted the following powers: 
a.  To assess, collect and disburse the cigarette tax for each participating jurisdiction; 
b.  To audit sales of cigarettes for each participating jurisdiction; 
c.  To provide information to commonwealth's attorneys or city attorney for each participating jurisdiction; 
d.  To designate an administrator; 
e.  To manage the Northern Virginia Cigarette Tax Funds; 
f.  To retain a certified public accountant to audit its books; 
g.  To designate a depository bank; 
h.  To contract with member jurisdiction for administrative services; 
i.  To hold and convey real and personal property; 
j.  To enter into contracts; 
k.  To hire, supervise and discharge its employees; 
l.  To sue and be sued in its own name; 
m.  To prescribe the design of a stamp and to issue and sell said stamps to authorized dealers; 
n.  To establish different classes of taxpayers; 
o.  To promulgate resolutions for the assessment and collection of cigarette taxes and the enforcement of this article; and 
p.  To conduct inspections of any place of business in order to enforce the provisions of this article and all resolutions of the board. 
(2)  The board may employ legal counsel, bring appropriate court action in its own name to enforce payment of the cigarette tax or penalties owed and file tax liens against property of taxpayers hereunder. 
(3)  The board is authorized to enter into an agreement with the state department of taxation under which a registered agent with the NVCTB who is also qualified to purchase state revenue stamps, may qualify to purchase dual Virginia-NVCTB stamps from the state department of taxation. Authority to purchase dual Virginia-NVCTB stamps is granted solely by the board and may be revoked or suspended for violations of this article or resolutions adopted by the board. 
(4)  The board may appoint certain employees as tobacco revenue agents, who shall be required to carry proper identification while performing their duties. Tobacco revenue agents are further authorized to conduct inspections of any place of business and shall have the power to seize or seal any vending machines, seize any cigarettes, counterfeit stamps or other property found in violation of this article and shall have the power of arrest upon reasonable and probable cause that a violation of this article has been committed. The board is authorized to provide its tobacco revenue agents with firearms for their protection, emergency equipped vehicles while on duty, and other equipment deemed necessary and proper. 
(5)  The board may exchange information relative to the sale, use, transportation or shipment of cigarettes with an official of any other jurisdiction entrusted with the enforcement of the cigarette tax laws of said other jurisdiction. 
(Code 1982, § 33-16; Ord. No. 826; Ord. No. 1782, 1-9-2006) 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 40-97. - Jeopardy assessment. 
    If the administrator of the Northern Virginia Cigarette Tax Board determines that the collection of any tax, or any amount of tax required to be collected and paid under this article, will be jeopardized by delay, such administrator shall make an assessment of the tax or amount of tax required to be collected and shall mail or issue a notice of such assessment to the taxpayer together with a demand for immediate payment of the tax or of the deficiency in tax declared to be in jeopardy including penalties and interest. In the case of a current period, for which the tax is in jeopardy, the administrator may declare the taxable period of the taxpayer immediately terminated and shall cause notice of such finding and declaration to be mailed or issued to the taxpayer together with a demand for immediate payment of the tax based on the period declared terminated, and such tax shall be immediately due and payable, whether or not the terms otherwise allowed by this section for filing a return and paying the tax have expired. 
(Code 1982, § 33-17; Ord. No. 826; Ord. No. 1782, 1-9-2006) 
Sec. 40-98. - Procedure in the event of erroneous assessment. 
(a)  Request for hearing. Any person assessed by the Northern Virginia Cigarette Tax Board with a cigarette tax, penalties and interest or any person whose cigarettes, vending machines and other property have been sealed or seized under processes of this article, who has been aggrieved by such assessment, seizure or sealing, may file a request for a hearing before the administrator for the board for a correction of such assessment and the return of such property seized or sealed. 
(b)  Notice. Where holders of property interest in cigarettes, vending machines or other property are known at time of seizure or sealing, notice of seizure or sealing shall be sent to them by certified mail within 24 hours. Where such holders of property interests are unknown at time of seizure or sealing, it shall be sufficient notice to such unknown interest holders to post such notice to a door or wall of the room or building which contained such seized or sealed property. Any such notice of seizure or sealing shall include procedures for an administrative hearing for return of such property seized or sealed as well as affirmative defenses set forth in this section which may be asserted. 
(c)  Time limits. Such hearing shall be requested within ten days of the notice of such assessment, seizure or sealing and shall set forth the reasons why said; tax, penalties and interest, cigarettes, vending machines or other property should be returned or released. Within five days after receipt of such hearing request, the administrator shall notify the petitioner by certified mail of a date and time for the informal presentation of evidence at a hearing to be held within 15 days of the date notification is mailed. Any such request for hearing shall be denied if the assessed tax, penalties and interest have not been paid as required or if the request is received more than ten days from first notice to the petitioner of such seizure or sealing. Within five days after the hearing, the administrator shall notify the petitioner by registered mail whether the request of the petitioner for a correction has been granted or refused. 
(d)  Determination, appeal. Appropriate relief shall be given by the administrator if he is convinced by the preponderance of the evidence that said seized cigarettes were in the possession of a person other than the petitioner without the petitioner's consent at the time said cigarettes, vending machines or other property were seized or sealed or that petitioner was authorized to possess such untaxed cigarettes. If the administrator is satisfied that the tax was erroneously assessed, the administrator shall refund the amount erroneously assessed together with any interest and penalties paid and shall return any cigarettes, vending machines or other property seized or sealed to the petitioner. Any petitioner who is dissatisfied with the written decision of the board may, within 30 days of the date of such decision, appeal such decision to the appropriate court in the jurisdiction where the seizure or sealing occurred. 
(Code 1982, § 33-18; Ord. No. 826; Ord. No. 1782, 1-9-2006) 
Sec. 40-99. - Disposal of seized property. 
    Any seized and confiscated cigarettes, vending machines or other property used in the furtherance of any illegal evasion of the tax may be disposed of by sale or other method deemed appropriate by the Northern Virginia Cigarette Tax Board after any petitioner has exhausted all administrative appeal procedures. No credit from any sale of cigarettes, vending machines, or other property seized shall be allowed toward any tax and penalties assessed. 
(Code 1982, § 33-19; Ord. No. 826; Ord. No. 1782, 1-9-2006) 
Sec. 40-100. - Extensions of time. 
    The administrator, upon a finding of good cause may grant an extension of time to file a tax report upon written application for a period not exceeding 30 days. Except as hereinafter provided, no interest or penalty shall be charged, assessed or collected by reason of the granting of such an extension. 
(Code 1982, § 33-20; Ord. No. 826; Ord. No. 1782, 1-9-2006) 
Sec. 40-101. - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $2,500.00 or imprisonment for not more than 12 months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Such fine and/or imprisonment shall not relieve any such person from the payment of any tax, penalty or interest imposed by this article. 
(Code 1982, § 33-21; Ord. No. 826; Ord. No. 1782, 1-9-2006) 
Sec. 40-102. - Each violation a separate offense. 
    The sale of any quantity, the use, possession, storage or transportation of more than 60 packages of cigarettes upon which the NVCTB tax stamp has not been affixed or the proper jurisdictional tax has not been paid shall be and constitute a separate violation. Each continuing day of violation shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1982, § 33-22; Ord. No. 826; Ord. No. 1782, 1-9-2006; Ord. No. 1782, 1-9-2006) 
Secs. 40-103-40-132. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - TAX RELIEF FOR LOW INCOME ELDERLY OR PERMANENTLY AND TOTALLY DISABLED[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to exempt or defer taxes on property of certain elderly or handicapped persons, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3210 et seq. 

Sec. 40-133. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
    Combined deferral and exemption means exemption from city real estate tax and deferral from any and all remaining portion of the city real estate tax according to provisions of this article. 
    Gross combined income means the gross combined income from all sources of the owners of the dwelling residing therein and of any relatives of such owners of the dwelling residing therein. 
    Net combined financial worth means all assets of the owners of the dwelling and that of the spouse of any owner who resides therein, and that of the owner's relatives living in the dwelling, including equitable interests, excluding the value of the dwelling and the land in an amount not to exceed one acre upon which it is situated. Household furnishings are not included in this definition. 
    Treasurer means the Treasurer of the City of Falls Church, Virginia. 
(Code 1973, § 36-13; Code 1982, § 33-23; Ord. No. 602; Ord. No. 816; Ord. No. 890; Ord. No. 1247, 12-12-1988; Ord. No. 1781, 11-28-2005; Ord. No. 1920, 4-28-2014) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 40-134. - Exemption and deferral eligibility. 
(a)  The tax relief for low income elderly and/or persons permanently and totally disabled program provides real estate tax relief to eligible residents to help them remain in the city. Any person who is not less than 65 years of age on December 31 of the year immediately preceding the grant year, and/or who is permanently and totally disabled who owns or partially owns a dwelling as the sole dwelling of that person shall be eligible for and may apply for an exemption, or a combination of an exemption and deferral of real estate taxes on such dwelling and the land, in an amount not to exceed one acre, on which it is situated, as outlined in this subsection: 
If Income is And Assets are The Percent of the Tax Relief is Subject to a Cap of Percent of Deferral At or below 30% AMI* (based on household size, up to 4 persons max) $0-$540,000.00 100% $4,000.00 100% Between 31% of AMI and 50% AMI (based on household size, up to 4 persons max) $0-$540,000.00 100% $3,000.00 100% Between 51% of AMI and 80% AMI (based on household size, up to 4 persons max) $0-$540,000.00 100% $1,000.00 100% Between 81% AMI and $75,000.00 $0-$540,000.00 0% $0.00 100% Note-AMI is the Area Median Income for the Washington-Arlington-Alexandria, DC-VA-MD Metro Fair Market Rent Area as determined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). HUD income determinations are updated annually and are available from local HUD offices for the appropriate jurisdictions.  
;ol0; (b)\The term "income" is defined as combined income from all sources during the preceding calendar year by owners of the dwelling who use it as their principal residence and the owners' relatives who live in the dwelling. There shall be excluded all or any portion of the income received by a permanently disabled owner during the preceding calendar year regardless of the source, up to a maximum of $7,500.00, or one-half the amount received for a permanent disability. 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, if a person qualifies for an exemption or deferral under this section, and if the person can prove by clear and convincing evidence, as determined by the city or its designee, that such person's physical or mental health has deteriorated to the point that the only alternative to permanently residing in a hospital, nursing home, convalescent home or other facility for physical or mental care is to have a relative move in and provide care for the person, and if a relative does then move in for that purpose, then none of the income of the relative or of the relative's spouse shall be counted towards the income limit; provided the owner of the residence has not transferred assets in excess of $5,000.00 without adequate consideration within a three-year period prior to or after the relative moves into such residence. 
(d)  The net combined financial worth of the owners as of December 31 of the year immediately preceding the taxable year did not exceed $540,000.00. Household furnishings shall not be included. 
(Code 1973, § 36-14; Code 1982, § 33-24; Ord. No. 602; Ord. No. 652; Ord. No. 801; Ord. No. 816; Ord. No. 890; Ord. No. 938; Ord. No. 1020, 8-9-1982; Ord. No. 1225, 6-13-1988; Ord. No. 1247, 12-12-1988; Ord. No. 1283, 11-27-1989; Ord. No. 1363, 6-10-1991; Ord. No. 1385, 12-9-1991; Ord. No. 1463, 2-28-1994; Ord. No. 1563, 12-23-1996; Ord. No. 1715, 12-10-2001; Ord. No. 1746, 11-24-2003; Ord. No. 1781, 11-28-2005; Ord. No. 1810, 10-22-2007; Ord. No. 1920, 4-28-2014) 
State Law reference- Restrictions and exemptions, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3211, 58.1-3212. 
Sec. 40-135. - Application for exemption; exemption and deferral information. 
(a)  Application for exemption and deferral provided for herein shall be made not later than April 15 of each the year for which exemption is sought and every three years thereafter on a three-year cycle, with annual certification by the applicant that no information contained on the last preceding affidavit filed has changed to violate the limitations and conditions provided herein. Applications and certifications shall be submitted to the treasurer on forms to be provided by the treasurer. The treasurer may, for good cause shown, extend such deadline for persons making application for this exemption for the first time or for persons failing to meet such deadline due to demonstrated hardship. The application shall contain information under oath that includes the name of the owner and all relatives occupying such dwellings. 
(b)  The treasurer may require an applicant to answer questions under oath as to the eligibility of the applicant under this section and/or to produce for inspection certified federal income tax returns for the preceding three years to establish the total combined income or net combined financial worth as hereinbefore defined. 
(c)  If the application is made by a person filing for exemption because of permanent and total disability, the application shall also be accompanied by a certification by the Social Security Administration, the department of veteran's affairs or the state railroad retirement board or if such person is not eligible for certification by any of these agencies, a sworn affidavit by two medical doctors licensed to practice medicine in the state, to the effect that such person is permanently and totally disabled as defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3217. The treasurer shall find a person permanently and totally disabled for purposes of this section if he finds such person is certified as required by this section as unable to engage in any substantial gainful activity by reason of any medically determinable physical or mental impairment or deformity which can be expected to result in death or can be expected to last for the duration of such person's life. 
(d)  If the application is denied, the applicant shall be notified in a timely manner. 
(Code 1982, § 33-25; Ord. No. 602; Ord. No. 682; Ord. No. 801; Ord. No. 890; Ord. No. 1247, 12-12-1988; Ord. No. 1463, 2-28-1994; Ord. No. 1664, 1-24-2000; Ord. No. 1746, 11-24-2003; Ord. No. 1920, 4-28-2014) 
State Law reference- Application for exemption, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3213. 
Sec. 40-136. - Changes in ownership, income, financial worth, etc. 
    Any change in respect to gross combined income, net combined financial worth, ownership of the dwelling exempted or other factors which occur during the taxable year for which the application is filed, and which has the effect of exceeding or violating the limitations and conditions of this article or section 40-134, shall nullify any exemption for the remainder of the current taxable year and taxable year immediately following; except in the case of the death of a spouse over age 65 or who was permanently and totally disabled in a household in which the other spouse is under the age of 65 and not permanently and totally disabled, the exemption shall be prorated. Such proration shall be determined by multiplying the amount of the exemption or deferral by a fraction wherein the number of complete months of the year such property was properly eligible for such exemption or deferral is the numerator and the number 12 is the denominator. 
(Code 1973, § 36-20; Code 1982, § 33-26; Ord. No. 602; Ord. No. 890; Ord. No. 938; Ord. No. 1247, 12-12-1988; Ord. No. 1283, 11-27-1989; Ord. No. 1920, 4-28-2014) 
State Law reference- Change in circumstances, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3215. 
Sec. 40-137. - Amounts of exemption and deferral; repayment. 
(a)  For qualifying persons, the amount of exemption of the real estate tax relief levied not to exceed $4,000.00 in any tax year in the amount set out in section 40-134. For persons eligible for any exemption, a deferral may be claimed for the remaining tax liability. 
(b)  The accumulated amount of taxes deferred shall be paid, with simple annual interest as shall be set on an annual basis in accordance with the prime rate as of January 1 of the tax calendar year and not to exceed the interest rate allowable by state code, or eight percent, whichever is less, to the treasurer of the city by the vendor upon the sale of the dwelling, or from the estate of the decedent within one year after the death of the last owner who qualified for tax upon the real estate as if they had been assessed without regard to the deferral permitted by this section; provided such liens shall, to the extent that they exceed in the aggregate ten percent of the price for which such real estate may be sold, be inferior to all other liens on record. 
(Code 1973, §§ 36-18, 36-19; Code 1982, § 33-27; Ord. No. 602; Ord. No. 890; Ord. No. 938; Ord. No. 951; Ord. No. 1020, 8-9-1982; Ord. No. 1225, 6-13-1988; Ord. No. 1247, 12-12-1988; Ord. No. 1283, 11-27-1989; Ord. No. 1385, 12-9-1991; Ord. No. 1715, 12-10-2001; Ord. No. 1746, 11-24-2003; Ord. No. 1920, 4-28-2014) 
Sec. 40-138. - Validation of prior deferments. 
    All deferments effectuated under the authority of Ordinance No. 547, adopted March 27, 1973, are hereby specifically validated as provided in such ordinance. 
(Code 1973, § 36-19; Code 1982, § 33-28; Ord. No. 602; Ord. No. 1247, 12-12-1988) 
Sec. 40-139. - Certification to city treasurer. 
    The treasurer shall deduct the amount of exemption from the applicant's real estate tax bill for that year. 
(Code 1982, § 33-29; Ord. No. 602; Ord. No. 1247, 12-12-1988) 
Secs. 40-140-40-161. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - RELIEF FROM PAYMENT OF PERSONAL PROPERTY TAXES ON AUTOMOBILES[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 26. 
State Law reference- Personal property taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3500 et seq.; tangible personal property tax relief, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3523 et seq. 

Sec. 40-162. - Eligibility. 
(a)  The city finds that persons who are 65 years of age or older or permanently and totally disabled, who receive low incomes and who are the owners of a passenger automobile, are in need of public relief from the payment of certain personal property taxes upon such property. 
(b)  Any person who is, on December 31 of the year immediately preceding the grant year, 65 years of age or older or permanently and totally disabled and is the registered owner of a passenger automobile subject to assessment for personal property taxes may apply for relief from the payment of such taxes; provided: 
(1)  The person applying for the relief is a resident of the city, and is responsible for payment of city personal property tax. 
(2)  The total combined income received from all sources during the preceding calendar year by owners and the owners' relatives who live in the dwelling where the vehicle is located, for which exception is claimed, shall not exceed $20,000.00; provided up to $8,500.00 of income of each relative who is not the spouse of an owner living in the dwelling shall be excluded. There shall also be excluded, all or any portion of the income received by a permanently disabled owner during the preceding calendar year regardless of the source, up to a maximum of $7,500.00 or one-half the amount received for the permanent disability, whichever is greater. 
(3)  The net combined financial worth of the applicant, as of December 31 of the year preceding the grant year, did not exceed $150,000.00. Household furnishings shall not be included. 
(4)  If such automobile is co-owned, all owners must be 65 years of age or older or permanently and totally disabled; except, that the applicant's spouse need not have attained the age of 65 years or be permanently and totally disabled. 
(5)  If the application is made by a person filing for exemption because of permanent and total disability, the application shall also be accompanied by a certification by the Social Security Administration, or if such person is not eligible for Social Security, a sworn affidavit by two medical doctors licensed to practice medicine in the state, to the effect that such person is permanently and totally disabled. A person shall be found to be permanently disabled, for purposes of this article, if such person is certified as required by this section as unable to engage in any substantial gainful activity by reason of any medically determinable physical or mental impairment or deformity which can be expected to result in death or can be expected to last for the duration of such person's life. 
(6)  Within any given household, this relief shall apply to one and only one vehicle per household. 
(7)  Notwithstanding subsection (b) of this section, if a person qualifies for relief under this section, and if the person can prove by clear and convincing evidence, as determined by the city or its designee, that such person's physical or mental health has deteriorated to the point that the only alternative to permanently residing in a hospital, nursing home, convalescent home or other facility for physical or mental care is to move in with a relative or to have a relative move in and provide care for the person, and if a relative does then move in for that purpose, or the applicant moves in with a relative, then none of the income of the relative or of the relative's spouse shall be counted towards the income limit, provided the applicant has not transferred assets in excess of $5,000.00 without adequate consideration within a three-year period prior to or after the relative moves into such residence, or the applicant moves in with the relative. 
(Code 1982, § 33-30; Ord. No. 602; Ord. No. 653; Ord. No. 801; Ord. No. 890; Ord. No. 938; Ord. No. 989, 11-9-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1020, 8-9-1982; Ord. No. 1225, 6-13-1988; Ord. No. 1247, 12-12-1988; Ord. No. 1283, 11-27-1989; Ord. No. 1384, 12-9-1991; Ord. No. 1463, 2-28-1994; Ord. No. 1563, 12-23-1996; Ord. No. 1746, 11-24-2003) 
Sec. 40-163. - Application for relief. 
    The application for relief from the payment of such taxes is to be filed on forms to be furnished such person by the city upon request. Any such application for relief shall be made under oath and shall be filed on or before April 1 of the tax year for which such relief is sought and every three years thereafter on a three-year cycle, with annual certification by the applicant that no information contained on the last preceding affidavit filed has changed to violate the limitations and conditions provided herein. The city manager may, for good cause shown, extend such deadline for persons making application for this exemption for the first time, or for persons failing to meet such deadline due to demonstrated hardship. 
(Code 1982, § 33-31; Ord. No. 602; Ord. No. 682; Ord. No. 890; Ord. No. 989, 11-9-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1247, 12-12-1988; Ord. No. 1463, 2-28-1994; Ord. No. 1664, 1-24-2000) 
Sec. 40-164. - Verification of eligibility. 
    The city shall make such investigation as may is necessary to verify that the automobile for which such tax relief is sought is in fact owned by a city resident who was 65 years of age or older or permanently and totally disabled on December 31 of the year immediately preceding the grant year and who satisfied the requirements as set forth in section 40-162. If the application is denied, the city shall furnish the applicant a statement of the reasons for denial of the application, in a timely manner. 
(Code 1982, § 33-32; Ord. No. 602; Ord. No. 801; Ord. No. 1247, 12-12-1988) 
Sec. 40-165. - Discharge of liability for tax. 
    The city manager shall certify to the city treasurer annually those persons who qualify under this article for an exemption and the amount. The treasurer shall deduct the amount of exemption from the applicant's personal property tax bill for that year. 
(Code 1982, § 33-33; Ord. No. 602; Ord. No. 1247, 12-12-1988) 
Sec. 40-166. - Amount. 
    For qualifying persons, the amount of the relief of personal property tax as to any eligible automobile shall be the amount of the personal property tax not to exceed $25.00 in any tax year. 
(Code 1982, § 33-34; Ord. No. 602; Ord. No. 949; Ord. No. 1247, 12-12-1988) 
Sec. 40-167. - Changes in income, ownership, financial worth, etc. 
    Any change in respect to gross combined income, net combined financial worth, ownership of such automobile exempted, or other applicable factors, which occurs during the year for which the application is filed, and which has the effect of exceeding or violating the limitations and conditions of this article, shall nullify any exemption for the remainder of the current taxable year and the taxable year immediately following; provided the amount of relief shall be prorated when a qualifying spouse dies during the year for which application is made. Such prorating shall be determined by multiplying the amount of the exemption by a fraction wherein the number of complete months of the year such property was properly eligible for such exemption is the numerator and the number 12 is the denominator. 
(Code 1982, § 33-35; Ord. No. 602; Ord. No. 890; Ord. No. 1247, 12-12-1988; Ord. No. 1283, 11-27-1989) 
Secs. 40-168-40-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - MOTEL TAX FOR TRANSIENTS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Transient occupancy tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3819. 

Sec. 40-181. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commissioner of revenue means the commissioner of revenue of the city or any of his duly authorized deputies or agents or successors. 
    Lodging facility means any public or private hotel, inn, apartment, hostelry, tourist home or house, motel, roominghouse, boardinghouse, travel campgrounds or other facilities within the city offering guestrooms rented out for continuous occupancy for fewer than 30 consecutive days, and the owner and operator thereof, who, for compensation, furnishes lodging to any transients as hereinafter defined. 
    Room rental means the total charge made by any such lodging facility for lodging and/or space furnished any such transient. If the charge made by such transient includes any charge for services or accommodations in addition to that of lodging, and/or use of space, then such portion of the total charge as represents only room and/or space rental shall be distinctly set out and billed to such transient by such lodging facility as a separate item. 
    Transient means any person who, for any period of fewer than 30 consecutive days, either at his own expense or at the expense of another, obtains lodging or the use of any space in any lodging facility as hereinabove defined, for which lodging or use of space a charge is made. Transient shall include any natural person or individual or group of natural persons or individuals. The term "transient" shall also include a corporation or partnership or group of corporations or partnerships. The term "transient" shall also mean any natural person or individual who rents a meeting, banquet, or other lodging space for purposes other than lodging. Contracting and paying for the occupancy of a lodging room for fewer than 30 consecutive days when the lodging room are occupied by different individuals or by different groups of individuals for fewer than 30 consecutive days constitutes transient occupancy or use of the rooms and is subject to the tax provided by this article. 
(Code 1982, § 33-36; Ord. No. 723; Ord. No. 1414, 10-13-1992) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Transient occupancy is fewer than 30 days, etc., Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3819; definition of occupancy, Code of Virginia, § 88.1-3826. 
Sec. 40-182. - Levied; amount. 
    In addition to all other taxes of every kind now or hereinafter imposed by law, there is hereby imposed and levied on each and every transient a tax equivalent to eight percent of the total amount paid for room rental by or for any such transient to any lodging facility. 
(Code 1982, § 33-37; Ord. No. 723; Ord. No. 1296, 4-23-1990; Ord. No. 1414, 10-13-1992; Ord. No. 1906, 10-15-2013; Ord. No. 1973, § 1, 4-24-2017) 
State Law reference- Certain excise taxes permitted, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3840. 
Sec. 40-183. - Exceptions. 
    No tax shall be payable hereunder on room rental paid to any hospital, medical clinic, convalescent home or home for the aged. 
(Code 1982, § 33-38; Ord. No. 723; Ord. No. 1414, 10-13-1992) 
Sec. 40-184. - Collection. 
    Every person receiving any payment for room rental with respect to which a tax is levied under this article shall collect the amount of tax hereby imposed from the transient on whom the same is levied or from the person paying for such room rental, at the time payment for such room rental is made. 
(Code 1982, § 33-39; Ord. No. 723; Ord. No. 1414, 10-13-1992) 
Sec. 40-185. - Reports. 
(a)  The person collecting any such tax shall make out a report upon such forms and setting forth such information as the commissioner of revenue may prescribe and require, showing the amount of room rental charges collected and the tax required to be collected, and shall sign and deliver the same to the commissioner of revenue with a remittance of such tax. 
(b)  Such reports and remittances shall be made on or before the 20th day of the month following each month and covering the amount of tax collected during the preceding month, except that taxpayers who use a 13-period annual accounting cycle shall report and remit no later than the 20th day following the close of each accounting period. 
(Code 1982, § 33-40; Ord. No. 723; Ord. No. 1414, 10-13-1992; Ord. No. 1662, 1-10-2000) 
Sec. 40-186. - Other powers and duties of the commissioner of revenue. 
    It shall be the duty of the commissioner of revenue to ascertain the name of every person operating a motel in the city liable for the collection of the tax levied in this article. The commissioner of revenue shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this article for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the tax herein levied, and a copy of such rules and regulations shall be on file and available for public examination in the city manager's office. Failure or refusal to comply with any rules and regulations promulgated under this article shall be deemed a violation of this section. 
(Code 1982, § 33-41; Ord. No. 723; Ord. No. 1414, 10-13-1992) 
Sec. 40-187. - Violation and penalty. 
    Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $300.00, or may be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such violation or failure shall constitute a separate offense. Such conviction shall not relieve any such person from the payment, collection or remittance of such tax, penalties and interest, as provided in this article. 
(Code 1982, § 33-42; Ord. No. 723; Ord. No. 1414, 10-13-1992) 
Sec. 40-188. - Interest. 
    If any person shall fail or refuse to remit to the commissioner of revenue the tax required to be collected and paid under this article within the time and in the amount specified in this article, there shall be added to such tax by the commissioner of revenue a penalty of ten percent, and if the tax shall remain delinquent and unpaid for a period of one month from the date the same is due and payable, there shall be in addition added to such tax by the commissioner of revenue interest at the rate of ten percent annually, computed monthly on the amount of the tax for each month or portion thereof from the date upon which the tax is due as provided in this section. 
(Code 1982, § 33-43; Ord. No. 723; Ord. No. 1414, 10-13-1992) 
Cross reference- General penalty for violations of Code, § 1-12. 
Sec. 40-189. - Determination of tax due by commissioner of the revenue. 
    If such person required to collect and remit the tax imposed by this article fails to file a statement and a remittance, or if the commissioner of the revenue has reasonable cause to believe that an erroneous statement has been filed, the commissioner of revenue may proceed to determine the amount due to the city and in connection therewith shall make such investigation and take such testimony and other evidence as may be necessary; provided, however, that notice and opportunity to be heard be given any person who may become liable for the amount owing prior to any determination by the commissioner of revenue. 
(Code 1982, § 33-44; Ord. No. 723; Ord. No. 1414, 10-13-1992) 
Sec. 40-190. - Cessation of business. 
    Whenever any person required to collect and pay to the city a tax under this article shall quit or otherwise dispose of his business, any tax under the provisions of this article shall become immediately due, and such person shall immediately make a report and pay the tax due. 
(Code 1982, § 33-45; Ord. No. 723; Ord. No. 1414, 10-13-1992) 
Secs. 40-191-40-211. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - ANNUAL ASSESSMENT 

Sec. 40-212. - Conduct of reassessment. 
(a)  Real property shall be assessed annually at its fair market value as of January 1 of each year. 
(b)  All new buildings shall be assessed when substantially completed or fit for use and occupancy, regardless of the date of completion or fitness, and shall be entered in the books the fair market value of such building. No partial assessment as provided herein shall become effective until information as to the date and amount of such assessment is recorded in the office and made available for public inspection. The total tax on any such new building for that year shall be the sum of: the tax upon the assessment of the completed building, computed according to the ratio which the portion of the year such building is substantially completed or fit for use and occupancy bears to the entire year; and the tax upon the assessment of such new building as it existed on January 1 of that assessment year, computed according to the ratio which the portion of the year such building was not substantially complete or fit for use and occupancy bears to the entire year. 
(c)  With respect to any assessment made under this section after November 1 of any year, no penalty for nonpayment shall be imposed until the last to occur of: December 5 of such year; or 30 days following the date of the official billing. 
(d)  Any supplemental bill, which is levied for additional assessments not related to the substantial completion of a new building or for correctional purposes, shall be due on December 5 of the year in which the supplemental bill was issued, provided, however, that any supplemental bill issued after November 5 of any year shall be due and payable 30 days after the issuance thereof. Any supplemental levy shall be subject to penalty and interest, in the same manner as provided for the assessment of new buildings. 
(Code 1982, § 33-46; Ord. No. 731; Ord. No. 788; Ord. No. 925; Ord. No. 1456, 11-8-1993; Ord. No. 1742, 8-11-2003) 
Sec. 40-213. - Supervisor for reassessments. 
    The director of the department of finance shall be the supervisor in charge of the annual reassessments. 
(Code 1982, § 33-47; Ord. No. 731; Ord. No. 788; Ord. No. 925; Ord. No. 1254, 4-10-1989) 
Sec. 40-214. - How assessed. 
(a)  In accordance with the Code of Virginia, all real property will be assessed at 100 percent of fair market value. 
(b)  There is established a permanent board of equalization consisting of five members appointed to staggered terms as provided by law. The board shall have all powers, and shall conduct its business, as provided for under applicable law. 
(c)  Applications for relief made by property owners or lessees must be received by the board no later than the first Friday in June of the year for which application is made. 
(Code 1982, § 33-48; Ord. No. 731; Ord. No. 788; Ord. No. 1458, 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 1752, 3-8-2004; Ord. No. 1756, 4-12-2004; Ord. No. 1914, 1-13-2014; Ord. No. 1932, 2-23-2015) 
Secs. 40-215-40-223. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - TAX ON MEALS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference- Food and food establishments, ch. 12; food and food service establishments, § 8-272 et seq. 
State Law reference- Authority to impose food and beverage tax, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-1104, 58.1-3840. 

Sec. 40-224. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cater means the furnishing of food, beverages, or both on the premises of another, for compensation. 
    Collector means the commissioner of the revenue of the City of Falls Church or designee. 
    Commissioner of the revenue means the city commissioner of the revenue and any duly designated deputies, assistants, inspectors or other employees. 
    Food means all food, beverages or both, including alcoholic beverages, purchased in or from a food establishment, whether prepared in such food establishment or not and whether consumed on the premises or not, and without regard to the manner, time or place of service. 
    Food establishment means any place in or from which food or food products are prepared, packaged, sold or distributed in the city, including, but not limited to, any restaurant, dining room, grill, coffee shop, cafeteria, cafe, snack bar, lunch counter, convenience store, movie theater, delicatessen, confectionery, bakery, eating house, eatery, drugstore, ice cream/yogurt shop, lunch wagon or truck, pushcart or other mobile facility from which food is sold, public or private club, resort, bar, lounge, or other similar establishment, public or private, and shall include private property outside of and contiguous to a building or structure operated as a food establishment at which food or food products are sold for immediate consumption. 
    Meal means any prepared food or drink offered or held out for sale by a food establishment for the purpose of being consumed by any person to satisfy the appetite and is ready for immediate consumption. All such food and beverage, unless otherwise specifically exempted or excluded herein shall be included, whether intended to be consumed on the seller's premises or elsewhere, whether designated as breakfast, lunch, snack, dinner, supper or by some other name, and without regard to the manner, time or place of service. 
(Code 1982, § 33-49; Ord. No. 1684, 6-26-2000) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 40-225. - Levy. 
    There is hereby imposed and levied by the city on each person a tax at the rate of four percent on the amount paid for meals purchased from any food establishment, whether prepared in such food establishment or not, and whether consumed on the premises or not. 
(Code 1982, § 33-50; Ord. No. 1684, 6-26-2000) 
Sec. 40-226. - Collection of tax by seller. 
    Every person receiving any payment for food with respect to which a tax is levied hereunder shall collect and remit the amount of the tax imposed by this article from the person on which the same is levied or from the person paying for such food at the time payment for such food is made. As set forth in Code of Virginia, § 51.5-98, no blind person operating a vending stand or other business enterprise under the jurisdiction of the state department for the blind and vision impaired and located on property acquired and used by the United States for any military or naval purpose shall be required to collect or remit such taxes. The seller shall separately state the amount of the tax and add such tax to the amount charged for the meal, and the tax shall be paid by the seller to the city for its use as hereinafter provided. 
(Code 1982, § 33-51; Ord. No. 1684, 6-26-2000) 
State Law reference- Exemption from collection of meal tax, Code of Virginia, § 51.5-98. 
Sec. 40-227. - Collections held in trust. 
    All money collected as taxes under this article shall be deemed to be held in trust by the seller collecting the same until remitted to the city as provided in this article. 
(Code 1982, § 33-52; Ord. No. 1684, 6-26-2000) 
Sec. 40-228. - Exemptions; limits on application. 
(a)  The tax imposed under this article shall not be levied on the following items when served exclusively for off-premises consumption: 
(1)  Factory-prepackaged candy, gum, nuts and other items of essentially the same nature. 
(2)  Factory-prepackaged donuts, ice cream, crackers, nabs, chips, cookies and items of essentially the same nature. 
(3)  Food sold in bulk. For the purposes of this provision, the term "bulk sale" shall mean the sale of any item that would exceed the normal, customary and usual portion sold for on-premises consumption (e.g., a whole cake, a gallon of ice cream). The term "bulk sale" shall not include any food or beverage that is catered or delivered by a food establishment for off-premises consumption. 
(4)  Alcoholic and nonalcoholic beverages sold in factory sealed containers and purchased for off-premises consumption. 
(5)  Any food or food product purchased with food coupons issued by the United States Department of Agriculture under the food stamp program or drafts issued through the Virginia Special Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infants, and Children. 
(6)  Any food or food product purchased for home consumption as defined in the Federal Food Stamp Act of 1977, 7 USC 1012, as amended, and federal regulations adopted pursuant to that act, except sandwiches, salad bar items sold from a salad bar, prepackaged single-serving salads consisting primarily of an assortment of vegetables, and nonfactory sealed beverages. 
This subsection shall not affect provisions set forth in subsections (c)(3), (4), and (5) of this section. 
(b)  A grocery store, supermarket or convenience store shall not be subject to the tax, except for any portion or section therein designated as a delicatessen or designated for the sale of prepared food and beverages. 
(c)  The tax imposed hereunder shall not be levied on the following purchases of food and beverages: 
(1)  Food and beverages furnished by food establishments to employees as part of their compensation when no charge is made to the employee. 
(2)  Food and beverages sold by day care centers, public or private elementary or secondary schools or food sold by any college or university to its students or employees. 
(3)  Food and beverages for use or consumption and which are paid for directly by the commonwealth, any political subdivision of the commonwealth or the United States. 
(4)  Food and beverages furnished by a hospital, medical clinic, convalescent home, nursing home, home for the aged, infirm, handicapped, battered women, narcotic addicts or alcoholics, or other extended care facility to patients or residents thereof. 
(5)  Food and beverages furnished by a public or private nonprofit charitable organization or establishment or a private establishment that contracts with the appropriate agency of the commonwealth to offer means at concession prices to elderly, infirm, blind, handicapped or needy persons in their homes or at central locations. 
(6)  Food and beverages sold on an occasional basis (not exceeding 52 times per calendar year), by a nonprofit educational, charitable or benevolent organization, church, or religious body as a fundraising activity, the net profits of which are to be used by such organization exclusively for nonprofit educational, charitable, benevolent or religious purposes. 
(7)  Food and beverages sold through vending machines. 
(Code 1982, § 33-53; Ord. No. 1684, 6-26-2000) 
State Law reference- Exceptions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3840. 
Sec. 40-229. - Gratuities and service charges. 
    No such taxes on meals may be imposed on that portion of the amount paid by the purchaser as a discretionary gratuity in addition to the sales price of the meal; or that portion of the amount paid by the purchaser as a mandatory gratuity or service charge added by the restaurant in addition to the sales price of the meal, but only to the extent that such mandatory gratuity or service charge does not exceed 20 percent of the sales price. 
(Code 1982, § 33-54; Ord. No. 1684, 6-26-2000) 
State Law reference- Exception for gratuitities, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3840 A. 
Sec. 40-230. - Report of taxes collected; remittance; preservation of records. 
    Every seller shall make a report for each calendar month, showing the amount of the meal charges collected and the tax required to be collected upon forms setting forth such other information as the commissioner of the revenue may prescribe and require, and shall sign and deliver such report to the commissioner of the revenue with remittance of such tax. Such reports and remittances shall be made to the commissioner of the revenue on or before the 20th day of the calendar month following the month being reported, except that taxpayers who use a 13-period annual accounting cycle shall report and remit no later than the 20th day following the close of each accounting period. The tax required to be collected may be computed by the seller on the basis of four percent of the total amount of meal charges collected for the calendar month, and such remitted to the treasurer in that amount. For the purpose of compensating a restaurant for accounting for and remitting the tax levied by this article, such restaurant shall be allowed two percent of the amount of tax due and accounted for in the form of a deduction in submitting the return and paying the amount due by the due date. No deduction shall be allowed if the amount due was delinquent. Such records shall be kept and preserved for a period of five years. The commissioner of the revenue or his duly authorized agents shall have the power to examine such records at reasonable times and without unreasonable interference with the business of such person, for the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this section, and to make transcripts of all or any parts thereof. 
(Code 1982, § 33-55; Ord. No. 1684, 6-26-2000) 
Sec. 40-231. - Advertising payment or absorption of tax prohibited. 
    No person shall advertise or hold out to the public in any manner, directly or indirectly, that all or any part of a tax imposed under this article will be paid or absorbed by him or by anyone else, or that he or anyone else will relieve any purchaser of the payment of all or any part of such tax. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1982, § 33-56; Ord. No. 1684, 6-26-2000) 
Sec. 40-232. - Penalty and interest for failure to remit tax when due. 
    If any person whose duty it is to do so shall fail or refuse to remit to the commissioner of the revenue the tax required to be collected under this article within the time and in the amount specified in this article, there shall be added to such tax by the commissioner of the revenue a penalty in the amount of ten percent and interest at the rate of ten percent for late filing, if filed after the 20th day of the month, with the exception if the 20th day falls on a weekend or holiday, and ten percent interest per annum, which shall be computed upon the tax and penalty from the first day of the month following the date said taxes and penalty became due and payable. 
(Code 1982, § 33-57; Ord. No. 1684, 6-26-2000) 
Sec. 40-233. - Procedure upon failure or refusal to collect, etc., taxes. 
    If any person whose duty it is to do so shall fail or refuse to collect the tax imposed under this article or to make within the time provided in this article the reports and remittances required by this article, the commissioner of the revenue shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain the facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the commissioner of the revenue procures such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax payable by any person who has failed or refused to collect such tax or to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such person such tax and penalty and interest provided for in this article and shall notify such person by registered mail at his last known place of address of the amount of such tax and interest and penalty and the total amount thereof shall be payable with ten days from the date of such notice. 
(Code 1982, § 33-58; Ord. No. 1684, 6-26-2000) 
Sec. 40-234. - Liability for not paying meals tax. 
(a)  Meals tax administered by local governments are trust taxes, that is, taxes which are collected by a merchant from its customers for remittance to the locality. The most common forms of local trust taxes are meals and beverage taxes, transient occupancy tax and admissions tax. A seller of goods or services collects these taxes from patrons, but the moneys collected are never the property of the merchant. The amounts collected are funds that are held in trust for the locality until properly remitted. The trust tax belongs to the locality when it is collected, even though the merchant collects it. 
(b)  As such, the failure to remit a local trust tax can result in personal liability for the responsible officers or employees of a delinquent business, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3906. Liability can be extended to any person who had knowledge of the failure to file or pay the trust tax, authority to prevent such failure, and a duty to act on behalf of the business. Such liability is to be assessed and collected as taxes are assessed and collected. Additionally, any person willfully attempting to evade or defeat a trust tax may be held criminally liable for a class 1 misdemeanor punishable by up to one year in prison and/or a $2,500.00 fine, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3907. The wrongful or fraudulent use of collected food and beverage taxes constitute embezzlement, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3833, and is a felony, if over $200.00 is involved. 
(c)  Whenever any person required to collect and pay to the city a tax under this article shall cease to operate and shall otherwise dispose of his business, any tax payable under this article to the city shall become immediately due and payable and such person shall immediately make a report and pay the tax due. 
(Code 1982, § 33-59; Ord. No. 1684, 6-26-2000) 
State Law reference- Liability for payment of certain local taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3906. 
Sec. 40-235. - Enforcement of article provisions. 
(a)  Any person willfully failing or refusing to file a return as required under this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor except that any person failing to file such a return shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor if the amount of tax lawfully assessed in connection with the return is $500.00 or less. Any person violating or failing to comply with any other provision of this article shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, any corporate or partnership officer, as defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3906, or any other person required to collect, account for, or pay over the meals tax imposed under this article, who willfully fails to collect or truthfully account for or pay over such tax, or who willfully evades or attempts to evade such tax or payment thereof, shall, in addition to any other penalties imposed by law, be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(c)  Each violation of or failure to comply with this article shall constitute a separate offense. Conviction of any such violation shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection or remittance of the tax as provided in this section. 
(Code 1982, § 33-60; Ord. No. 1684, 6-26-2000) 
Secs. 40-236-40-263. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - EXEMPTION FROM TAXATION OF CERTIFIED SOLAR ENERGY EQUIPMENT, FACILITIES OR DEVICES[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to exempt certified solar energy equipment, etc., Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3661. 

Sec. 40-264. - Separate class of property. 
    Certified solar energy equipment, facilities and devices, as defined herein, are hereby declared to a separate class of property and shall constitute a classification for local taxation separate from other classifications of real or personal property. 
(Code 1982, § 33-61; Ord. No. 824) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3661 A. 
Sec. 40-265. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Certified solar energy equipment, facilities or devices means any property, including real or personal property, equipment, facilities, or devices, certified by the local certifying authority to be designed and used primarily for the purpose of providing for the collection and use of incident solar energy for water heating, space heating or cooling or other application which would otherwise require a conventional source of energy such as petroleum products, natural gas or electricity. 
    Local certifying authority means the city division of inspections of the department of public works. The state board of housing and community development shall promulgate regulations setting forth criteria for certifiable solar energy equipment. 
    Local tax rate means the real estate property tax rate. 
(Code 1982, § 33-62; Ord. No. 824) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3661 B. 
Sec. 40-266. - Exemption authorized. 
    Tax exemption is provided according to the terms of this article for qualified property owners who possess certified solar energy equipment, facilities or devices. 
(Code 1982, § 33-63; Ord. No. 824) 
Sec. 40-267. - Administration of exemption. 
    The exemption shall be administered by the division of inspections of the public works department and the commissioner of the revenue's office according to the general provisions of this article. 
(Code 1982, § 33-64; Ord. No. 824) 
Sec. 40-268. - Requirements. 
    Exemption shall be granted to persons subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  The title of the property for which exemption is claimed is held, or partially held, on the first day of the taxable year, by the person or persons claiming exemption, whether or not that person initially installed the equipment, facility or device up to a total of ten years' tax exemption for the originally installed equipment. 
(2)  The division of inspections of the public works department has determined, after examination of such equipment, facility or device that the unit primarily performs at least one of the functions set forth in section 40-265 and conforms to the requirements set by regulations of the state board of housing and community development. 
(3)  The city division of inspections of the department of public works has certified to the commissioner of revenue that the applicant has met all requirements qualifying such equipment, facilities or device for exemption from taxation. 
(Code 1982, § 33-65; Ord. No. 824) 
Sec. 40-269. - Claiming. 
(a)  The person claiming an exemption must file an application with the division of inspections of the public works department on forms provided by the state office of housing and community development and available from the division of inspections of the public works department. 
(b)  The application must be submitted with a set of plans and specifications, as required for city mechanical, electrical and plumbing permits, of the solar energy equipment, facilities or devices for which exemption is claimed to the division of inspections. 
(c)  Upon receipt of the certificate from the city division of inspections of the department of public works, the commissioner of revenue shall proceed to determine the value of such qualifying solar energy equipment, facilities or device. 
(Code 1982, § 33-66; Ord. No. 824) 
Sec. 40-270. - Appeal. 
    Any person aggrieved by a decision of the division of inspections of the public works department may appeal such decision to the state technical review board, which may affirm or reverse such decision. 
(Code 1982, § 33-67; Ord. No. 824) 
State Law reference- Appeal, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-366 C. 
Sec. 40-271. - Amount of exemption. 
(a)  The amount of the exemption provided by this section shall be determined by applying the local tax rate to the value of the certified solar energy equipment, facilities or devices and subtracting such amount, wholly or partially, either: 
(1)  From the total real property tax due on the real property to which such equipment, facilities, or devices are attached; or 
(2)  If such equipment, facilities, or devices are taxable as machinery and tools under Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3507, from the total machinery and tools tax due on such equipment, facilities, or devices, at the election of the taxpayer. 
(b)  For purposes of the administration of this section, and for no other purposes, the value of certified solar energy equipment, facilities or devices qualifying for exemption shall be presumed to be not less than the normal cost of purchasing and installing such equipment, facilities or devices. 
(Code 1982, § 33-68; Ord. No. 824) 
State Law reference- Determining amount of exemption, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3661.D, E. 
Sec. 40-272. - Effective date of exemption. 
    This exemption shall be effective in the tax year next succeeding the year in which application for exemption is made and shall be permitted for a term of ten years. In the case of real estate assessed pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3292, the exemption shall be effective when the real estate is first assessed, but not prior to the date of such application for exemption. 
(Code 1982, § 33-69; Ord. No. 824) 
State Law reference- Effective dates for exemption, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3661.D. 
Secs. 40-273-40-282. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - DUE DATE AND PAYMENT OF REAL ESTATE TAXES IN INSTALLMENTS 

Sec. 40-283. - Tax assessment. 
(a)  Effective January 1, 2015, a short calendar year real estate tax shall begin on January 1, 2015, and end on June 30, 2015. All real estate taxes shall be payable by the person who on January 1, 2014 of the short calendar year is the owner thereof. Effective July 1, 2015 and thereafter, however, the tax year for real property shall be the first day of July each year and end on the 30th day of June each year. 
    Beginning on July 1, 2015, and thereafter, the annual assessment and reassessment and equalization of assessments for real estate in the city shall have an effective tax date of July 1. 
    Payment terms; installments. All taxes assessed on real estate in the city each tax year shall be due and payable to the city treasurer, without discount, on or before December 5 of the year in which assessed, but may be paid in two equal installments, the first to be paid not later than December 5 and the last installment not later than the following June 5. The amount of such installment shall be delinquent as of that date, and if the second installment is not paid on or before June 5, the amount of such second installment shall be delinquent as of that date. Any payment made on real estate taxes after a penalty has accrued on the first half installment shall be applied first to the payment of the first half installment. 
(b)  Delinquency; penalties. To all real estate taxes that may be delinquent, there shall be added and collected as a part thereof a penalty as follows: On the first one-half installment, a penalty of ten percent or the sum of $10.00, whichever shall be the greater, if not paid on or before December 5. On the second one-half installment, a penalty of ten percent, or the sum of $10.00, whichever shall be the greater, if not paid on or before June 5. In addition to such penalties, interest of ten percent per annum shall be due on such taxes and penalties from the first day of the month following the month in which such taxes are due to be paid as required by subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1982, § 33-70; Ord. No. 1045, 5-9-1983; Ord. No. 1417, 10-26-1992; Ord. No. 1914, 1-13-2014) 
State Law reference- Due dates and penalties, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3916. 
Secs. 40-284-40-293. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - CONSUMER UTILITY TAXES[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 42; underground utilities, § 42-231 et seq. 
State Law reference- Tax on consumers of local telecommunication service, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3812. 

Sec. 40-294. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    CCF means the volume of gas at standard pressure and temperature in units of 100 cubic feet. 
    Consumer means every person who, individually or through agents, employees, officers, representatives or permittees, makes a taxable purchase of telephone, water, sewer, electricity, or natural gas services in the city. 
    Gas utility means a public utility authorized to furnish natural gas service in Virginia. 
    Kilowatt hours (kWh) delivered means 1,000 watts of electricity delivered in a one-hour period by an electric provider to an actual consumer, except in the case of eligible customer-generators (sometimes call cogenerators) as defined in Code of Virginia, § 56-594. The term "kilowatt hours delivered" also means kWh supplied from the electric grid to such customer-generators, minus the kWh generated and fed back to the electric grid by such customer-generators. 
    Person means any individual, corporation, company or other entity. 
    Pipeline distribution company means a person, other than a pipeline transmission company, which transmits, by means of a pipeline, natural gas, manufactured gas or crude petroleum and the products or byproducts thereof to a purchaser for purposes of furnishing heat or light. 
    Purchaser means every person who purchases a utility service. 
    Residential consumer means the owner or tenant of property used primarily for residential purposes, including but not limited to, separately metered apartment houses and other multiple-family dwellings. 
    Seller means every person, whether a public service corporation of the city, or not, who sells or furnishes a utility service. 
    Service provider means a person who delivers electricity to a consumer or a gas utility or pipeline distribution company which delivers natural gas to a consumer. 
    Used primarily relates to the larger portion of the use for which electric or natural gas utility service is furnished. 
    Utility service means local exchange telephone service, electricity service, gas service, water service and sewer service furnished in the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 33-71; Ord. No. 1690, 10-30-2000) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 40-295. - Telephone utility consumer tax. 
(a)  Tax imposed and levied. For each and every fiscal year beginning July 1 and ending June 30 of each such year, unless otherwise changed by the council, there is hereby imposed and levied by the city upon each and every purchaser of telephone utility service a tax as described in this subsection. The amount subject to taxation shall be exclusive of any federal tax and in the case where a bill is rendered other than monthly, the exclusion amount shall be multiplied by the number of months of service the bill represents. 
(1)  Residential users. Ten percent of the monthly charge excluding the amount in excess of $50.00 of the monthly charge. 
(2)  Commercial and industrial users. Twenty percent of the monthly charge excluding the amount in excess of $50.00 of the monthly charge. 
(b)  Pay telephone; long distance, etc. The tax hereby imposed and levied on purchasers with respect to telephone service shall apply to all charges made for local telephone exchange service, except as follows: 
(1)  Coinbox telephones. No tax shall be imposed on telephone service paid for by inserting coins in coin-operated telephones. 
(2)  Flat rate service. With respect to flat rate and flat message rate service, the tax shall apply only to the amount payable for local area service and shall not apply to any specific charge for calls to points outside the city or to any general charge or rate differential payable for the privilege of calling points outside the city. 
(3)  Message rate service. Where purchasers of telephone service are charged on a message-rate basis, the tax shall apply only to the basic charge for such service and shall not apply to any charge for additional message units. 
(c)  Collection and payment of tax. The aforementioned tax upon utility service shall be made by the seller against the purchaser, with respect to telephone utility service, and collected by the seller from the purchaser and shall be paid by the purchaser unto the seller for the use of the city at the time the purchase price of such charge shall become due and payable. 
(d)  Duty to report and remit tax. It shall be the duty of every seller, in acting as the tax collection medium or agency for the city, to collect from the purchaser, for the use of the city, the tax hereby imposed and levied at the time of collecting the purchase price charged for the telephone utility service, and the taxes collected during each calendar month shall be reported and remitted by the seller to the commissioner of the revenue of the city on or before the 15th day of the following month thereafter. The required report shall be in such form as may be prescribed by the commissioner. 
(Code 1982, § 33-72; Ord. No. 1690, 10-30-2000) 
State Law reference- Consumer utility tax on telegraph and telephone companies, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3812; local tax for enhanced 911 service, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3813.1. 
Sec. 40-296. - Water and sewer utility consumer tax. 
(a)  For each and every fiscal year beginning July 1 and ending June 30 of each such year, unless otherwise changed by the council, there is hereby imposed and levied by the city upon each and every purchaser of water and sewer utility service a tax as described in this subsection: 
(1)  Residential user. Ten percent of the monthly charge excluding the amount in excess of $50.00 of the monthly charge. 
(2)  Multiunit housing projects or apartments served by master meters. Eight percent of the monthly charge. 
(3)  Commercial and industrial users. Eight percent of the monthly charge. 
(b)  The tax hereby imposed and levied shall not apply to the purchase of bottled water. 
(Code 1982, § 33-73; Ord. No. 1690, 10-30-2000) 
State Law reference- Local tax on consumers of utility services, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814. 
Sec. 40-297. - Electric utility consumer tax. 
(a)  Imposed and levied. In accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814, there is hereby imposed and levied a monthly tax on each purchase of electricity delivered to consumers by a service provider, classified as determined by such provider, as follows: 
(1)  Residential consumers. 
a.  Single unit consumers. Such tax shall be $0.70 plus the rate of $0.007535 on each kWh delivered monthly to residential consumers by a service provider not to exceed $5.00 monthly. 
b.  Multiunit consumers. Such tax on residential multiunit consumers, including but not limited to master metered apartments, condominiums, or other multiunits shall be at the same tax rate per residential unit as single unit consumers. 
(2)  Nonresidential consumers. Such tax on nonresidential consumers shall be at the rates per month for the classes of nonresidential consumers as set forth in this subsection: 
a.  Commercial consumers. Such tax shall be $0.92 plus the rate of $0.004807 on each kWh delivered monthly to commercial consumers. 
b.  Industrial consumers. Such tax shall be $0.92 plus the rate of $0.004807 on each kWh delivered monthly to industrial consumers. 
(b)  Billing, collection and remittance of tax. The service provider shall bill the electricity consumer tax to all users who are subject to the tax and to whom it delivers electricity and shall remit the same to the commissioner of the revenue for the city on a monthly basis on forms provided by the commissioner. Such taxes shall be paid by the service provider to the city in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814 F and G and Code of Virginia, § 58.1-2901. If any consumer receives and pays for electricity but refuses to pay the tax imposed by this section, the service provider shall notify the commissioner of the revenue of the city of the name and address of such consumer. If any consumer fails to pay a bill issued by a service provider, including the tax imposed by this section, the service provider must follow its normal collection procedures and upon collection of the bill or any part thereof must apportion the net amount collected between the charge for electric service and the tax and remit the tax portion to the city. Any tax paid by the consumer to the service provider shall be deemed to be held in trust by such provider until remitted to the city. Such remittance shall be done before the last day of the calendar month following the month the tax was received by the service provider. 
(c)  Computation of bills not on monthly basis. Bills shall be considered as monthly bills for the purposes of this section if submitted 12 times per year of approximately one month each. Accordingly, the tax for a bimonthly bill (approximately 60 days) shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  The kWh will be divided by two. 
(2)  A monthly tax will be calculated using the rates set forth in this section. 
(3)  The tax determined by subsection (c)(2) of this section shall be multiplied by two. 
(4)  The tax in subsection (c)(3) of this section may not exceed twice the monthly maximum tax. 
(Code 1982, § 33-74; Ord. No. 1690, 10-30-2000; Ord. No. 1693, 12-11-2000) 
State Law reference- Local tax on consumers of utility services, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814. 
Sec. 40-298. - Local natural gas utility consumer tax. 
(a)  Imposed and levied. In accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814, there is hereby imposed and levied a monthly tax on each purchase of natural gas delivered to consumers by pipeline distribution companies and gas utilities classified by class of consumers as such term is defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814 J, as follows: 
(1)  Residential consumers. 
a.  Single unit consumers. Such tax on residential consumers of natural gas shall be $0.70 plus at the rate of $0.0039 on CCF delivered monthly to residential consumers, not to exceed $5.00 per month. 
b.  Multiunit consumers. Such tax on multiunit residential dwelling unit consumers of natural gas shall be $1.016 plus at the rate of $0.01759 on CCF delivered monthly to multiunit residential customers. 
(2)  Nonresidential consumers. Such tax on nonresidential consumers shall be at the rates per month shown for each CCF delivered by a pipeline distribution company or a gas utility for the classes as set forth in this subsection: 
a.  Commercial consumers. Such tax shall be $0.676 plus the rate of $0.04098 on each CCF delivered monthly to commercial consumers. 
b.  Industrial consumers. Such tax shall be $0.676 plus the rate of $0.098 on each CCF delivered monthly to industrial consumers. 
(3)  Effective date of tax. The conversion of tax pursuant to this section to monthly CCF delivered shall not be effective before the first meter reading after December 31, 2000, prior to which time the tax previously imposed by the city shall be in effect. 
(b)  Billing, collection and remittance of tax. The service provider shall bill the natural gas consumer tax to all users who are subject to the tax and to whom it delivers natural gas and shall remit the same to the commissioner of the revenue for the city on forms provided by the commissioner on a monthly basis. Such taxes shall be paid by the service provider to the city, in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814 H and I, and Code of Virginia, § 58.1-2901. If any consumer receives and pays for natural gas billed but refuses to pay the tax imposed by this section, the service provider shall notify the commissioner of the revenue of the city of the name and address of such consumer. If any consumer fails to pay a bill issued by a service provider, including the tax imposed by this section, the service provider must follow its normal collection procedures and upon collection of the bill or any part thereof must apportion the net amount collected between the charge for natural gas and the tax and remit the tax portion to the city. Any tax paid by the consumer to the service provider shall be deemed to be held in trust by such provider until remitted to the city. Such remittance shall be done before the last day of the calendar month following the month the tax was received by the service provider. 
(c)  Computation of bills not on monthly basis. Bills shall be considered as monthly bills for the purposes of this section if submitted 12 times per year of approximately one month each. Accordingly, the tax for a bimonthly bill, approximately 60 days, shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  The CCF will be divided by two. 
(2)  A monthly tax will be calculated using the rates set forth in this section. 
(3)  The tax determined by subsection (c)(2) of this section shall be multiplied by two. 
(4)  The tax in subsection (c)(3) of this section may not exceed twice the monthly maximum tax. 
(Code 1982, § 33-75; Ord. No. 1690, 10-30-2000) 
State Law reference- Local tax on consumers of utility services, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814. 
Sec. 40-299. - Exemptions, records, and penalties. 
(a)  The United States of America, the state, the political subdivisions and alien employees of foreign embassies and legations are hereby exempt from the taxes imposed by this article. 
(b)  Each and every seller shall keep complete records showing all such purchases in the city, which records shall show the price charged against each purchaser with respect to each purchase, the date, the date of payment and the amount of tax imposed hereunder, and such records shall be kept open for inspection by the duly authorized agents of the city at reasonable times. The duly authorized agents of the city shall have the right, power and authority to make such transcripts thereof during such times as they may desire. 
(c)  Any consumer of electricity or natural gas failing, refusing or neglecting to pay the tax imposed and levied under this article, and any officer, agent or employee of any service provider violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $1,000.00 nor more than $2,500.00, or by imprisonment in jail for not more than 364 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such failure, refusal, neglect or violation shall constitute a separate offense. Such conviction shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection and remittance of the tax as provided in this article. 
(Code 1982, § 33-76; Ord. No. 1690, 10-30-2000) 
State Law reference- Local tax on consumers of utility services, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3814. 
Sec. 40-300. - Mobile local telecommunication service tax. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed and levied by the city upon every mobile service consumer a tax in the amount of ten percent of the monthly gross charges, as defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3812, as amended, however said tax shall not be applicable to any amount so charged in excess of $30.00 per month for each mobile service consumer. 
(b)  Every mobile service provider shall collect the tax from the mobile service consumer by adding the tax to the monthly gross charge for such services. The tax shall, when collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the monthly gross charge. Until the mobile service consumer pays the tax to the mobile service provider, the tax shall constitute a debt of the mobile service consumer to the city. If any mobile service consumer refuses to pay the tax, the mobile service provider shall notify the city. After the mobile service consumer pays the tax to the mobile service provider, the taxes collected shall be deemed to be held in trust by the mobile service provider until remitted to the city treasurer. 
(c)  A mobile service provider shall remit monthly to the city treasurer the amount of tax billed during the preceding month to mobile service consumers with a service address, as defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3812, as amended, in the city. 
(d)  The terms "consumer," "gross charge," "local mobile telecommunications service," "mobile service consumer," "mobile service provider," "place of primary use," "service address," and "service provider" have the definitions specified in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3812. 
(Code 1982, § 33-76.1; Ord. No. 1780, 9-26-2005) 
Secs. 40-301-40-318. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - EMERGENCY OR ENHANCED PHONE SERVICE (E-911) TAX[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
State Law reference- Local tax for enhanced 911 service, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3813.1. 

Sec. 40-319. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    E-911 system means a telephone service which utilizes a computerized system to automatically route emergency telephone calls placed by dialing the digits "911" to the proper public safety answering point serving the jurisdiction from which the emergency telephone call was placed. An E-911 system includes selective routing of telephone calls, automatic telephone number identification and automatic location identification performed by computers and other ancillary control center communications equipment. 
    Local exchange telephone system means, as it applies to an E-911 system, local telephone service, a switched local exchange access service. 
    Public safety answering point means a communications facility operated on a 24-hour basis which first receives E-911 calls from persons in an E-911 service area and which may, as appropriate, directly dispatch safety services or extend, transfer or relay E-911 calls to appropriate public safety agencies. 
    Purchaser means every person who purchases a local exchange telephone service within the city. 
    Seller means every person who sells or furnishes local exchange telephone services within the city. 
    Utility service means local exchange telephone service furnished within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 33-77; Ord. No. 1398, 4-27-1992) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 40-320. - Amount of tax on telephone service. 
    Pursuant to the authority set forth in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3813, as amended, there is hereby imposed and levied by the city upon each purchaser of local exchange telephone service, a tax in the amount of $1.00 per telephone line per month. This tax shall be paid by the purchaser to the seller of local exchange telephone service for the use by the city to pay the capital, installation and maintenance cost and recurring maintenance cost of its E-911 system. 
(Code 1982, § 33-78; Ord. No. 1398, 4-27-1992; Ord. No. 1507, 4-24-1995) 
Sec. 40-321. - Exemptions. 
    The following persons shall be exempt from the payment of the tax provided for herein: 
(1)  The United States of America, the commonwealth and all political subdivisions, boards, agencies, commissions and authorities of the state. 
(2)  Purchasers or lessees of local exchange telephone services who utilize coin-operated telephones. 
(3)  Persons qualified for partial or total real property tax relief or rental relief under the city tax exemption program for elderly and totally disabled persons, as certified by the city treasurer's office, and persons occupying housing with rental subsidy by a governmental program of relief for elderly and disabled persons. 
(Code 1982, § 33-79; Ord. No. 1398, 4-27-1992) 
Sec. 40-322. - Collection and remittance by the seller. 
    It shall be the duty of every seller in acting as the tax collection agency for the city to collect from the purchaser for the use of the city the tax hereby imposed and levied at the time of collecting the purchase price charged, and the taxes imposed, levied and collected during each calendar month shall be reported and paid by each seller to the city treasurer on or before the 15th day of the second calendar month thereafter, together with the name and address of any purchaser who has refused to pay the tax. The required report shall be in a form prescribed by the city treasurer. 
(Code 1982, § 33-80; Ord. No. 1398, 4-27-1992) 
Sec. 40-323. - Records of the seller. 
    Each seller shall keep complete records showing all purchases in the city, which shall show the price charged against each purchaser with respect to each purchase, the date, the date of payment and the amount of tax imposed hereunder. Such records shall be kept open for inspection by the city, and the city shall have the right to make transcripts thereof during such time as it may desire. 
(Code 1982, § 33-81; Ord. No. 1398, 4-27-1992) 
Secs. 40-324-40-351. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - EXEMPTION FOR CERTAIN REHABILITATED, RENOVATED OR REPLACEMENT COMMERCIAL REAL ESTATE[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
State Law reference- Exemption for certain rehabilitated, renovated or replacement commercial structures, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3221. 

Sec. 40-352. - Intent and policy. 
    It is the purpose of this article to implement the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3221 which defines and classifies rehabilitated commercial real estate as a separate class of property in order to permit the city to allow a tax exemption on rehabilitated structures thereon. Such exemption will provide an economic incentive to owners and businesses to improve their properties and will help to prevent the vacation and deterioration of older commercial buildings which is harmful to the health and welfare of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 33-83; Ord. No. 1560, 11-25-1996) 
Sec. 40-353. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Base value means the assessed value of the structure as of January 1 of the year in which the rehabilitation begins. 
    Commercial use means those uses that are permitted in B-1, B-2, and B-3 zoning districts as they are defined in chapter 48, pertaining to zoning. 
    Date of application means the date upon which the application required in section 40-356 is filed with the assessing officer. 
    Office use means a room, set of rooms, or a building where the business of a commercial or industrial organization or of a professional person is conducted and where no merchandise or wares are sold except as incidental to the business that meets this definition. 
    Replacement means the complete removal of an existing commercial structure and the erecting of a new commercial structure. 
    Structure, as used in this article XVI, means a building not less than 20 years old on the date of the application. 
    Substantially rehabilitated or renovated structure means an existing structure which has been improved so as to increase the assessed value of the structure by no less than 100 percent over its assessed value on the date of application. 
    Taxable year shall mean the calendar year, from January 1 through December 31, for which real property tax is imposed or an exemption is claimed under this article. 
(Code 1982, § 33-84; Ord. No. 1560, 11-25-1996; Ord. No. 1964, 11-28-2016) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 40-354. - Exemption authorized. 
    Commercial use real property on which a structure no less than 20 years of age has been substantially rehabilitated for commercial use shall be partially exempt from taxation for a period of ten years, commencing on January 1 of the year following completion of the rehabilitation; provided, however, that no property owner may apply for exemption on the basis of a building permit issued prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Code 1982, § 33-85; Ord. No. 1560, 11-25-1996; Ord. No. 1964, 11-28-2016) 
Sec. 40-355. - Eligibility requirements. 
    Any owner of real estate upon which there exists a structure of no less than 20 years of age, which structure is proposed to be substantially rehabilitated, renovated, or replaced resulting in an increase or improvement of at least 10,000 square feet of office space by adding new office space, renovating or rehabilitating existing office space, or converting other uses to office space shall be eligible to apply for a partial exemption authorized in section 40-354. 
    To be eligible for the exemption the structure must be one that does not contain residential rental units, residential condominium units, townhouses or a single-family attached unit. The structure will qualify for the exemption only after the requirements of this article have been satisfied, and where the rehabilitation, renovation or replacement is the result of a single project with all work undertaken pursuant to a single building permit or combination of permits issued within a 60-day period and completed within 24 months from the date the initial construction permit was issued. 
(Code 1982, § 33-86; Ord. No. 1560, 11-25-1996; Ord. No. 1964, 11-28-2016) 
Sec. 40-356. - Application process and fee. 
(a)  Applications for exemptions shall be filed with the assessing officer on forms provided for that purpose prior to beginning the proposed rehabilitation. A separate application shall be submitted for each structure. 
(b)  The appropriate building permits shall be acquired prior to the filing of the application and the beginning of the rehabilitation. 
(c)  The assessing officer may require the applicant to submit all documentation deemed necessary to establish eligibility for an exemption. No application will be considered complete or will be processed until receipt of such information. 
(d)  A processing fee of $250.00 shall be paid to the city with each application. 
(Code 1982, § 33-87; Ord. No. 1560, 11-25-1996; Ord. No. 1964, 11-28-2016) 
Sec. 40-357. - Inspections; notification of completion. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a completed application for an exemption and immediately prior to commencement of the proposed rehabilitation, the assessing officer shall inspect the structure to verify that appropriate building permits were obtained for the rehabilitation, renovation or replacement of the structure. 
(b)  After the rehabilitation has been completed, the owner shall submit a written request to the assessing officer to inspect the structure to determine whether the rehabilitation, renovation or replacement was completed and if the property then qualifies for the rehabilitated property exemption. Such inspection and determination shall be made by the assessing officer within 60 days after such written request is submitted. If the property qualifies for such exemption, then the tax exemption shall become effective beginning January 1 of the next calendar year. 
(c)  No structure shall be eligible for exemption if such access, for the purposes of assessing the structure and determining whether the requirements of this section have been met, is denied. 
(Code 1982, § 33-88; Ord. No. 1560, 11-25-1996; Ord. No. 1964, 11-28-2016) 
Sec. 40-358. - Amount, commencement and duration of exemption. 
(a)  The partial exemption shall be the amount of real estate taxes resulting from the increase in assessed value attributable to the substantial rehabilitation, renovation or replacement of the structure, as determined by the assessing officer, and this amount only shall be applicable to subsequent assessments commencing on January 1 of the year following completion of the rehabilitation, renovation or replacement. An increase in an assessment occurring after the first year of the exemption shall not result in an increase in the exemption. In no case shall an exemption be permitted if the assessed value falls below the base value in any given year, or if the exemption causes the total tax derived from the property or use thereof to be less than the total annual tax paid prior to the rehabilitation, renovation or replacement. 
(b)  The exemption shall commence on January 1 of the year following completion of the rehabilitation, provided that the assessing officer verifies that the rehabilitation described in the application has been completed and meets the criteria established in this article. 
(c)  The 100 percent exemption shall be a credit against real estate taxes and shall run with the real estate for a period of five years. Upon expiration of the initial five-year exemption period, a 50 percent exemption period will immediately commence during which time there shall be a credit against real estate taxes in the amount of 50 percent of the exemption described in subsection 40-358(a) above, which credit will be subject to all of the requirements for the previous 100 percent credit, and shall be applied to the real estate tax bill for the property for each of the next five years. 
(d)  In the event that real estate exempted from taxes under this article ceases being used, in whole or in part, for office use, eligibility for further tax exemptions for the portion of space that is no longer used for office purposes shall be terminated immediately. 
(e)  No improvements made upon vacant land shall be eligible for partial exemption from real estate taxation pursuant to this article XVI. 
(Code 1982, § 33-89; Ord. No. 1560, 11-25-1996; Ord. No. 1964, 11-28-2016) 
Sec. 40-359. - True value to be shown on land books. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall be construed so as to permit the assessing officer to list upon the land book any reduced value due to the exemption provided in this article. 
(Code 1982, § 33-90; Ord. No. 1560, 11-25-1996) 
Sec. 40-360. - Duty of assessing officer. 
    It shall be the duty of the assessing officer to clearly mark the tax records so as to identify, by markings, colored cards or other method, the properties to which this exemption shall be granted. 
(Code 1982, § 33-91; Ord. No. 1560, 11-25-1996) 
Secs. 40-361-40-378. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVII. - TECHNOLOGY ZONE[15] 
Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
State Law reference- Local enterprise zones program for technology zones, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3245.12; creation of local technology zones, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3850. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 40-379. - Purpose. 
    The city finds that the development of its commercial and industrial tax base requires incentives, and determines that an appropriate method of offering incentives for the city is to create a technology zone, as guided and authorized by Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3850. The city believes that the establishment of a technology zone will improve the economic conditions of the city which would benefit the welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 33-92; Ord. No. 1594, 12-22-1997) 
Sec. 40-380. - Administration. 
(a)  The administrator of the city technology zone shall be the city's economic development director or his functional successor. There is hereby established a review committee consisting of one representative each from the city's economic development office, the commissioner of the revenue's office and the economic development authority ("EDA") which shall approve or deny all applications submitted based on the standards of this article. The city's business tax auditor will research and advise the committee on applicants' eligibility. The city's chief technology officer will be a resource for consultation for the committee. 
(b)  The administrator shall be the single point-of-contact for qualified businesses to take advantage of the technology zone incentive described in this article, and shall provide recommendations as necessary to streamline the processes for a business to qualify and obtain the incentive. 
(Code 1982, § 33-93; Ord. No. 1594, 12-22-1997; Ord. No. 1965, 11-28-2016) 
Sec. 40-381. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Qualified technology business. The term qualified technology business shall mean a company or identifiable subdivision of a company that have 50 percent or more of its gross receipts derived from the creation, design and/or research and development of technology hardware or software. Web design or simple use of commercial off-the-shelf products without integrating or extending product design or capabilities are not qualified primary functions. The use of computer, telecommunications service, web page, social networking or internet sites in a business is insufficient to qualify that entity as a technology business. Online accounting, legal, investment and financial service businesses are not eligible for the program. A qualified technology business shall employ more than one full-time equivalent employee, which may include the business owner. This creation of a technology zone does not affect any other existing requirements for businesses, such as zoning regulations. Existing companies within the boundaries of the city which qualify under any of the criteria set forth in this definition shall be qualified as a technology company. A company meeting the criteria which moves into the city shall also qualify. 
(Code 1982, § 33-94; Ord. No. 1594, 12-22-1997; Ord. No. 1965, 11-28-2016) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 40-382. - Boundaries and applicability. 
    The technology zone shall include all locations for which a commercial certificate of occupancy can be issued by the City of Falls Church, Virginia. The technology zone shall not include properties zoned "R" or uses that are enabled by a home occupation permit as defined in chapter 48, Zoning, section 48-2. 
(Code 1982, § 33-95; Ord. No. 1594, 12-22-1997; Ord. No. 1965, 11-28-2016) 
Secs. 40-383-40-407. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TAX EXEMPTION 

Sec. 40-408. - Taxes eligible for exemption. 
    Qualified technology businesses shall be exempt from the business, professional and occupational license taxes and fees imposed by article XVIII of this chapter that would otherwise be imposed on income derived from the creation, design and/or research and development of technology hardware or software. Only gross receipts attributable to qualified primary functions are exempt from these taxes. Not exempt from taxes are online accounting, legal, investment and financial service functions. 
(Code 1982, § 33-101; Ord. No. 1594, 12-22-1997; Ord. No. 1965, 11-28-2016) 
Sec. 40-409. - Amount of exemption. 
    Qualified technology businesses shall be exempt for three consecutive calendar years from the taxes identified in section 40-408 at 100 percent abatement and for two additional years at 50 percent abatement. Year 1 is the calendar year in which the business becomes a qualified technology business if it qualified prior to June 30 of the year. Otherwise, year 1 shall be the year following the year in which the business becomes a qualified technology business. Qualified technology businesses shall receive the exemption established by this article for five years. Once a business has qualified as a technology business, it or its principal owners shall not be entitled to additional years or any parts thereof. If a business ceases to be a qualified technology business during a year in which the rebates or exemptions apply, they shall be prorated for the months the business was a qualified technology business. The city's business tax auditor will conduct annual reviews of participating businesses to determine status of eligibility. 
(Code 1982, § 33-102; Ord. No. 1594, 12-22-1997; Ord. No. 1965, 11-28-2016) 
Sec. 40-410. - Procedure for tax exemption. 
    Any business wishing to take advantage of the tax exemption allowed by this article XVII shall submit application to the administrator for certification as a qualified technology business. The application must be made within six months of the month in which the applicant met the definition of a qualified technology business. The administrator shall submit the application to the commissioner of revenue for review. After the commissioner determines that no other unpaid taxes are outstanding, the application will be returned to the administrator who will then promptly forward it to the review committee for determination of eligibility, which determination shall be completed within 30 days after receipt of the application by the commissioner of the revenue. If it meets the requirements of this division, the business shall be certified by the administrator as a qualified technology business and shall be entitled to the exceptions created by this article following committee approval and within 60 days of the application submission. In the event it is determined that the applicant has outstanding unpaid taxes, or does not meet the requirements of this division, the administrator shall be notified immediately, and the administrator shall notify the business immediately thereafter. 
(Code 1982, § 33-103; Ord. No. 1594, 12-22-1997; Ord. No. 1965, 11-28-2016) 
Sec. 40-411. - Compliance. 
    Failure of the business to pay in full by the due date any taxes imposed by the city shall result in the loss of the exemption for the remainder of the current year upon a finding by the administrator that such delinquency is significant. The city reserves the right to withdraw qualified technology business status for any business that is not compliant with any city ordinance, regulation, or other legal requirement. 
(Code 1982, § 33-104; Ord. No. 1594, 12-22-1997) 
Secs. 40-412-40-435. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - EDUCATION AND PROMOTION 

Sec. 40-436. - Education and promotion. 
    The administrator or designee shall develop programs to educate the public and potential businesses of the benefits of the technology zone. It is the intention of council that the technology zone and related technology-based benefits of the city be promoted by the administrator or designee(s) of the administrator. 
(Code 1982, § 33-111; Ord. No. 1594, 12-22-1997; Ord. No. 1965, 11-28-2016) 
Secs. 40-437-40-455. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVIII. - BUSINESS, PROFESSIONAL, OCCUPATIONAL LICENSES[16] 
Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of city to require licenses, § 2.07. 
Cross reference- Dog license, § 4-56 et seq.; finance, ch. 16; permits for food service establishments, § 8-323; permit for parades and processions, § 26-13; resident parking permits, § 26-44 et seq.; city vehicle licenses, § 26-68 et seq.; permits for outdoor lighting, § 14-130; licenses for peddlers, solicitors and canvassers, § 8-193 et seq.; dealers in precious metals and jewels, § 8-234 et seq.; taxation, ch. 40; tree removal permit, § 44-109; certificate of public convenience and necessity for for-hire vehicles, § 46-40 et seq.; concealed firearm permit requirements, § 37-6. 
State Law reference- Municipal licenses and permits, Code of Virginia, § 15.2.1125; license taxes, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3700 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 40-456. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Affiliated group. The term "affiliated group" means: 
(1)  One or more chains of corporations subject to inclusion connected through stock ownership with a common parent corporation which is a corporation subject to inclusion if: 
a.  Stock possessing at least 80 percent of the voting power of all classes of stock and at least 80 percent of each class of the nonvoting stock of each of the corporations subject to inclusion, except the common parent corporation, is owned directly by one or more of the other corporations subject to inclusion; and 
b.  The common parent corporation directly owns stock possessing at least 80 percent of the voting power of all classes of stock and at least 80 percent of each class of the nonvoting stock of at least one of the other subject to inclusion corporations. 
As used in this article, the term "stock" does not include nonvoting stock which is limited and preferred as to dividends; the phrase "corporation subject to inclusion" means any corporation within the affiliated group irrespective of the state or country of its incorporation; and the term "receipts" includes gross receipts and gross income. 
(2)  Two or more corporations if five or fewer persons who are individuals, estates or trusts own stock possessing: 
a.  At least 80 percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote or at least 80 percent of the total value of shares of all classes of the stock of each corporation; and 
b.  More than 50 percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote or more than 50 percent of the total value of shares of all classes of stock of each corporation, taking into account the stock ownership of each such person only to the extent such stock ownership is identical with respect to each such corporation. 
When one or more of the corporations subject to inclusion, including the common parent corporation, is a nonstock corporation, the term "stock" as used in this subdivision shall refer to the nonstock corporation membership or membership voting rights, as is appropriate to the context. 
    Amusement includes every person engaged in the conduct of a business or trade enumerated in section 40-501. 
    Assessment means a determination as to the proper rate of tax, the measure to which the tax rate is applied, and ultimately the amount of tax, including additional or omitted tax, that is due. An assessment shall include a written assessment made pursuant to notice by the commissioner of the revenue or a self-assessment made by a taxpayer upon the filing of a return or otherwise not pursuant to notice. Assessments shall be deemed to be made by the commissioner of the revenue when a written notice of assessment is delivered to the taxpayer by the commissioner of the revenue or his employee of the commissioner of the revenue, or mailed to the taxpayer at his last known address. Self-assessments shall be deemed made when a return is filed, or if no return is required, when the tax is paid. A return filed or tax paid before the last day prescribed by the ordinance from which this article is derived for the filing or payment thereof shall be deemed to be filed or paid on the last day specified for the filing of a return or the payment of tax, as the case may be. 
    Base year means the calendar year preceding the license year, except for contractors subject to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3715 or unless the local ordinance provides for a different period of measuring the gross receipts of a business, such as for beginning businesses or to allow an option to use the same fiscal year as for federal income tax purposes. 
    Business means a course of dealing which requires the time, attention and labor of the person so engaged for the purpose of earning a livelihood or profit. It implies a continuous and regular course of dealing, rather than an irregular or isolated transaction. A person may be engaged in more than one business. The following acts shall create a rebuttable presumption that a person is engaged in a business: 
(1)  Advertising or otherwise holding oneself out to the public as being engaged in a particular business; or 
(2)  Filing tax returns, schedules and documents that are required only of persons engaged in a trade or business. 
    Business service includes every person engaged in the conduct of a business or trade enumerated in section 40-497. 
    Definite place of business means an office or a location at which occurs a regular and continuous course of dealing for 30 consecutive days or more. A definite place of business for a person engaged in business may include a location leased or otherwise obtained from any person on a temporary or seasonable basis and real property leased to another. A person's residence shall be deemed to be a definite place of business if there is no definite place of business maintained elsewhere and the person is not subject to licensure as a peddler or itinerant merchant. 
    Financial services means the buying, selling, handling, managing, investing, and providing of advice regarding money, credit, securities, or other investments. 
    Gross expenditures means all expenditures incurred in connection with the acquisition or lease of real property, including cash, credits, fees, commissions, brokerage charges and rentals; all expenditures incurred in connection with the improvement or development of such property by force account, including cost of all labor involved in such improvement or development, cost of materials and supplies, equipment rental or an equivalent charge therefore if equipment is owned by the builder or developer, and any other expenditure of whatever description incurred in connection with the improvement or development by force account of such property. The term "gross expenditures" shall not include amounts expended for interest on or payment of principle of debt incurred in connection with such improvement or development work. 
    Gross receipts means the gross receipts from any business, profession, trade, occupation, vocation, calling or activity, including, but not limited to, cash, credits, fees, commissions, reimbursements, brokerage charges and rentals, and property of any kind, nature or description, from either sales made or services rendered without any deduction therefrom on account of cost of the property sold, the cost of materials, labor or services or other costs, interest or discounts paid or any expense whatsoever and shall include in case of merchants, the amount of the sale price of supplies and goods furnished to or used by the licensee or his family or other person for which no charge is made. 
(1)  The term "gross receipts," is intended to have the most expansive meaning possible, including any broader meaning possible using words like earnings, gross earnings or gross receipts. Articles upon which there is levied a direct excise tax by the United States shall include such excise tax payments to the United States government. 
(2)  The term "gross receipts" excludes any receipts required to be excluded by applicable state or federal law. 
(3)  The term "gross receipts" when used in connection with, or in respect to financial transactions involving the sale of notes, stock, bonds or other securities, or the collection or advance of money, or the discounting of notes, bills or other evidence of debt, shall be deemed to mean the gross interest, gross discount, gross commission or other gross receipts earned by means of, or resulting from such financial transactions, but the term "gross receipts" shall not include amounts received as payment of debts. 
(4)  The term "gross receipts" shall include the gross receipts from all sales made or services rendered or activities conducted from a place of business within the city, both to persons residing within the city and to persons residing outside the city. 
(5)  The calculation of gross receipts for license tax purposes shall be based on the calendar year, on either a cash or accrual basis, provided that such basis used, whether cash or accrual, coincides with the system of accounts used by the taxpayer for federal and state income tax purposes. 
Gross receipts shall not include dues, donations, gifts, or grants made to organizations which are exempt from federal taxation where the receipt of such is also exempt from federal taxation. Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, the term gross receipts always includes any gross receipts, no matter how described or denominated or by whom received, received for providing medical care or medical coverage or medical insurance. 
    Hotels and motels means any building or group of buildings containing guestrooms and/or dwelling units which are intended, used or designed to be rented, let or hired out for compensation by automobile tourists or other transients, whether such compensation be paid directly or indirectly. This shall include motels, hotels, motor hotels, tourist courts, motor lodges and the like. Daily or weekly rental of units or any sign on the premises making reference to other than monthly rates shall be considered prima facie evidence that a building is a hotel. 
    License year means the calendar year for which a license is issued for the privilege of engaging in business. 
    Person includes individuals, firms, partnerships, associations, corporations and combinations of individuals of whatever form or character, including any trustee, receiver, assignee or personal representative thereof carrying on or continuing a business, profession, trade or occupation, but shall not include a court appointed trustee, receiver or personal representative in the liquidation of assets for immediate distribution or a sergeant or sheriff, or any deputy, selling under authority of process or writ of a court of justice. The term "person" shall not include a volunteer fire department, a volunteer rescue squad, or parttime umpires and referees to the extent they are working in education and community sponsored recreational sports programs. 
    Personal service means every person engaged in the conduct of a business or trade enumerated in section 40-497. 
    Professional and specialized occupation includes every person engaged in an occupation enumerated in section 40-495 or section 40-499. 
    Professional services means services performed by architects, attorneys-at-law, certified public accountants, dentists, engineers, land surveyors, surgeons, veterinarians, and practitioners of the hearing arts (the arts and sciences dealing with the prevention, diagnosis, treatment and cure or alleviation of human physical or mental ailments, conditions, diseases, pain or infirmities) and such occupations, and no others, as the state department of taxation may list in the BPOL guidelines promulgated pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3701. The state department of taxation shall identify and list each occupation or vocation in which a professed knowledge of some department of science or learning, gained by a prolonged course of specialized instruction and study, is used in its practical application to the affairs of others, either advising, guiding, or teaching them, and in serving their interests or welfare in the practice of an art or science founded on it. The term "profession" implies attainments in professional knowledge as distinguished from mere skill, and the application of knowledge to uses for others rather than for personal profit. 
    Purchases means all goods, wares and merchandise received for sale at each definite place of business of a wholesale merchant. The term "purchases" also include the cost of manufacture of all goods, wares and merchandise manufactured by any wholesale merchant and sold or offered for sale. A wholesale merchant may elect to report the gross receipts from the sale of manufactured goods, wares and merchandise, if it cannot determine the cost of manufacture or chooses not to disclose the cost of manufacture. 
    Real estate services means providing a service with respect to the purchase, sale, lease, rental, or appraisal of real property. 
    Repair service includes every person engaged in the business of repairing, renovation or servicing one or more of those items or articles enumerated in section 40-497. 
    Retail merchant includes every person engaged in the conduct of a business enumerated in section 40-498. The term "retail merchant" is further defined to mean any merchant who sells to others for their use only and not for resale. 
    Wholesale merchant includes every person engaged in the conduct of a business enumerated in section 40-500. The term "wholesale merchant" is further defined to mean every merchant who sells to others for resale only, or who sells to institutional, commercial or industrial users. 
(Code 1982, § 18-1; Ord. No. 1457, 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 1562, 12-9-1996) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Definitions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3700.1. 
Sec. 40-457. - Authority to impose license tax. 
(a)  Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3703 authorizes localities to enact an ordinance levying a local license (BPOL) tax and/or a fee for issuing a license. Every ordinance adopted or maintained by a locality which levies a license tax is required to be substantially similar to the provisions in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3703.1. Further, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3703 and 58.1-3706 set statutory maximums for license rates and fees. 
(b)  The license tax imposed in this section is not an ad valorem tax. Gross receipts are used as the standard for fixing the amount of tax because gross receipts have been found to be the best indicator of the volume of the activity within the city. It is the intent of this definition of gross receipts to require to the fullest extent permitted by law the equitable taxation of every business, profession, trade or occupation, vocation, calling or activity (referred to collectively as "business"). No business or phase of a business conducted in the city shall escape taxation because the gross receipts attributable to that business are paid to a person located outside the city. Thus, in those instances where gross receipts otherwise attributable to a business or a phase of a business conducted within the city are actually paid to a person located outside of the city, the business shall be taxed based upon the gross receipts paid outside of the city which are attributable to the amount of activity conducted by the phase located in the city. 
(Code 1982, § 18-1; Ord. No. 1457, 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 1562, 12-9-1996) 
State Law reference- Business, professional, occupational license, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3700 et seq. 
Sec. 40-458. - Tax levied. 
    Each and every year beginning with January 1 of each year and ending December 31 following, until otherwise changed, there are hereby levied and there shall be collected the annual license taxes hereinafter set forth in this section, except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, on persons conducting or engaged in any business, trade or occupation in the city hereinafter set forth in this section. 
(Code 1982, § 18-2(a); Ord. No. 1457, 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 1562, 12-9-1996) 
Sec. 40-459. - Situs of gross receipts. 
(a)  Gross receipts based on definite place of business within state. Except as otherwise provided by law, situs refers to the locality in which a person subject to a local license taxation for any business, profession, trade, occupation or calling has a definite place of business. If the person has a definite place of business in any other locality, then the other locality may impose a license tax on him, provided such other locality is otherwise authorized to impose a local license tax upon his business. When a BPOL tax is measured by gross receipts, the gross receipts included in the taxable measure are only those gross receipts attributed to the exercise of a privilege subject to licensure at a definite place of business within the state. Where activities are conducted outside of a definite place of business, such as during a visit to a customer location, gross receipts are attributed to the definite place of business from which such activities are initiated, directed, or controlled. The situs of gross receipts for different classifications of business are attributed to one or more definite places of business or offices. 
(b)  General rule. Whenever the tax or fee imposed by this section is measured by gross receipts, the gross receipts included in the taxable measure are only those gross receipts attributed to the exercise of a privilege subject to licensure at a definite place of business in the city. In case of business activities conducted outside of a definite place of business in the city, such as during a visit to a customer's location, gross receipts from such activities shall be attributed to the definite place of business from which such activities are initiated, directed or controlled. The situs of gross receipts for different license tax classifications of business shall be attributed to one or more definite places of business or offices as follows: 
(1)  The gross receipts of a contractor shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which the contractor services are performed, or if his services are not performed at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which his services are directed or controlled, unless the contractor is subject to the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3715. 
(2)  The gross receipts of a retailer or wholesaler shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which sales solicitation activities occur, or if sales solicitation activities do not occur at any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which sales solicitation activities are directed or controlled; however, a wholesaler or distribution house subject to a license tax measured by purchases shall determine the situs of its purchases by the definite place of business at which or from which deliveries of the purchased goods, wares and merchandise are made to customers. Any wholesaler who is subject to license tax in two or more localities and who is subject to multiple taxation because the localities use different measures, may apply to the department of taxation for a determination as to the proper measure of purchases and gross receipts subject to license tax in each locality. 
(3)  The gross receipts of a business renting tangible personal property are attributed to the definite place of business from which the tangible personal property is rented or, if the property is not rented from any definite place of business, then the definite place of business from which the rental of such property is managed. 
(4)  The gross receipts from the performance of services shall be attributed to the definite place of business at which the services are performed or, if not performed at any definite place of business, then to the definite place of business from which the services are directed or controlled. 
(c)  Apportionment. If the licensee has more than one definite place of business, and it is impractical or impossible to determine the definite place of business to which gross receipts should be attributed under the general rule of this section, the gross receipts of the business shall be apportioned between the definite place of business on the basis of payroll. Gross receipts shall not be apportioned to a definite place of business under the applicable general rule unless some activities occurred at, or were controlled from, such definite place of business. Gross receipts attributable to a definite place of business in another jurisdiction shall not be attributed to the city solely because the other jurisdiction does not impose a tax on the gross receipts attributable to the definite place of business in such other jurisdiction. A taxpayer may propose an alternative method of allocation and apportionment. The commissioner of the revenue may consider such alternative in apportioning gross receipts if the commissioner of the revenue finds such method reasonable. 
(d)  Interjurisdictional agreements. The commissioner of the revenue may enter into agreements with other political subdivisions of the state concerning the manner in which gross receipts shall be apportioned among definite places of business. However, the sum of the gross receipts apportioned by any such agreement shall not exceed the total gross receipts attributable to all of the definite places of business affected by the agreement. Upon notification by a taxpayer that the commissioner's method of attributing gross receipts is fundamentally inconsistent with the method of one or more political subdivisions in which the taxpayer is licensed to engage in business and that the difference has resulted, or is likely to result, in taxes on more than 100 percent of its gross receipts from all locations in the affected jurisdictions, the commissioner of the revenue shall make a good faith effort to reach an apportionment agreement with the other political subdivisions involved. 
(e)  Procedure when no agreement. If an agreement as provided in subsection (d) of this section cannot be reached, either the commissioner of the revenue or the taxpayer may seek an advisory opinion from the department of taxation pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3701; notice of the request shall be given to the other party. 
(f)  Procedure to prevent double assessment. Notwithstanding the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3993, when a taxpayer has demonstrated to a court that two or more political subdivisions of the state have assessed taxes on gross receipts that may create a double assessment within the meaning of Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3986, the court shall enter such orders pending resolution of the litigation as may be necessary to ensure that the taxpayer is not required to pay multiple assessments, even though it is not then known which assessment is correct and which is erroneous. 
(Code 1982, § 18-2(b)-(f); Ord. No. 1457, 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 1562, 12-9-1996) 
State Law reference- Situs of gross receipts, apportionment, agreements, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3703.1 A.3. 
Sec. 40-460. - Persons subject to tax. 
(a)  Each and all of the taxes hereinafter imposed are in all cases imposed upon the privilege of doing business or exercising a profession, trade or occupation in the city, including all phases of the business, profession, trade or occupation conducted in the city. 
(b)  Every person shall apply for a license tax for each business or profession when engaging in a business in the city if: 
(1)  The person has a definite place of business in the city; 
(2)  The person maintains no definite place of business anywhere, but resides in the city; or 
(3)  The person maintains no definite place of business in the city but operates amusement machines, is an itinerant merchant, peddler, carnival or circus, pursuant to the Code of Virginia and this section, is a contractor pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3715, or is a public service corporation under Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3731 and Code of Virginia, § 58.1-2690. 
(c)  A separate license is required for each definite place of business and for each business in the city; except a person engaged in two or more businesses or professions carried on at the same place of business may elect to obtain one license for all such businesses and professions if all of the following criteria are satisfied: 
(1)  Each business or profession is subject to licensure at the location and has satisfied any requirements imposed by state law or other provisions of this Code; 
(2)  All of the businesses or professions are subject to the same tax rate, or, if subject to different tax rates, the licensee agrees to be taxed on all businesses and professions at the highest rate; and 
(3)  The taxpayer agrees to supply such information as the commissioner of the revenue may require concerning the nature of the several businesses and their gross receipts. 
(Code 1982, § 18-3; Ord. No. 1457, 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 1525, 9-26-1995; Ord. No. 1562, 12-9-1996) 
Sec. 40-461. - Exemptions from business license tax. 
    The following shall be exempt, in whole or in part, from the business license tax: 
(1)  Any public service corporation except as provided in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3731 or as permitted by other provisions of law; 
(2)  For selling farm or domestic products or nursery products, ornamental or otherwise, or for the planting of nursery products, as an incident to the sale thereof, outside of the regular market houses and sheds in the city, provided, such products are grown or produced by the person offering such products for sale; 
(3)  Upon the privilege or right of printing or publishing of any newspaper, magazine, newsletter or other publication issued daily or regularly at average intervals not exceeding three months, provided the publication's subscription sales are exempt from state sales tax; or operating or conducting any radio or television broadcasting station or service; 
(4)  On a manufacturer for the privilege of manufacturing and selling goods, wares and merchandise at wholesale at the place of manufacture; 
(5)  Upon a wholesaler for the privilege of selling goods, wares and merchandise to other persons for resale unless such wholesaler has a definite place of business or store in the city. This section shall not be construed as prohibiting imposition of a license tax on a peddler at wholesale; 
(6)  On or measured by receipts for management, accounting, or administrative service provided on a group basis under a nonprofit cost-sharing agreement by a corporation which is an agricultural cooperative association under the provisions of Code of Virginia, § 13.1-312 et seq., or a member or subsidiary or affiliated association thereof, to other members of the same group. This exemption shall not exempt any such corporation from such license or other tax measured by receipts from outside the group; 
(7)  On or measured by receipts or purchases by a corporation which is a member of an affiliated group of corporations from other members of the same affiliated group. This exclusion shall not exempt affiliated corporations from such license or other tax measured by receipts or purchases from outside the affiliated group. This exclusion also shall not preclude a wholesale merchant's license tax on an affiliated corporation on those sales by the affiliated corporation to a nonaffiliated person, company, or corporation, notwithstanding the fact that the wholesale merchant's license tax would be based upon purchases from an affiliated corporation. Such tax shall be based on the purchase price of the goods sold to the nonaffiliated person, company, or corporation. As used in this article, the term "sales by the affiliated corporation to a nonaffiliated person, company or corporation" shall mean sales by the affiliated corporation to a nonaffiliated person, company or corporation where goods sold by the affiliated corporation or its agent are manufactured or stored in the state prior to their delivery to the nonaffiliated person, company or corporation; 
(8)  On any insurance company subject to taxation under Code of Virginia, § 58.1-2500 et seq., or any agent of such company; 
(9)  On any bank or trust company subject to taxation under Code of Virginia, § 58.1-1200 et seq.; 
(10)  Upon a taxicab driver working for a taxicab company in the city, provided that such company has a business license under this article; 
(11)  On any blind person operating a vending stand or other business enterprise under the jurisdiction of the department for the visually handicapped, or a nominee of the state department for the blind and vision impaired, as set forth in Code of Virginia, § 51.5-98; 
(12)  On an accredited religious practitioner in the practice of the religious tenets of any church or religious denomination. The term "accredited religious practitioner" shall be defined as one who is engaged solely in praying for others upon accreditation by such church or religious denomination; 
(13)  a.  On or measured by receipts of a charitable nonprofit organization, except to the extent the organization has receipts from an unrelated trade or business the income of which is taxable under Internal Revenue Code, § 511 et seq. For the purpose of this subdivision, the term "charitable nonprofit organization" means an organization which is described in Internal Revenue Code, § 501(c)(3) and to which contributions are deductible by the contributor under Internal Revenue Code, § 170, except that educational institutions shall be limited to schools, colleges and other similar institutions of learning; 
b.  On or measured by gifts, contributions, and membership dues of a nonprofit organization. Activities conducted for consideration which are similar to activities conducted for consideration by for-profit businesses shall be presumed to be activities that are part of a business subject to licensure. For the purpose of this subdivision, the term "nonprofit organization" means an organization exempt from federal income tax under Internal Revenue Code, § 501 other than charitable nonprofit organizations; 
(14)  On any venture capital fund or other investment fund, except commissions and fees of such funds. Gross receipts from the sale and rental of real estate and buildings within the city remain taxable by the city, provided the city is otherwise authorized to tax such businesses and rental of real estate; 
(15)  Itinerant merchants who participate in a special event sponsored or run by a not-for-profit 501(c)(3) organization, provided the event lasts no longer than four days, shall not be required to obtain a business license nor pay a gross receipts tax; 
(16)  Persons in the business of printing, other than persons engaged in the business of instant printing, photocopying, or similar businesses, shall be considered manufacturers and shall be entitled to the exemption from local business license taxation provided to manufacturers under state law. 
(Code 1982, § 18-3.5; Ord. No. 1562, 12-9-1996; Ord. No. 1703, 5-14-2001) 
Sec. 40-462. - Procedures for obtaining license. 
    Every person liable for the payment of a license tax under the provisions of this article shall make application therefore in writing to the commissioner of the revenue at his office in the Harry E. Wells Building. The commissioner of the revenue shall furnish a license application form, which form shall be properly and fully executed by the applicant, and shall contain such information as may be required by the commissioner of the revenue. No license shall be issued to cover more than one place of business. All applicants shall be required to obtain a separate license for each place of business in which the business, profession, trade or occupation to be licensed is pursued. The commissioner of the revenue shall assess such applicant or other person of whom a license is required with the license tax required by this article and shall retain a copy of the license application. The commissioner of the revenue shall issue a license to the licensee, which shall be displayed at the place of business. 
(Code 1982, § 18-4; Ord. No. 1457, 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 1562, 12-9-1996; Ord. No. 1703, 5-14-2001) 
Sec. 40-463. - Beginner's license. 
(a)  Every person beginning a business, profession, trade or occupation which is subject to a license tax under the provisions of this article, which is based in whole or in part on gross receipts or gross expenditures, shall estimate the amount of the gross receipts he will receive or the gross expenditures he will incur between the date of beginning business and the end of the then current license year and his license tax for the then current year shall be computed on such estimate. 
(b)  The commissioner of the revenue shall make a determination as to whether a reasonable estimate of gross receipts has been made, prior to the issuance of a beginner's license. In making a determination, the commissioner of the revenue shall take into account the size and location of the business, as well as the actual experience of reasonably similar businesses and other relevant factors. If the commissioner of the revenue determines that the applicant's estimate is unreasonable, the estimate of the commissioner of the revenue shall be the basis for computing the estimate. 
(c)  Whenever a license tax is computed upon the estimated gross receipts or gross expenditures, any incorrect estimate shall be subject to correction, and the commissioner of the revenue shall assess such person with an additional license tax found to be due after the end of that license year and shall, at the same time, correct the estimate for the then current year until a full year of operation shall have been completed. In case of an overestimate, the taxpayer shall be entitled to a credit upon has license tax payable in the following year. 
(d)  A grace period of 30 days shall be allowed from the date of beginning a business, before a penalty of ten percent shall be added to all license taxes imposed under the terms of this section. 
(e)  No interest shall accrue on an adjustment of estimated tax liability to actual liability at the conclusion of a base year. 
(Code 1982, § 18-5; Ord. No. 1457, 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 1562, 12-9-1996) 
Sec. 40-464. - Applicants for license to give certain information. 
    Every applicant for a license to conduct any business, profession, trade or occupation under the provisions of this article shall furnish the commissioner of the revenue, in writing, with the correct name and trade name, if any, of the applicant, the correct residence of the applicant, the nature of the business, profession, trade or occupation to be pursued, the place where it is to be pursued, and any and all other pertinent information as may be required by the commissioner of the revenue. 
(Code 1982, § 18-6; Ord. No. 1457, 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 1562, 12-9-1996) 
Sec. 40-465. - Transferring licenses. 
(a)  Licenses issued under the provision of this article, except as otherwise provided, may be transferred from one person to another or from one location to another; provided no such transfer shall be valid unless and until notice in writing is given to the commissioner of the revenue of the proposed transfer, which notice shall contain the name, trade name, if any, and the address of the proposed transferee, the proposed new location, if any, as well as the time of the proposed transfer; and the commissioner of the revenue may approve such transfer upon being satisfied of the good faith thereof. Failure to notify the commissioner of the revenue of the transfer of a license within 30 days of such transfer shall invalidate such license and such invalidated license shall not be subject to refund as provided by section 40-471. 
(b)  It is specifically provided, however, that if the transferor's license for the current license year has been based on an estimate of gross receipts, or gross expenditures, as provided in section 40-463, that the transferor shall reveal his gross receipts or gross expenditures from the period he was in business during the current license year and if the accumulation of gross receipts by the transferor shall exceed the original estimate, the transferee shall be required to amend the license by an estimate of the gross receipts or gross expenditures he will incur between the day of beginning business and the end of the current license year. 
(Code 1982, § 18-7; Ord. No. 1457, 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 1562, 12-9-1996) 
Sec. 40-466. - Compliance with zoning provisions. 
(a)  The commissioner of the revenue shall issue a license for conducting any business, profession, trade or occupation at a location where the conduct of such business, profession, trade or occupation is not prohibited by chapter 48, pertaining to zoning. 
(b)  All licenses issued shall be subject to verification to ascertain compliance with chapter 48, pertaining to zoning. Failure to comply shall be just cause for immediate revocation of the license by the commissioner of the revenue. 
(Code 1982, § 18-8; Ord. No. 1457, 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 1562, 12-9-1996) 
Sec. 40-467. - Minimum tax on gross receipts. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, businesses, professions, trades and occupations required to be licensed under this article with total annual gross receipts of less than $10,000.00 shall pay no tax, including the minimum tax. However, such businesses, trades and occupations shall file an annual business license application as required elsewhere in this article and shall be subject to all other provisions of this article. The commissioner of the revenue shall review the application and issue a business license if the application is in order. A business, trade or occupation required to be licensed under this article with total annual gross receipts of between $10,000.00 and $50,000.00 shall pay the minimum tax of $30.00 per each business. If a business files for a license based on an estimate of gross receipts, then the commissioner of the revenue shall correct the assessment pursuant to section 40-463, if necessary. This section shall not be applicable to any business, profession, trade or occupation which has a license based on other than gross receipts. 
(Code 1982, § 18-9; Ord. No. 1457, 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 1525, 9-26-1995; Ord. No. 1562, 12-9-1996) 
Sec. 40-468. - Payment of taxes. 
    All license taxes may be paid on a quarterly basis where the amount of such tax is in excess of $1,000.00. The due date for payment of quarterly payments shall be on or before the first day of each calendar quarter. 
(Code 1982, § 18-10; Ord. No. 1457, 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 1562, 12-9-1996) 
Sec. 40-469. - License requirements. 
    Whenever a license is required by law or whenever the general assembly shall levy a license tax on any business, employment or profession, it shall be unlawful to engage in such business employment or profession without first obtaining the required license. No business license under this article shall be issued until the applicant has produced satisfactory evidence that all delinquent business license, personal property, meals, short-term rental, transient occupancy, and admission taxes which have been assessed against the applicant by the city and owed by the business to the city have been paid. 
(Code 1982, § 18-11; Ord. No. 1457, 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 1703, 5-14-2001) 
Sec. 40-470. - Business license tax records required; report of gross receipts; audit. 
(a)  Every person liable for a license tax under this article which is based on gross receipts or gross expenditures shall keep all records and accounts necessary to compute and to verify such gross receipts or gross expenditures and the report of such gross receipts or gross expenditures shall be taken from such records. All such records and general books of account shall be maintained and be open to inspection and examinations for the current year and for a period of three additional years. The accessing official shall assess the local license tax omitted because of fraud or failure to apply for a license for the current license year and the six preceding license years. 
(b)  Each licensee whose license is measured by gross receipts or gross expenditures shall submit to the commissioner of the revenue, not later than the March 1 of each year, a report of the business gross receipts or gross expenditures for the preceding year. In those cases in which the conduct of the business, trade or occupation involves operations subject to more than one rate or is computed on more than one base, as hereinafter set forth, the licensee is hereby required to maintain separate accounts for each such operation; provided, however, that the licensee may elect to maintain one account for all operations taxed on gross receipts, in which case the entire business taxed on gross receipts shall be computed at the highest rate applicable to any part of the business taxed on gross receipts. 
(c)  If any taxpayer fails to maintain the records required in this section, regularly supported by customary vouchers, the commissioner of the revenue shall estimate the taxpayer's gross receipts on the basis of the best evidence obtainable, and the commissioner of the revenue shall make an assessment on the basis of such evidence. 
(d)  The commissioner of the revenue may provide the taxpayer with the option to conduct a business tax audit in the taxpayer's office, if the records are maintained in the Washington, D.C., metropolitan area. If the records are maintained outside the Washington, D.C., metropolitan area, copies of the appropriate books and records shall be sent to the commissioner of the revenue's office upon demand. 
(Code 1982, § 18-12; Ord. No. 1457, 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 1562, 12-9-1996) 
Sec. 40-471. - Erroneous assessments; proration of license taxes; refund. 
(a)  The commissioner of the revenue is empowered to certify to the city treasurer any instance of erroneous assessments. Upon receipt of such certificate, the treasurer is directed to make a refund based upon the certification of the commissioner of the revenue. 
(b)  Licenses issued under the provisions of this article, except those measured by other than gross receipts, shall be subject to a refund where the licensee goes out of business before the end of the current license year. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, general or special, and regardless of the basis or method of measurement or computation, the city shall impose a license tax based on gross receipts on a business, trade, profession, occupation or calling, or upon a person, firm or corporation for any fraction of a year during which such person has permanently ceased to engage in such business, trade, profession, occupation or calling within the city. In the event a person ceases to engage in a business, trade, profession or calling within the city during a year for which a license tax based on gross receipts has already been paid, the taxpayer shall be entitled, upon application, to a refund for that portion of the license tax already paid, prorated on a monthly basis so as to ensure that the licensed privilege is taxed only for that fraction of the year during which it is exercised within the city. In no event shall the city be required to refund any part of a flat fee or minimum flat tax, or any of the minimum tax referred to in section 40-467. 
(c)  Interest on refunds of additional or omitted tax assessments is as follows, except as provided in section 40-463(e): Whenever an assessment of additional or omitted tax by the commissioner of the revenue is found to be erroneous, all interest and penalty charged and collected on the assessment found to be erroneous shall be refunded, together with interest on the refund from the date of payment or the due date, whichever is later, whether attributable to an amended return or other reason. Interest on any refund shall be paid at the same rate charged by the treasurer for late payment of taxes. No interest shall be paid on a refund or charged on a late payment, provided the refund or the late payment is made not more than 30 days from the date of the payment that created the refund or the due date of the tax, whichever is later. The refund, if in excess of $1,000.00, shall be made in the ensuing fiscal year. Refunds of $1,000.00 or less shall be made within 60 days of the application. Refunds shall only be made upon application. 
(Code 1982, § 18-13; Ord. No. 1457, 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 1562, 12-9-1996) 
Sec. 40-472. - Appeals. 
(a)  If the commissioner of the revenue ascertains that any person who has been assessed with a license tax levied under the provisions of this article for any license tax year of the three license tax years last past or for the then current license tax year, but that, upon a correct audit and computation of the license tax, the assessment should be an increased amount and the assessment of the license tax at the lesser amount was not due to fraudulent intent or to evade taxes, then the commissioner of the revenue shall assess the taxpayer with the additional license tax found to be due, without penalty, and shall furnish written notice to the taxpayer and at the same time shall transmit a copy of the assessment notice to the city treasurer for collection. If the assessment of the additional license tax is not paid to the city treasurer within 30 days after written notice to the taxpayer of such additional assessment, a penalty of ten percent of such tax due, plus interest at the rate of ten percent per annum shall begin to accrue from the first day of the month following the month in which payment is due until payment is made. The city treasurer shall collect such interest in the same manner as the tax may be collected. 
(b)  Any person assessed with a license tax as a result of an audit may apply within 90 days from the date of such assessment to the commissioner of the revenue for a correction of the assessment. The application must be filed in good faith and sufficiently identify the taxpayer, audit period, remedy sought, each alleged error in the assessment, the grounds upon which the taxpayer relies, and any other facts relevant to the taxpayer's contention. The commissioner of the revenue may hold a conference with the taxpayer if requested by the taxpayer, or require submission of additional information and documents, further audit, or other evidence deemed necessary for a proper and equitable determination of the application. The commissioner of the revenue shall undertake a full review of the taxpayer's claims and issue a determination to the taxpayer setting forth its position. Every assessment pursuant to an audit shall be accompanied by a written statement of the taxpayer's right to seek correction. 
(c)  Provided an application is made within 90 days of an assessment, collection activity shall be suspended until 30 days after the final determination is issued by the commissioner of the revenue, unless the treasurer determines that collection would be jeopardized in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3719. Interest shall accrue in accordance with the provisions of section 40-476. If application for correction is made to the commissioner of the revenue within 30 days of the assessment, before the tax is delinquent, no penalty as provided in section 40-476 shall be imposed on the tax due unless it remains unpaid 30 days after the final determination from the commissioner of the revenue. 
(d)  Any taxpayer whose appeal on an audit of the business license has been denied by the commissioner of the revenue may appeal to the state tax commissioner pursuant to state law. See Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3703.1(5). 
(e)  Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3703.1 is hereby adopted, mutatis mutandis, and made a part of this article as fully as though set forth at length herein. 
(Code 1982, § 18-14; Ord. No. 1457, 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 1562, 12-9-1996) 
Sec. 40-473. - Assessment in case of fraudulent intent to evade license tax. 
    If the commissioner of the revenue ascertains that any person has fraudulently, or with intent to evade the payment of proper license taxes, failed or refused to obtain a proper license or pay the proper license tax as required by the provisions of this Code for any one or more of the three license tax years last past, or for the then current license tax year, and the liability is ascertained, such omitted or additional license tax and a penalty of ten percent of such tax due, plus interest at the annual rate of ten percent from the first day of the month following the month in which the taxes should have been paid shall be assessed. 
(Code 1982, § 18-15; Ord. No. 1457, 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 1562, 12-9-1996) 
Sec. 40-474. - Display of license receipts. 
    The license receipts or other certificates showing the payment of license taxes whenever imposed by the provisions of any section of this article are to be displayed in a conspicuous place at the regular place of business or profession of the licensee, in order that the commissioner of the revenue or authorized agent, or any police officer of the city may inspect the same at any and all reasonable times. All licensees who have or maintain no regular place of business shall either carry with them on their person or have affixed or attached to their truck, car or other vehicle the license receipt or certificate and promptly display the same when called upon by any enforcement officer of the city to do so. 
(Code 1982, § 18-16; Ord. No. 1457, 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 1562, 12-9-1996) 
Sec. 40-475. - Jurisdiction over violations. 
    The general district court of the city shall have jurisdiction of violations under this article. 
(Code 1982, § 18-17; Ord. No. 1457, 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 1562, 12-9-1996) 
Sec. 40-476. - Penalties; interest on delinquent taxes. 
(a)  All license taxes shall be due and payable at the office of the city treasurer on the last day of March of each year except as herein otherwise provided for, and a penalty in the amount of ten percent of the license tax assessed or a penalty of $10.00, whichever is the larger amount, shall be imposed for failure to pay license taxes on or before the last day of March of each year. The penalty imposed hereby shall be due and payable when imposed and, when imposed, shall become a part of the tax. Interest at the rate of ten percent per annum shall be added to the delinquent license taxes, in addition to any other penalties imposed by law, beginning the first day following the day such tax is due. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to file a return or to pay a tax shall not be imposed if such failure was not the fault of the taxpayer, or was the fault of the commissioner of the revenue or the treasurer. No penalty for failure to pay any tax shall be imposed for any assessment made later than two weeks before the day on which the taxes are due, if such assessment is made thereafter through the fault of a local official and if such assessment is paid within 15 days after the notice is mailed. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful and constitute a misdemeanor for any person to conduct a business or to engage in a profession, trade or occupation before procuring a license as required under the provisions of this article. It shall be unlawful to willfully fail or refuse to file a license tax return at the times required by this article. The penalty shall not exceed those prescribed by general law for: 
(1)  A class 3 misdemeanor, if the amount of the tax lawfully assessed in connection with the return is $1,000.00 or less; or 
(2)  A class 1 misdemeanor, if the amount of the tax lawfully assessed in connection with the return is more than $1,000.00. 
Each day any person shall continue to violate the provisions of this article after the due date of any license tax prescribed in this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  In the enforcement of the provisions of this article the commissioner of the revenue of the city, in addition to the powers herein specifically granted, shall have all and the same enforcement authority with respect to the city licenses that state law confers upon the commissioners of the revenue generally with respect to licenses. As one of the means of ascertaining the amount of any license tax due under the provisions of this article, or of ascertaining any other pertinent information, the commissioner of the revenue may propound interrogatories to each applicant and may use such other evidence as he may procure. Such interrogatories shall be answered under oath, and it shall be unlawful for any applicant for a city license to refuse to answer any such interrogatories. 
(e)  The commissioner of the revenue of the city shall have such duties, authority and power with respect to the enforcement of the provisions of this article as may be conferred by the city council. The commissioner of the revenue shall have the power to summon any person by registered letter or otherwise to appear before him at his office at a time to be specified in such summons and to answer, under oath, questions touching such taxpayer's license tax liability. Failure to answer such summons without good cause or failing or refusing to answer, under oath, questions touching their tax liability shall be a misdemeanor and punishable as provided by Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3111. 
(f)  The commissioner of the revenue, after the hereinabove set out powers of enforcement have been exhausted, shall have the added power to proceed by warrant to enforce compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1982, § 18-18; Ord. No. 1457, 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 1562, 12-9-1996) 
Secs. 40-477-40-490. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SCHEDULE OF TAXES 

Sec. 40-491. - Sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  Every person engaged in the manufacture, bottling or selling of alcoholic beverages within the city shall pay for the privilege, an annual license tax, as follows: 
(1)  For each distiller's license: $1,000.00 per annum; no such city license shall be required for any person who shall manufacture not more than 5,000 gallons of alcohol or spirits or both during such license year; 
(2)  For each winery license: $1,000.00 per annum; 
(3)  For each brewery license: $1,000.00 per annum; 
(4)  For each bottler's license, $500.00 per annum; 
(5)  For each wholesale beer license: $125.00 per annum; 
(6)  For each wholesale wine distributor's license: $50.00 per annum, and for each wholesale druggist license, $10.00 per annum; 
(7)  For each retail on-premises wine and beer license for a hotel, restaurant or club and for each retail off-premises wine and beer license: $75.00 per annum; 
(8)  For each retail on-premises beer license for a hotel, restaurant or club, for each retail off-premises beer license and for each druggist license: $50.00 per annum; 
(9)  For each banquet license: $5.00; 
(10)  For each fruit distiller's licenses: $1,500.00; 
(11)  For each hospital license: $10.00; 
(12)  For each mixed beverage license for restaurants, including restaurants located on premises of and operated by hotels and motels: $200.00 per annum for each restaurant with a seating capacity at tables for up to 100 persons; $350.00 per annum for each restaurant with a seating capacity at tables for more than 100 but not more than 150 persons; and $500.00 per annum for each restaurant with a seating capacity at tables for more than 150 persons; and for each private, nonprofit club operating a restaurant on the premises of such club, $350.00 per annum; and for each caterer, $200.00. 
(b)  No such license shall be issued to any person, unless such person shall hold or shall secure simultaneously therewith the proper state license provided for in Code of Virginia, § 4.1-100 et seq. 
(c)  Nothing herein shall be construed so as to require any person to obtain a city license where such person is a wholesaler or distributor who maintains no place of business within the city, but merely delivers alcoholic beverages in the city. 
(d)  No alcoholic beverage license authorized by this section shall be construed as exempting any licensee from any merchants' or restaurants' licenses. The alcoholic beverage tax is an annual tax, not subject to proration (Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3710) and cannot be transferred. 
(Code 1982, § 18-19; Ord. No. 1457, 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 1562, 12-9-1996) 
Sec. 40-492. - Contractors; worker's compensation requirements. 
(a)  Whenever a license tax is levied on contractors by the city, the governing body of the city may, in its discretion, require a bond from the person licensed, with such surety, penalty and conditions as it may deem proper. 
(b)  The commissioner of the revenue shall require each contractor to provide a contractor's certification of insuring liability for worker's compensation at the time of application for a business license, which certifies such contractor is in compliance with Code of Virginia, § 62.5-800 et seq. 
(c)  Every person engaged in business in the city as a contractor shall pay for the privilege a license tax of $30.00 or $0.16 per $100.00 of gross receipts, whichever is greater. The restrictions on imposing license taxes contained in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3715 are applicable. 
(d)  All contractors are required to submit to the commissioner of the revenue a roster of all subcontractors doing work within the city for the contractor within 30 days from the date of issuance of building permit, listing name, address, phone number, amount of contract, and type of work to be performed. 
(e)  Definition. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Contractor. 
(1)  The term "contractor" means any person who accepts, or offers to accept: 
a.  Contracts to perform, or regularly performs, or engages others to perform any of the work described in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3714 B on buildings, structures or real estate owned by him when the buildings, structures or real estate are sold upon completion of such work; or, if he regularly performs, or engages others to perform any of the work described in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3714 B, on buildings, structures, or real estate owned by others; 
b.  Contracts for the subdivision and improvement of real estate, and for the speculative building of houses or other buildings with the intention of offering the subdivided lots or completed buildings for sale. The mere subdivision of land into lots, without more, is not contracting within the meaning of this section. A person who would otherwise be classified as a contractor shall not lose such classification because real estate is temporarily leased, less than 12 months, until it can be sold, or leased with an option to purchase instead of sold, unless the leasing activity constitutes a separate licensable business. Any gross receipts from such leases shall be considered ancillary to the business of contracting; 
c.  Contracts to install water or sewer systems, roads, or engages in any other activity described in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3714 B on his own land with the intent to offer the land for sale; 
d.  Orders or contracts for doing any work on or in any building or structure requiring the use of paint, stone, brick, mortar, wood, cement, structural iron or steel, sheet iron, galvanized iron, metallic piping, tin, lead or other metal or any other building material; 
e.  Contracts to do any paving, curbing or other work on sidewalks, streets, alleys or highways, on public or private property, using asphalt, brick, stone, cement, concrete, wood or any composition; 
f.  An order for or contract to excavate earth, rock or other material for foundation or any other purpose or for cutting, trimming or maintaining rights-of-way; 
g.  An order or contract to construct any sewer of stone, brick, terra-cotta or other material; 
h.  Orders or contracts for doing any work on or in any building or premises involving the erecting, installing, altering, repairing, servicing or maintaining of electric wiring, devices or appliances permanently connected to such wiring or the erecting, repairing, or maintaining of the lines for the transmission or distribution of electric light and power; 
i.  An order or contract to remodel, repair, wreck or demolish a building; 
j.  An order or contract to bore or dig a well; 
k.  An order or contract to install, maintain or repair air conditioning apparatus or equipment. 
(2)  The term "contractor" does not include the business of contracting by the property owner to build or improve a building which the property owner intends to occupy as the property owner's residence, office or other place of business for not less than six months prior to sale of property. 
(f)  Contracting generally includes, but is not limited to, persons engaged in the following occupations, businesses or trades: 
Air conditioning. 
Brick contracting and other masonry. 
Builder. 
Building. 
Buyer. 
Cementing. 
Developer. 
Dredging. 
Electrical contracting. 
Elevator installation. 
Erecting signs which are assessed as realty. 
Floor scraping or finishing. 
Foundations. 
House moving. 
Paint and paper decorating. 
Plastering. 
Plumbing, heating, steamfitting. 
Refrigeration. 
Road, street, bridge, sidewalk or curb and gutter construction. 
Roofing and tinning. 
Seller. 
Sewer drilling and well digging. 
Structural metal work. 
Subdivider. 
Tile, glass, flooring and floor covering installation. 
Wrecking, moving or excavating. 
Installation of water, gas or electrical lines in the installation of appliances. 
(Code 1982, § 18-20; Ord. No. 1457, 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 1562, 12-9-1996; Ord. No. 1703, 5-14-2001) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 40-493. - Limits on principal contractors receiving federal appropriations for research and development. 
    Any person designated as the principal or prime contractor receiving identifiable federal appropriations for research and development services as defined in section 31.205-18(a) of the Federal Acquisition Regulation in the areas of: 
Computer and electronic systems; 
Computer software; 
Applied sciences; 
Economic and social sciences; and 
Electronic and physical sciences; 
shall be subject to a license tax rate not to exceed $0.03 per $100.00 of such federal funds received in payment of such contracts upon documentation provided by such person to the commissioner of the revenue confirming the applicability of this section. 
(Code 1982, § 18-21; Ord. No. 1457, 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 1562, 12-9-1996) 
Sec. 40-494. - Financial or real estate services. 
(a)  Every person engaged in financial or real estate services within the city, except those excluded by the terms of subsection (f) of this section, shall pay for the privilege a license tax of $30.00 or $0.52 per $100.00 of gross receipts, whichever is greater. 
(b)  Any person rendering a service for compensation in the form of a credit agency, an investment company, a broker or dealer in securities and commodities or a security or commodity exchange is providing a financial service, unless such service is specifically provided for under another section of this article. 
(c)  Those engaged in rendering financial services include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Buying installment receivables. 
Chattel mortgage financing. 
Check cashing. 
Consumer financing. 
Credit card services. 
Credit unions. 
Factors. 
Financial consultants, portfolio managers. 
Financing accounts receivable. 
Industrial loan companies. 
Installment financing. 
Inventory financing. 
Loan or mortgage brokers. 
Loan or mortgage companies. 
Safety deposit box companies. 
Security and commodity brokers and services. 
Stockbroker. 
Working capital financing. 
(d)  Any person other than a national bank or bank or trust company organized under the laws of this state or duly licensed and practicing attorney-at-law that engages in the business of buying and selling for others on commission or for other compensation, shares in any corporation, bonds, notes or other evidence of debt is a stockbroker. The fact that orders are taken subject to approval by a main office does not relieve the broker from license taxation. Also, an insurance company engaged in selling mutual funds is a broker as to that portion of its business. 
(e)  Any person rendering a service for compensation as lessor, agent or broker is providing a real estate service, unless the service is specifically provided for under another section of this article. 
(f)  All real estate agencies are required to submit to the commissioner of the revenue a roster of all their active agents working from a city office, listing name and address, every January 1 and July 1 of each year. 
(g)  All developers are required to submit to the commissioner of the revenue a roster of all subcontractors performing work in the city within 30 days from date of issuance of building permit, listing name, address and type of work to be performed. 
(h)  Those rendering real estate services include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Appraisers of real estate. 
Escrow agents, real estate. 
Fiduciaries, real estate. 
Lessors of real property. 
Operators of residential mobile home sites. 
Owner-operators and lessors of buildings. 
Real estate agents, brokers and managers. 
Real estate selling agents. 
Rental agents for real estate. 
(i)  Any person engaged in financial or real estate services who is engaged as an employee of an employer, who has paid the proper license tax under the provisions of this section, shall be excluded from the terms of this section. It is the intent of this section that the employer, but not the employee, be taxed on gross receipts including those attributed to or produced by the employee. 
(Code 1982, § 18-22; Ord. No. 1457, 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 1562, 12-9-1996; Ord. No. 1703, 5-14-2001; Ord. No. 1754, 3-22-2004) 
Sec. 40-495. - Professional occupations. 
(a)  Every person conducting or engaging in one or more of the following professions, occupations or businesses shall pay for the privilege an annual license tax of $0.52 for each $100.00 of gross receipts or gross expenditures. The minimum annual licenses tax shall be $30.00. 
(b)  Those engaged in rendering a professional occupation include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Architects. 
Attorneys-at-law. 
Certified public accountants. 
Chiropodist. 
Chiropractor. 
Clinical psychologist. 
Dentists. 
Doctor of internal medicine. 
Engineers in all disciplines. 
Homeopathist. 
Medical doctor. 
Neuropathist. 
Neurologist. 
Oculist. 
Optometrist. 
Patent attorney. 
Physician. 
Physiotherapist. 
Practitioner of the healing arts, as defined in Code of Virginia, § 54.1-2900, as amended. 
Psychiatrist. 
Surgeons. 
Surveyors. 
Teachers, certified. 
Veterinarians. 
Other similar professional occupations. 
(Code 1982, § 18-23; Ord. No. 1457, 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 1562, 12-9-1996; Ord. No. 1703, 5-14-2001) 
Sec. 40-496. - Renting of houses, apartments or commercial establishments by owner. 
(a)  Every person who, as principal or through an agent, shall engage in the business of renting houses, or apartments in the city shall pay for the privilege of doing business an annual license tax of $0.38 on each $100.00 of gross receipts from the rental of all houses, apartment units or dwelling units during the preceding fiscal or calendar year. Persons engaged in the business of renting houses or apartments, or both, shall not be affected by or come within the provisions of this section, unless such person is engaged in the business of renting in excess of two separate dwelling units. The minimum annual licenses tax shall be $30.00. 
(1)  The business of renting houses and apartments as used in this section shall be construed to mean the rental of a building or portion thereof designed exclusively for residential occupancy, including one-family, two-family and multiple family dwellings, but not including hotels, boardinghouses and roominghouses. 
(2)  The term "dwelling unit" is defined to mean one or more rooms in a dwelling house or apartment designed for occupancy by one family for living purposes and having cooking, toilet and bathing facilities. The term "single piece of commercial property" is defined to mean either land improved or unimproved. 
(b)  Every person who, as principal or through an agent, shall engage in the business of renting commercial property in the city shall pay for the privilege of doing business an annual license tax of $0.53 on each $100.00 of gross receipts from the rental of all commercial establishments during the preceding fiscal or calendar year. Persons engaged in renting a single piece of commercial property shall be considered to be doing business and shall come within the provisions of this section. The minimum annual licenses tax shall be $30.00. 
(c)  Every person operating any commercial establishment in the city having four or more tenants in any building shall on or before February 1 of each year, upon request of the commissioner of the revenue of the city, furnish a list of such tenants giving the name, address and the type or nature of business of each such tenant, as of January 1 preceding. 
(d)  This section applies to the renting or leasing of all or a portion of buildings or other improvements. It does not apply to the rental or leasing of rooms in hotels, motels, motor lodges, auto courts, tourist courts, lodginghouses, roominghouses and boardinghouses, but it does apply to land on which such buildings or other improvements are located. 
(Code 1982, § 18-24; Ord. No. 1457, 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 1562, 12-9-1996; Ord. No. 1703, 5-14-2001) 
Sec. 40-497. - Repair, personal, business and other services. 
    Every person engaged in a repair, personal or business service within the city shall pay for the privilege a license tax of $30.00 or $0.36 per $100.00 of gross receipts, whichever is greater. 
(1)  Repair service. The repairing, renovating, cleaning or servicing or some article of item of personal property for compensation is a repair service, unless the service is specifically provided for under another section of this article. 
(2)  Personal service. Any service rendered for compensation either upon or for persons, animals or personal effects is a personal service, unless the service is specifically provided for under another section of this article. 
(3)  Business service. Any service rendered for compensation to any business, trade, occupation or governmental agency is a business service, unless the service is specifically provided for under another section of this article. 
(4)  Service enumerated. Those rendering a repair, personal or business service or other service including, but are not limited to, the following: 
Advertising agencies. 
Ambulance services. 
Animal hospitals, grooming services, and kennels. 
Assayers. 
Automobile repair, engine repair of any type. 
Auctioneers and common criers. 
Automobile driving schools. 
Bailbonding company. 
Barbershops, beauty parlors, and hairdressing establishments, schools and services. 
Bid or building reporting services. 
Billiard or pool establishments or parlors. 
Blacksmith or wheelwright. 
Bondsman. 
Booking agents or concert managers. 
Bottle exchanges. 
Bowling alleys. 
Chartered clubs. 
Child care attendants or schools. 
Collection agents or agencies. 
Commercial photography, art and graphics. 
Commercial sports. 
Computer time-sharing. 
Commission brokers who do not take title or possession of merchandise other than real estate and financial consultants. 
Correspondent establishment or bureau. 
Dancehalls, studios and schools. 
Developing or enlarging photographs. 
Detective agency and protective services. 
Drafting services. 
Employment agent or agency. 
Engraving. 
Escort services. 
Erecting, installing, removing or storing awnings. 
Extermination services. 
Freight traffic bureau or agency. 
Fumigating or disinfecting. 
Funeral services and crematories. 
Golf courses, driving ranges and miniature golf courses. 
Hauling of sand, gravel or dirt. 
Hospitals, medical clinics, convalescent homes, nursing homes, nursing facilities, group homes, or other extended care facilities. 
Hotels, motels, tourist courts, boardinghouses and roominghouses and trailer parks and campsites. 
House cleaning services. 
Impounding lots. 
Information bureaus. 
Instructors, tutors, schools and studios of music, ceramics, art, sewing, sports and the like. 
Interior decorating. 
Janitorial services. 
Laundry cleaning and garment services including laundries, dry cleaners, linen supply, diaper services, coin-operated laundries and carpet and upholstery cleaning. 
Limousine service. 
Live model photographic studio. 
Longterm leasing of vehicles. 
Mailing, messenger and correspondent services. 
Mechanics of all kinds. 
Microfilming. 
Movie theaters and drive-in theaters. 
Nickel plating, chromizing and electroplating. 
Nurses and physician registries. 
Operating a scalp treating or electrolysis. 
Packing, crating, shipping, hauling or moving goods or chattels for others. 
Parcel delivery services. 
Parking lots, public garages and valet parking. 
Pawnbrokers. 
Personnel services, labor agents and employment bureaus. 
Photographers and photographic services. 
Piano tuning. 
Picture framing and gilding. 
Porter services. 
Press clipping services. 
Promotional agents or agencies. 
Realty multiple listing services. 
Reducing salon. 
Renting or leasing any items of tangible personal property. 
Renting or furnishing automatic clothes-washing machines. 
Reproduction services, including photocopying. 
Schools, provided they are operated for a profit. 
Secretarial services. 
Septic tank cleaning. 
Shoe repair, shoe shine and hat repair shops. 
Sightseeing carriers. 
Sign painting, window and vehicle lettering. 
Storage, all types. 
Swimming pool maintenance and management. 
Tabulation services. 
Taxidermist. 
Telephone answering services. 
Telecommunications services not subject to taxation under section 40-495. 
Towing services. 
Transportation services including buses and taxis. 
Travel bureaus. 
U-drive-it firm or business, daily or mileage. 
Undertakers or embalmers. 
Vehicular advertising, electric advertising, business advertising, commercial advertising. 
Wake-up services. 
Washing, cleaning or polishing automobiles. 
Other personal service occupations. 
(Code 1982, § 18-25; Ord. No. 1457, 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 1562, 12-9-1996; Ord. No. 1991, 12-18-2018) 
Sec. 40-498. - Retail sales. 
(a)  Every person engaged in business in the city in retail sales shall pay for the privilege a license tax of $30.00 or $0.19 per $100.00 of gross receipts, whichever is greater. For itinerant merchants and peddlers, the maximum tax shall be $500.00 per year. The license tax imposed herein shall be further limited as required by Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3717 and 58.1-3719. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Itinerant merchant means any person who engages in, does or transacts any temporary or transient business in the city either in one locality or in traveling from place to place in the sale of goods, wares and merchandise and who, for the purpose of scarring on such business hires, leases, uses or occupies any building or structure, motor vehicle, tent, car, boat or public room or any part thereof, including rooms in hotels, lodginghouses or houses of private entertainment, or in any street, alley or public place for a period of less than one year for the exhibition of or sale of such goods, wares or merchandise. 
    Peddler means any person who carries from place to place any goods, wares, or merchandise and offers to sell or actually sells and delivers at the same time is a peddler. Any person who does not keep a regular place of business, whether it is a house or a vacant lot or elsewhere, with regular business hours, but at that place offers to sell goods, wares and merchandise is a peddler. Any person who keeps a regular place of business or regular business hours at the same place, who other than at that regular place of business, personally or through agents offers for sale or sells and at the time of such offering for sale, delivers goods, wares and merchandise is a peddler. 
    Retail merchant means any person who makes retail sales. 
    Retail sale means the sale of goods, wares and merchandise for any purpose other than resale, but not including sales at wholesale to institutional, commercial and industrial users. 
(c)  Any peddler or itinerant merchant who sells goods, wares or merchandise at retail is engaged in retail sales and is subject to this license tax as such. 
(d)  When a merchant conducts both a wholesale and a retail business, the merchant is subject to the retail license tax on the retail portion of the business and subject to the wholesale license tax on the wholesale portion of the business. However, he may, but is not required to, pay the license tax as a retailer on both the retail and wholesale portions of the business. 
(e)  Banks and savings and loan associations that sell promotional items are engaged in retail sales as to the sales of the promotional items and are not exempt from license taxation as to those sales. 
(f)  A charitable institution or other not-for-profit organization that engages in the business of buying and selling merchandise is subject to the license tax as a retail or wholesale merchant, even though the proceeds are subsequently used for charitable purposes. 
(g)  A lunch counter operated by an organization open to members only, the proceeds from which are used to maintain the organization, is subject to a local license tax. 
(g)  Any hotel, motel, boardinghouse or lodginghouse which also furnishes or sells food or merchandise for compensation is engaged in retail sales as to the sales of the food or merchandise. 
(i)  Any person who sells goods at retail through a commission merchant, upon consignment or otherwise, is liable for the license tax as to such sales. 
(j)  A person is not subject to a license tax if his business in this city is limited solely to the solicitation of orders by catalogs mailed from outside this city to mail-order buyers in this city and who fills orders from outside this city. However, if the catalogs are distributed by a city resident by mail or in person or if the person engaged in the mail-order business has a definite place of business in this city at which mail orders are received or filled, the mail-order business shall be treated the same as any other retail or wholesale business for the purpose of city license taxes. 
(k)  Any person who merely fills prescriptions for or fits corrective lenses and eyeglasses frames is a retail merchant. However, any practitioner who examines eyes is engaged in rendering a professional service. 
(l)  Any practitioner of a profession who sells goods, wares or merchandise in connection with the practice of the profession is engaged in making retail sales as to those goods, wares or merchandise he sells, but does not himself administer. 
(Code 1982, § 18-26; Ord. No. 1457, 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 1562, 12-9-1996) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 40-499. - Specialized occupations. 
    Every person conducting or engaging in one or more of the following specialized occupations shall pay for the privilege an annual license of $0.36 for each $100.00 of gross receipts, as hereinabove defined, from the occupation during the fiscal or calendar year. The minimum annual license tax shall be $30.00. The specialized occupations are the following: 
Accountants, public (not certified) and bookkeepers. 
Actuary. 
An appraiser or evaluator of personal property for others for compensation. 
Artist. 
Assayer. 
Atomic energy consultants. 
Auditing companies or firms. 
Blueprinter. 
Broker, other than loan or real estate broker listed elsewhere. 
Business chance broker. 
Business consultant. 
Business operations management. 
Commercial inventory and valuation service. 
Communications consultant. 
Credit rating consultant. 
Data processing, computer and system development services. 
Debt refinancing consultant. 
Economic and social science research service. 
Editorial company or firm. 
Electronic and physical science research service. 
Home design consultant. 
Insurance claim adjustor. 
Labor relations consultant. 
Landscaping consultant or designer. 
Legislative researcher. 
Lumber measurer. 
Massage practitioner (certified). 
Manufacturer's agent. 
Marketing research analyst. 
Mercantile agent or agency. 
Operations analyst. 
Patent agent. 
Patent researcher. 
Patent service. 
Public relation services, including booking agents. 
Public stenographer. 
Publishers, publishing company, and writers (authors). 
Recorder of proceedings in any court, commission or other organization. 
Sales agent or agency. 
Scientific research and development service. 
Sculptor. 
Tax consultant (not certified public accountant). 
Title abstract company. 
Transportation consultant. 
Urban or regional planner. 
Other specialized occupations. 
(Code 1982, § 18-27; Ord. No. 1457, 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 1562, 12-9-1996) 
Sec. 40-500. - Wholesale merchants. 
    Every person conducting or engaging in any of the following wholesale merchant occupations, businesses or trade shall pay for the privilege an annual license tax of $0.08 for each $100.00 of gross receipts, as hereinabove defined, from the business during the preceding fiscal or calendar year; the minimum annual license tax shall be $30.00: 
Automotive. 
Chemicals. 
Clothing, furnishings. 
Coal, coke. 
Commission merchants (who take title or other classes as brokers). 
Drugs. 
Dry goods. 
Electrical, plumbing goods. 
Farm products or supplies. 
Furniture and house furnishings. 
Groceries and foods. 
Hardware. 
Jewelry. 
Junk dealers. 
Lumber, paint and construction materials. 
Machinery, equipment and supplies. 
Metals and metalwork. 
Other goods, wares and merchandise. 
Paper and paper products. 
Petroleum and petroleum products. 
Seafood. 
Soft drinks. 
Sporting goods. 
Tobacco and tobacco products, except leaf tobacco. 
Waste materials. 
Other wholesale merchants. 
(Code 1982, § 18-28; Ord. No. 1457, 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 1562, 12-9-1996) 
Sec. 40-501. - Coin-operated amusement machines, operators, and services. 
(a)  Every person conducting or engaging in the business of amusement arcade operator shall pay for the privilege an annual license tax. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Amusement arcade operator means any person selling, leasing, renting or otherwise furnishing or providing a coin-operated amusement machine or device; however, a person owning less than three machines and operating such machines on property owned or leased by such person is not an amusement machine operator. 
(c)  Every amusement machine operator as herein defined shall pay for the privilege an annual license tax according to the following: 
2 machines or less $50.00 3 to 9 machines $100.00 10 or more machines $200.00  
This tax shall not be prorated. This tax shall be due 30 days after the adoption of the ordinance enacting this section and no later than the first day of March each year hereafter. Each amusement machine operator shall furnish the commissioner of the revenue a complete list of all machines on location in the city and the address of each location, by January 31 of each year. Each machine shall post a label or sticker as required by Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3722. Any person failing to procure any license as established in this section shall be subject to the maximum fine permissible for a class 1 misdemeanor under state law and the machine or other device shall be forfeited to the city. 
(d)  In addition to the above, each amusement operator shall pay a gross receipts tax in the amount of $0.36 per $100.00 of gross receipts. This tax shall be due only on that portion of the receipts actually received by the amusement operator. 
(e)  There is hereby imposed a gross receipts tax of $0.36 per $100.00 on those providing amusement services. Those engaged in rendering an amusement service include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Amusement park. 
Arcade or building devoted to general amusement or entertaining. 
Auditorium. 
Billiards. 
Bowling alley. 
Furnishing closed-circuit television. 
Furnishing closed-circuit musical. 
Entertainment. 
Hobby-horse machines, etc. 
Shooting galleries. 
Skating rink. 
Theaters. 
Theatrical performers, bands and orchestras. 
(Code 1982, § 18-30; Ord. No. 1457, 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 1562, 12-9-1996) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 40-502. - Advertising with loudspeakers on vehicles. 
    For each vehicle used on the streets of the city for advertising by means of a loudspeaker, radio or other mechanical equipment, there shall be a license tax of $12.50 per diem, which license fee shall not be prorated. 
(Code 1982, § 18-31; Ord. No. 1457, 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 1562, 12-9-1996) 
Sec. 40-503. - Canvassers and soliciting agents. 
    Canvassers or soliciting agents not otherwise provided for shall pay a license tax of $25.00 per annum or $5.00 per diem; except, that activities by or in behalf of charitable agencies are exempt herein. Any canvasser or soliciting agent exempt from local licenses under the federal law shall register with the chief of police and any canvasser or soliciting agent failing to register will be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1982, § 18-32; Ord. No. 1457, 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 1562, 12-9-1996) 
Sec. 40-504. - Circuses, etc. 
(a)  No show, circus, carnival or other like performances shall be exhibited within the city until a license has been obtained, for which privilege a license tax of $150.00 per day shall be charged, and no rebate shall be allowed for rainy days. 
(b)  For the privilege of using the streets and highways of the city for a circus street parade, a license tax of $100.00 shall be charged, and no such license shall be issued except after a permit for the parade has been obtained from the city manager. 
(Code 1982, § 18-33; Ord. No. 1457, 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 1562, 12-9-1996) 
Sec. 40-505. - Fortunetellers, clairvoyants, phrenologists, etc. 
    Every fortuneteller, clairvoyant, phrenologist, spirit medium, chiromancer, astrologist or palmist operating in the city shall pay for the privilege an annual license tax of $1,000.00. This license tax shall not be prorated and the license shall not be transferable. 
(Code 1982, § 18-34; Ord. No. 1457, 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 1562, 12-9-1996) 
Sec. 40-506. - Savings and loan associations. 
    Stock savings and loans associations, state chartered credit unions, and building and loan associations whose main office is in the city shall pay an annual license tax for the privilege in the sum of $50.00. 
(Code 1982, § 18-35; Ord. No. 1457, 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 1562, 12-9-1996) 
Sec. 40-507. - Short-term rental business. 
    Every person conducting or engaging in the short-term rental business as defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3510 shall pay an annual business license tax of $0.19 for each $100.00 of gross receipts. The tax shall be collected in the manner described by state law. If a person's certification as a short-term rental business is revoked or not renewed, the tax rate mandated by this section shall not apply for the year in which the certificate is revoked nor for any years in which the certificate is not renewed. 
(Code 1982, § 18-36; Ord. No. 1457, 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 1562, 12-9-1996) 
Sec. 40-508. - Telephone companies and motor vehicle carriers. 
(a)  To the extent permitted by state law, telephone companies, without regard to place of office or place of business, shall pay a license tax of one-half of one percent of gross receipts from sales of goods and services to ultimate consumers within the city during the calendar year. 
(b)  Motor vehicle carriers operating on or through the streets of the city shall pay for the privilege or using the streets, roads and routes, including bridges, an annual license tax of one-fifth cent per mile for each vehicle operated within the city. 
(Code 1982, § 18-37; Ord. No. 1457, 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 1562, 12-9-1996; Ord. No. 1689, 10-30-2000) 
Sec. 40-509. - Wall signs and billboards. 
    All persons engaged in the business of wall sign or billboard painting or posting or the rental of space or facilities for such signs or billboards shall pay for the privilege an annual tax of $50.00 for each such wall sign or billboard. The commissioner of the revenue shall issue no license under the provision of this article, unless the applicant shall present a certificate in writing from the city planning commission that the location of such wall signs or billboards is in conformity with chapter 48, pertaining to zoning. 
(Code 1982, § 18-38; Ord. No. 1457, 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 1562, 12-9-1996) 
Sec. 40-510. - Severability; purpose. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, clauses, sentences, and parts of this article are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this article is declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this article or the application of such provisions to other provisions or circumstances but shall be confined in its application to the section, clause, sentence, paragraph, or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which said judgment shall have been rendered and the person or circumstances involved. 
(b)  Should any exemption from, lower rate of, or limitation on this tax be declared invalid, illegal, unconstitutional, or void for any reason, such declaration is not intended to affect the taxes imposed by this article, but the transactions found to be wrongfully exempted, limited, or subject to a lower tax rate shall become fully subject to this tax to the same extent as if such exemption, attempted exemption or limitation, or lower rate had never been included in this article. If any conflict arises between this article and applicable state law, then it is intended that the provision of state law shall be applicable. 
(c)  The purpose of this section is to comply with the minimum requirements of Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-3700 through 58.1-3732.2 regulating local business, professional, and occupational license taxation; and in any event where the provisions of this Code conflict with the state law, the provisions of state law shall control as if set out in this Code in full. 
(Code 1982, § 18-39; Ord. No. 1457, 12-13-1993; Ord. No. 1562, 12-9-1996) 
Secs. 40-511-40-525. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIX. - SHORT-TERM RENTAL TAX[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
State Law reference- Daily rental property tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3510.1 et seq. 

Sec. 40-526. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Affiliated means any common ownership interest in excess of five percent of any officers or partners in common with the lessor and lessee. For purposes of this test: 
(1)  Any rental to a person affiliated with the lessor shall be treated as rental receipts but shall not qualify for purposes of the 80 percent requirement; and 
(2)  Any rental of personal property which also involves the provision of personal services for the operation of the personal property rented shall not be treated as gross receipts from rental. For purposes of this article, the delivery and installation of tangible personal property shall not mean operation. 
    Certificate of registration refers to the annual certificate issued by the Falls Church Commissioner of the Revenue to persons engaged in the short-term rental business in the city who make application for such certificate, pursuant to section 40-534. 
    City means the City of Falls Church, Virginia. 
    Commissioner of the revenue means the commissioner of the revenue of the City of Falls Church, Virginia, and any of the commissioner's duly authorized deputies or agents. 
    Daily rental property means all tangible personal property held for rental and owned by a person engaged in the short-term rental business as defined in this section, except trailers, as defined in Code of Virginia, § 46.2-100 and other tangible personal property required to be licensed or registered from the state department of motor vehicles, the state department of game and inland fisheries or the state department of aviation. 
    Gross proceeds shall mean the total amount charged including penalties, late charges of interest, to each person for the rental of daily rental property from a short-term rental business with a valid certificate of registration, excluding any state and local sales tax paid pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 48.1-600 et seq. Gross proceeds is the taxable basis for the daily rental tax. 
    Gross rental receipts shall mean all proceeds from rentals during a calendar year, including rentals to persons affiliated with the lessor, except that proceeds from rental of personal property which also involves the provision of personal services for the operation of the personal property rented shall not be treated as gross receipts from rental. For purposes of this article, the delivery and installation of tangible personal property shall not mean operation. 
    Person shall mean and include individuals, firms, partnerships, associations, corporations, and combinations of individuals of whatever form and character. 
    Short-term rental business shall include any person engaged in the short-term rental of daily rental property as defined in this section, if: 
(1)  Not less than 80 percent of the gross rental receipts of such business in any year are from transactions involving rental periods of 92 consecutive days or less, including all extensions and renewals to the same person or a person affiliated with the lessor; and provided that 
(2)  Any rental to a person affiliated with the lessor shall be treated as rental receipts for the purpose of collecting the daily rental tax but shall not qualify for purposes of the 80 percent requirement to qualify as a short-term rental business; and 
(3)  Any rental of personal property which also involves the provision of personal services for the operation of the personal property rented shall not be treated as gross receipts from rental. For purposes of this article, the term "delivery and installation of tangible personal property" shall not mean operation. 
(Code 1982, § 40-1; Ord. No. 1289, 12-11-1989) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Definitions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3510. 
Sec. 40-527. - Levy and rate of daily rental tax. 
    Pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3510.1, and in addition to all other taxes of every kind now or hereinafter imposed by law, the city hereby levies and imposes on every person engaged in the short-term rental business a tax of one percent on the gross proceeds of such business, as defined in section 40-526. Such tax shall be in addition to the tax levied pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-605. 
(Code 1982, § 40-2; Ord. No. 1289, 12-11-1989) 
State Law reference- Sales tax authority, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-605; authority to levy daily rental tax, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3510.1. 
Sec. 40-528. - Exemptions from daily rental tax. 
(a)  No tax hereunder shall be collected or payable on rentals by the commonwealth, by any political subdivision of the commonwealth or by the United States. 
(b)  No tax hereunder shall be collected or payable on any rental of durable medical equipment as defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-609.10(10). 
(c)  All rentals exempt from the state sales and use tax, pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-600 et seq., shall be exempt from this daily rental tax. 
(d)  All exemptions from this tax claimed by short-term rental businesses at the time of payment of collected taxes shall be proved by filing of appropriate documentation as directed by the commissioner and are subject to verification by the commissioner at any time. 
(Code 1982, § 40-3; Ord. No. 1289, 12-11-1989) 
State Law reference- Exemptions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3510.1 C. 
Sec. 40-529. - Short-term rental business application for certificate of registration. 
    Every person engaging in the business of short-term rental, as defined in section 40-526, shall annually file an application for a certificate of registration with the city commissioner of the revenue for each place of business in the city from which short-term rental business will be conducted by the applicant. Such application shall be filed by January 31 of each year or within 30 days of the beginning of a short-term rental business. The application shall be on a form prescribed by the city commissioner of the revenue and shall contain: 
(1)  The name under which the applicant intends to operate the rental business; 
(2)  The location in the city from which the rental business will be conducted, as well as the location of the rental business headquarters; 
(3)  The figures for the previous year's business including the total gross receipts from all business, the total gross rental proceeds and the total receipts from short-term rental of daily rental property; 
(4)  A list of all tangible personal property owned by the applicant as of January 1 of the current year and used as short-term rental property; 
(5)  A list of all property leased or licensed to the short-term rental business as of January 1 of the current year, used for short-term rental, with the name and address of the owner of such property; 
(6)  Such other information as the commissioner may require; and 
(7)  An oath by the person making application or an officer, partner or duly authorized agent for such applicant that they are in fact qualified for tax treatment as a short-term rental business, they shall collect only those daily rental taxes due under the law in the time and manner prescribed by law, and they shall remit all daily rental taxes collected or due and owing to the city. 
(Code 1982, § 40-4; Ord. No. 1289, 12-11-1989) 
State Law reference- Certificate of registration, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3510.2. 
Sec. 40-530. - Issuance and effect of certificate of registration for short-term daily rental business. 
    Upon approval of the application required by section 40-534 by the commissioner of the revenue, a certificate of registration shall be issued for each location from which a daily rental business is to be conducted or operated in the city by the applicant. The certificate shall be conspicuously displayed at all times at the place of business for which it is issued. Each annual certificate shall be valid and authorize the collection of the short-term rental tax until renewal or revocation of the certificate. The certificate is not assignable and shall be valid only for the person in whose name it is issued and the place of business designated. 
(Code 1982, § 40-5; Ord. No. 1289, 12-11-1989) 
State Law reference- Certificate of registration, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3510.2. 
Sec. 40-531. - Collection and recordkeeping. 
(a)  Every person engaged in the short-term rental business with a valid certificate of registration from the commissioner of the revenue shall collect this daily rental tax from the lessee of the daily rental property at the time of the rental. 
(b)  The person collecting this tax shall maintain a record of all rental transactions for which this tax is collected, which record shall contain: 
(1)  A description of the property rented; 
(2)  The period of time for which the property was rented; 
(3)  The name and address of the person to whom the property was rented; and 
(4)  The amount charged for each rental, including all late charges, penalties and interest. 
(c)  Every person engaged in the short-term rental business shall maintain a complete record of all exemptions from payment of this tax granted to renters of short-term rental property including, in addition to the information specified in subsection (b) of this section: 
(1)  A copy of the state department of taxation tax-exemption certificate; 
(2)  A copy of the U.S. State Department tax exemption certificate, which U.S. State Department card must specify the renter by name who is exempt from sales tax; or 
(3)  Other explanation and proof of claimed exemption. 
(Code 1982, § 40-6; Ord. No. 1289, 12-11-1989) 
Sec. 40-532. - Filing of quarterly tax returns and remittance of tax. 
    Each certified short-term rental business under the provisions of this article shall file a quarterly tax return with the commissioner of the revenue, indicating for the quarter just past: 
(1)  The total business gross receipts of the return filer; 
(2)  The gross proceeds derived from the short-term rental business; 
(3)  All rental gross proceeds claimed to be exempt from the daily rental tax and documentation of each such claim; 
(4)  The total daily rental tax due the city for the previous quarter's short-term rental business. 
Each return shall indicate the gross proceeds derived from the short-term rental business. The city commissioner of the revenue shall assess the tax due, and the treasurer or director of finance shall collect the daily rental property tax. The quarterly return shall be filed with the commissioner of the revenue on or before the 20th day of each of the months of April, July, October and January, representing, respectively, the gross proceeds and taxes collected during the preceding quarters ending March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31. 
(Code 1982, § 40-7; Ord. No. 1289, 12-11-1989) 
State Law reference- Assessment by the commissioner of the revenue, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3510.1 B. 
Sec. 40-533. - Taxes held in trust for city. 
    The taxes required to be collected under this article shall be deemed to be held in trust for the city by the person required to collect such taxes until remitted as required in this article. 
(Code 1982, § 40-8; Ord. No. 1289, 12-11-1989) 
Sec. 40-534. - Penalty for failure or refusal to collect tax. 
    If any certified, short-term rental business in the city fails or refuses to collect the tax imposed under this article, their current certificate of registration shall be revoked and the business shall not be subject to the provision of Code of Virginia, §§ 58.2-3510, 58.1-3510.1 and 58.1-3706 nor to the provisions of section 40-507 and this article for the calendar year in which the certificate was revoked. Any payments of daily rental tax made previous to the revocation of the certificate shall be refunded to such lessees as can be identified by the lessor. 
(Code 1982, § 40-9; Ord. No. 1289, 12-11-1989) 
Sec. 40-535. - Penalties and interest; failure to file return or pay over taxes collected. 
(a)  If any certified, short-term rental business fails to file the returns required by this article or fails or refuses to remit to the commissioner of the revenue the tax collected and paid under this article at the time specified in this article, its certification as a short-term rental business shall be revoked and there shall be added to such tax collected prior to revocation of the certificate and due the city but not paid a penalty in the amount of ten percent of the tax past due or the sum of $10.00, whichever is greater. The assessment of such penalty shall not be deemed a defense to any criminal prosecution for failure to comply with any of the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Interest on late payment of any taxes and penalties due shall be at the rate of ten percent for the first year. For the second and subsequent years, interest shall be paid on the delinquent tax and penalty at a rate established by the treasurer, at his or her discretion, but not to exceed ten percent per annum or the rate of interest, established pursuant to section 6621 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1984, as amended, whichever is greater. Penalty and interest for failure to file the return or to pay the tax due pursuant to this article shall be assessed on the first day following the day such quarterly return and tax payment is due. The certification shall be revoked if the failure to pay the tax due or to file the returns required by this article continues for 60 days beyond the due date. 
(Code 1982, § 40-10; Ord. No. 1289, 12-11-1989) 
Sec. 40-536. - Uncertified renters prohibited from collecting tax. 
    No person renting any property or services to any other person shall collect from the lessee the daily rental tax authorized by this article, unless they have a valid certificate of registration issued for the current year by the commissioner of the revenue. Any taxes collected in a manner not authorized by law shall be forfeited to the city. 
(Code 1982, § 40-11; Ord. No. 1289, 12-11-1989) 
Sec. 40-537. - Criminal penalties. 
    Persons violating or failing to comply with any provision of this article shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor, except as provided below: 
(1)  If the amount of tax due and unpaid for any quarter exceeds $1,000.00, any person failing to file a return or remit payment when due and convicted of such failure on a criminal warrant shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(2)  Any person violating section 40-536 shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Code 1982, § 40-12; Ord. No. 1289, 12-11-1989) 
Sec. 40-538. - Taxation of rental property that is not daily rental property. 
    Except for daily rental passenger cars, rental property that is not daily rental property shall be classified for taxation, pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3503. 
(Code 1982, § 40-13; Ord. No. 1289, 12-11-1989) 
Sec. 40-539. - Effect of revocation of certification as short-term rental business. 
    If upon audit by the commissioner of the revenue of the preceding full year's gross proceeds and gross rental receipts, it is ascertained that a certified short-term rental business did not meet the criteria for certification set out in section 40-526, any current certification shall be revoked or renewal of certification shall be denied. In addition the business shall not be treated for business license tax and business tangible property tax assessment as a certified, short-term rental business for the preceding year and for the current year. The business shall be assessed any additional business license and business tangible property taxes found to be due. 
(Code 1982, § 40-14; Ord. No. 1289, 12-11-1989) 
Sec. 40-540. - Exemptions, penalties. 
    Provisions in Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-609.1 through 58.1-609.11 relating to exemptions, Code of Virginia, §§ 58.1-635 and 58.1-636 relating to penalties, and Code of Virginia, § 58.1-615 relating to the manner of collecting the local retail sales and use tax applicable in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-600 et seq., shall apply mutatis mutandis to the daily rental property tax, except that the city commissioner of the revenue shall assess the tax due, and the treasurer or director of finance shall collect the daily rental property tax, instead of the state department of taxation. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3510.3. 
Chapter 42 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of city to construct, regulate, etc., sewers and water system, §§ 2.03, 2.04; establishment of use rates, § 2.05; public utilities, §§ 13.01-13.05. 
Cross reference- Buildings, ch. 6; cable television, ch. 10; consumer utility tax, § 40-294; outdoor lighting, § 14-127 et seq.; housing, ch. 22; water recreation facilities, § 8-425 et seq.; safety standards for underground installations, § 36-127 et seq.; activities of public utilities relative to trees, shrubs and weeds, § 44-23; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 36; subdivisions, ch. 42; zoning, ch. 48. 
State Law reference- Municipal public utilities generally, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2109 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - Director of public utilities. 
(a)  Creation of office; duties. The city manager is hereby authorized and directed to employ a director of public utilities of the city at a salary to be fixed and apportioned to the various city accounts by the council. 
(b)  Supervision; duties. The director of public utilities shall be under the supervision of the general manager of the department of environmental services and orders of the council and it shall be the duty of the director of public utilities to faithfully operate the water and sanitary sewer utilities of the city. The director shall perform such other duties as may be assigned by the general manager of the department of environmental services. 
(Code 1973, §§ 31-1, 31-2; Code 1982, § 29-1) 
Charter reference- Charter provision as to director of public utilities, §§ 13.03, 13.04. 
Sec. 42-2. - Privies. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain a privy or dry closet within the city. 
(Code 1973, § 31-4; Code 1982, § 29-2) 
Sec. 42-3. - Septic tanks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to install a septic tank in the city. 
(Code 1973, § 31-5; Code 1982, § 29-3) 
Secs. 42-4-42-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal water supplies and facilities, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2109 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 42-25. - Wells and cisterns. 
    No wells or cisterns will be allowed to be connected to the potable water supply of any building in the city. Existing wells shall be disconnected when a health hazard would result from their continued use, and the building's potable water system shall be connected to the city water supply. Wells may be drilled for use as nonpotable water supply for use in cooling towers, lawn sprinklers and the like, when approved by the building official, and a permit with approval shall be obtained from the health department. 
(Code 1973, § 31-6; Code 1982, § 29-4) 
Sec. 42-26. - Connection with city water supply. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any house or type of construction used as a human habitation, or the owner of any land used for the parking or standing of any trailer or automobile trailer or vehicle of any kind used as a human habitation, or the owner of any public building or other place where persons congregate or are employed, within the corporate limits of the city, to occupy, rent or lease the same for occupancy, unless the habitation has been connected to the city water system. 
(b)  Fee. A charge as set by the city council by ordinance will be made for connecting any building to the city water system. 
(Code 1973, §§ 31-7, 31-8; Code 1982, § 29-5) 
Sec. 42-27. - Account charge. 
    An account charge shall be paid by each applicant for service whether for a new account or for a transfer of account. This charge is included in the first bill rendered to the customer. The amount of the account charge shall be $12.50. 
(Code 1973, § 31-9; Code 1982, § 29-6; Ord. No. 735; Ord. No. 920) 
Sec. 42-28. - Service rates. 
    The rates for water service to all consumers shall be as set by the city council by ordinance. 
(Code 1973, § 31-10; Code 1982, § 29-7) 
Sec. 42-29. - Bills. 
(a)  Due date. All water bills shall be paid within 30 days after date of rendition. 
(b)  Division of system into sections. The water system shall be divided into sections; one section to be billed to water consumers each month for the current quarterly period beginning with that month. Large consumers, as determined by the director of utilities customer service, shall be billed monthly. 
(Code 1973, §§ 31-12, 31-13; Code 1982, § 29-8) 
Cross reference- Billing and collection of charges for use of water and sewer, § 29-28. 
Sec. 42-30. - Disconnection on default or violation. 
    In case of any default of payment of a bill or violation of any other requirement or regulation of the department of public utilities, water service shall be cut off from the premises affected without further notice. 
(Code 1973, § 31-14; Code 1982, § 29-9) 
Sec. 42-31. - Charge for reconnection. 
    When water service has been shut off from any consumer on account of default in payment of water bill or for other violations, a charge for reconnection will be set by the city council by ordinance. 
(Code 1973, § 31-15; Code 1982, § 29-10) 
Sec. 42-32. - New installations or extensions-Permits and inspections. 
(a)  No water installations or extensions in new or old buildings, either or both, either inside or outside the boundaries of the city shall be made without a permit by the appropriate jurisdiction for same. An inspection shall be made of the completed work before the water meter is installed in new buildings or water is turned on in extensions in old buildings. 
(b)  The cost of such permit and inspection shall be as required by the appropriate jurisdiction. 
(c)  Failure to comply with regulations of this section shall be deemed cause for the refusal of the use of water by the city in new installations and immediate disconnection of meter in old installations. 
(Code 1973, §§ 31-16-31-18; Code 1982, § 29-11) 
Sec. 42-33. - Same-Costs; title; agreements for reimbursement. 
(a)  Responsibility for costs. The entire cost of water line extension shall be paid for by the person requesting such extensions. When such extensions are made by the department of public utilities, the estimated whole cost of such extensions must be deposited with the treasurer of the city before any work is started. All extensions shall become the property of the department of public utilities. Agreements may be made to reimburse those making extensions by requiring any person connecting to the extensions to pay a pro rata share. However, all such agreements shall become null and void after a period of ten years from the date of execution. The council may, by ordinance, establish a local facilities charge or an availability charge, to be paid by anyone requesting a water tap on lines installed by the city at its own expense or on lines which have been otherwise acquired by the city. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Availability charge means the applicant's share of the cost of that portion of the pumping stations, transmission mains, storage tanks and treatment facilities and associated appurtenances needed to convey water to a location convenient to the applicant's local distribution system and which have been or will be provided at the expense of the city. 
    Local facilities means water mains, valves, fittings, fire hydrants and associated appurtenances needed to provide water service at a location that obviates the need for any further extension, by the applicant, and which have been provided at the expense of the city, individuals, corporations, or firms other than the applicant and subsequently conveyed to the city. 
(c)  Agreement for reimbursement. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the council, upon the recommendation of the city manager, from authorizing the expenditure of funds from the waterworks renewal fund or from other sources for the extension of trunk mains; provided, further, that the city manager may, upon the recommendation of the general manager of the department of environmental services, enter into an agreement to reimburse persons required by the city to install oversize mains in order to provide for the future expansion of the water system. 
(Code 1973, § 31-19; Code 1982, § 29-12; Ord. No. 832) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 42-34. - Dimensions of water taps. 
    Dimensions of water taps shall be established by the director of public utilities. 
(Code 1973, § 31-20; Code 1982, § 29-13) 
Sec. 42-35. - Size of permanent water main. 
    No permanent water main smaller than four inches shall be installed under any consideration. 
(Code 1973, § 31-21; Code 1982, § 29-14) 
Sec. 42-36. - Single connection to one meter. 
    It shall be unlawful to connect or serve more than one residence or other establishment from one meter. This is not to be construed as prohibiting the extension of a water line of a residence or other establishment to the out-buildings properly appertaining thereto. The city manager is authorized to permit the serving of a church and its parsonage from one meter. 
(Code 1973, § 31-22; Code 1982, § 29-15) 
Sec. 42-37. - Connections outside city. 
    No water connections shall be made to facilities of the city until permits for the same shall have been issued and fees collected as set by ordinance by the city council. All such connections shall be inspected in the usual manner by the department of public utilities. 
(Code 1973, § 31-23; Code 1982, § 29-16) 
Sec. 42-38. - Unauthorized interference with system. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make any connection or turn any valve, or in any way to tamper with the water line, connections, hydrants or valves belonging to the water supply or distribution system of the city, except by permit issued by the city authorities. 
(Code 1973, § 31-24; Code 1982, § 29-17) 
State Law reference- Destruction or damage to water facilities, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-162. 
Secs. 42-39-42-64. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WATER CONSERVATION[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings, ch. 6; underground utilities, § 42-231 et seq. 
State Law reference- Authority to require installation of water conservation devices, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-923. 

Subdivision I. - In General 

Secs. 42-65-42-87. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Water Shortage Control Plan 

Sec. 42-88. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subdivision, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Coordinator means the coordinator of the Metropolitan Washington Water Supply Emergency Agreement. 
    Emergency plan means the Metropolitan Washington Water Supply Emergency Plan contained within the Metropolitan Washington Water Supply Emergency Agreement entered into by the jurisdiction on December 5, 1979, and any amendments subsequently approved by the jurisdiction. 
    Emergency stage means the stage in the emergency plan at which ordinances which require mandatory curtailment of nonessential water use by the general public will be activated in affected areas. Upon notification from the coordinator that the emergency stage has been declared and that the jurisdiction is affected, the water use administrator shall activate and implement the provisions of this subdivision. 
    Jurisdiction means the City of Falls Church, Virginia. 
    Water means water taken from any public water supply or distribution system within the boundaries of the jurisdiction. 
    Water use administrator means the city manager or the designee of the city manager authorized to implement this subdivision. 
(Code 1973, § 31-25; Code 1982, § 29-18(a); Ord. No. 752) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 42-89. - Restriction of water use. 
    At such time as the water use administrator is notified by the coordinator that the emergency stage of the emergency agreement has been declared, and after appropriate legal notice has been given to the general public, the water use administrator is authorized to implement this section by ordering the restricted use or absolute curtailment of use of water for certain nonessential purposes including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  The use of hoses, sprinklers or other means for sprinkling or watering of shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass, plants, vines, gardens, vegetables, flowers or any other vegetation. 
(2)  The use of water for washing automobiles, trucks, trailers, trailer-houses or any other type of mobile equipment. 
(3)  The washing of streets, driveways, parking lots, service station aprons, office buildings, exterior of homes, sidewalks, apartments or other outdoor surfaces. 
(4)  The operation of any ornamental fountain or other structures making a similar use of water. 
(5)  The use of water for filling swimming and wading pools. 
(6)  The operation of any water-cooled comfort air conditioning which does not have water conserving equipment. 
The water use administrator shall notify the coordinator of any and all such actions. 
(Code 1973, § 31-25; Code 1982, § 29-18(b); Ord. No. 752) 
Sec. 42-90. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating any provision of this subdivision or order of the water use administrator implementing this subdivision shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as provided by section 1-12. 
(Code 1973, § 31-25; Code 1982, § 29-18(c); Ord. No. 752) 
Sec. 42-91. - Appeals. 
    Whenever the water use administrator shall issue an order directing restriction or curtailment of the use of water as provided herein, or shall seek suspension of water service as a result of a violation of provisions of this subdivision, the person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the decision of the water use administrator to the city council. The city council may appoint a temporary board of appeal consisting of members of the council and other appropriate parties to act in its place on this matter. The council or board of appeal shall grant such person a reasonable opportunity to present in writing or, at the option of the council or board of appeal, in open hearing, such person's arguments against such decision of the water use administrator. The council or board of appeals shall consider such arguments and pertinent facts and its decision with respect to such appeal shall be final. 
(Code 1973, § 31-25; Code 1982, § 29-18(d); Ord. No. 752) 
Sec. 42-92. - Exception to maintain sanitation. 
    The water use administrator, upon the recommendation of the city health officer or upon its own recognizance, shall have the authority to permit a reasonable use of water in any case necessary to maintain adequate health and sanitation standards. 
(Code 1973, § 31-25; Code 1982, § 29-18(e); Ord. No. 752) 
Sec. 42-93. - Exceptions for business necessary to public welfare. 
(a)  The provisions of this subdivision shall not apply to any business or industry which shall be declared by resolution of the city council to be specifically excepted as necessary for the public health, safety and welfare. 
(b)  Businesses and industries processing animal, vegetable and mineral matter for food for human consumption purposes shall be regulated in the following manner: The water use administrator, when so ordered by ordinance of the city council, shall hold a public hearing to determine the amount of water to be used based upon the amount needed during normal years in the particular business and the severity and period of the existing drought conditions. 
(c)  The utilities customer service division shall have available and furnish all records necessary to determine the usages of water restricted by this subdivision. 
(Code 1973, § 31-25; Code 1982, § 29-18(f); Ord. No. 752) 
Secs. 42-94-42-115. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Fixtures and Equipment for Carwashes[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Underground utilities, § 42-231 et seq. 

Sec. 42-116. - New and existing installations. 
    Carwash installations shall be equipped with an approved water recycling system. This clause shall be retroactive and all existing carwash installations shall be equipped with such recycling devices by not later than one year after the effective date of the ordinance from which this subdivision is derived. 
(Code 1982, § 6-105(c); Ord. No. 751) 
Sec. 42-117. - Coin-operated or similar devices. 
    No coin-operated carwash may be permitted to be installed and used until plans have been submitted to and approved by the administrative authority. The plans must show the method of connection to an approved sanitary sewer system, disposal of rain subsurface water and the protection of the potable water system. 
(Code 1982, § 6-105(d); Ord. No. 751) 
Sec. 42-118. - Continuous flow equipment. 
    Any water connected device or appliance requiring a continuous flow of five gallons per minute or more and not previously listed in this subdivision shall be equipped with an approved water recycling system. 
(Code 1982, § 6-105(e); Ord. No. 751) 
Secs. 42-119-42-149. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CROSS CONNECTION AND BACKFLOW PREVENTION CONTROL IN WATERWORKS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings, ch. 6; underground utilities, § 42-231 et seq. 

Sec. 42-150. - Adoption of state regulations. 
    Section 6.00, pertaining to cross connection and backflow prevention control in waterworks, Commonwealth of Virginia Waterworks Regulations is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference into this Code, as fully as if set out at length herein, save and except such portions as are modified, amended or deleted hereby. Three copies of such regulations together with a copy of this division attached to each shall be filed and maintained in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1982, § 6-106; Ord. No. 776) 
Sec. 42-151. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Air gap separation means the unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying pure water to a tank, plumbing fixture or other device and the rim of the receptacle. 
    Auxiliary water system means any water system on or available to the premises other than the waterworks. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor's waterworks; or water from a source such as wells, lakes or streams; or process fluids; or used water. They may be polluted or contaminated or objectionable, or constitute a water source or system over which the water purveyor does not have control. 
    Backflow means the flow of contaminants, pollutants, process fluids, used water, untreated waters, chemicals, gases, or nonpotable waters into any part of a waterworks. 
    Backflow prevention device means any approved device, method, or type of construction intended to prevent backflow into a waterworks. 
    Consumer means the owner or person in control of any premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a waterworks. 
    Consumer's water system means any water system located on the consumer's premises, supplied by or in any manner connected to a waterworks. 
    Contamination means any introduction into pure water of microorganisms, wastes, wastewater, undesirable chemicals or gases. 
    Cross connection means any connection or structural arrangement, direct or indirect, to the waterworks whereby backflow can occur. 
    Degree of hazard means the term that is derived from an evaluation of the potential risk to health and the adverse effect upon the waterworks. 
    Double gate-double checkvalve assembly means an approved assembly composed of two single, independently acting checkvalves including tightly closing shut-off valves located at each end of the assembly and petcocks and test gauges for testing the watertightness of each checkvalve. 
    Health hazard means any condition, device or practice in a waterworks or its operation that creates, or may create, a danger to the health and well-being of the water consumer. 
    Interchangeable connection means an arrangement or device that will allow alternate but not simultaneous use of two sources of water. 
    Pollution means the presence of any foreign substance (chemical, physical, radiological or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute an unnecessary risk or impair the usefulness of the water. 
    Pollution hazard means a condition through which an aesthetically objectionable or degrading material may enter the waterworks or a consumer's water system. 
    Process fluids means any fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted which would constitute a health, pollution or system hazard, if introduced into the waterworks. This includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Polluted or contaminated waters; 
(2)  Process waters; 
(3)  Used waters originating from the waterworks which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality; 
(4)  Cooling waters; 
(5)  Contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes, streams or irrigation systems; 
(6)  Chemicals in solution or suspension; and 
(7)  Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquor and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other processes, or for firefighting purposes. 
    Pure water or potable water means water fit for human consumption and use which is sanitary and normally free of minerals, organic substances and toxic agents in excess of reasonable amounts for domestic usage in the area served, and normally adequate in supply for the minimum health requirement of the persons served. 
    Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device means a device containing a minimum of two independently acting checkvalves together with an automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located between the two checkvalves. During normal flow and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two checkvalves shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either checkvalve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure between the checkvalves at less than the supply pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shut-off valves located at each end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with properly located test cocks. These devices must be of approved type. 
    Service connection means the terminal end of a service line from the waterworks. If a meter is installed at the end of the service, then the service connection means the downstream end of the meter. 
    System hazard means a condition posing an actual, or threat of, damage to the physical properties of the waterworks or a consumer's water system. 
    Used water means any water supplied by a water purveyor from waterworks to a consumer's water system after it has passed through the service connection. 
    Water purveyor means an individual, group of individuals, partnership, firm, association, institution, corporation, municipal corporation, county or authority which supplies water to any person within this state from or by means of any waterworks. 
    Waterworks means all structures and appliances used in connection with the collection, storage, purification and treatment of water for drinking or domestic use and the distribution to the public or residential consumers as set forth in Code of Virginia, § 32.1-167 et seq., as amended. 
(Code 1982, § 6-107; Ord. No. 776) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 42-152. - Inspections. 
    The city shall cause inspections to be made of properties served by the waterworks where cross connection with the waterworks is deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections, based on potential health hazards involved, shall be established by the city manager in the cross connection control and backflow prevention program and as approved by the state department of health. 
(Code 1982, § 6-108; Ord. No. 776) 
Sec. 42-153. - Administrative authority. 
    The representative of the city, as designated by the city manager, shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time properties served by a connection to the waterworks of the city piping system for cross connections. Upon request, the owners or occupants of property served shall furnish to the inspection agency pertinent information regarding the piping system on such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross connections. 
(Code 1982, § 6-109; Ord. No. 776) 
Sec. 42-154. - Discontinuation of service. 
    The water purveyor may deny or discontinue the water service to a consumer if the required backflow prevention device is not installed. If it is found that the device has been removed or bypassed or if a cross connection exists on the premises, or if the pressure in the waterworks is lowered below ten pounds per square inch gauge, the purveyor shall take positive action to ensure that the waterworks is adequately protected at all times. Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the deficiencies have been corrected or eliminated in accordance with state waterworks regulations and to the satisfaction of the purveyor. 
(Code 1982, § 6-110; Ord. No. 776) 
Sec. 42-155. - Protection of water system. 
    The water purveyor or its agent shall require that the potable water made available to the properties served by the waterworks shall be protected by the consumer from possible contamination or pollution, by enforcement of this division and the city plumbing code. Any water outlet which would be used for potable or domestic purposes and is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled as "Water Unsafe for Drinking" in a conspicuous manner. 
(Code 1982, § 6-111; Ord. No. 776) 
Sec. 42-156. - Penalty; violations. 
(a)  Any person or customer found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this division, or any written order of the duly designated representative of the city, in pursuance thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as per section 1-12. 
(b)  Each day upon which a violation of the provisions of this division shall occur shall be deemed a separate and additional violation for the purposes of this division. 
(Code 1982, § 6-112; Ord. No. 776) 
Secs. 42-157-42-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Sewage disposal generally, Code of Virginia, § 32.1-163 et seq. 

Sec. 42-171. - Regulation and protection of public sewers. 
(a)  Deposits, obstructing flow. No person shall throw or deposit in or upon any public drainage ditch, streambed, storm or sanitary sewer, or any trap, basin or other appurtenance of any public storm or sanitary sewer in the city, any matter, organic or inorganic, except groundwater or roof water discharged into a public storm sewer when approved by the administrative authority, or matter normally discharged into a sanitary sewer from industrial, commercial or residential structures. Nor shall any person obstruct, impede, or cause to be impeded or obstructed, the flow of any public drainage ditch, streambed, storm or sanitary sewer, nor interfere with the free discharge or ventilation, nor clog up any appurtenance. 
(b)  Entry. No person other than on-duty employees of the city shall enter any public storm or sanitary sewer or appurtenance without a written permit from the city manager or the designee of the city manager; provided that the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a master plumber acting under circumstances of emergency. 
(c)  Cutting, tapping. No person shall cut, break, damage, pierce or tap any public storm or sanitary sewer or appurtenance, or introduce any tube, pipe, trough or conduit into any public storm or sanitary sewer or appurtenance without a written permit from the city manager, or the designee of the city manager; provided that the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a master plumber acting under circumstances of emergency. 
(d)  Lifting manhole covers, etc. No person other than on-duty employees of the city shall turn, lift, remove, raise or tamper with any cover of any manhole, basin, inlet or other appurtenance of any public storm or any sanitary sewer without a written permit from the city manager or the designee of the city manager; provided that the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to master plumber acting under circumstances of emergency. 
(e)  Prohibited discharges. No person shall make or maintain any connection with any public storm or sanitary sewer or appurtenance whereby there may be conveyed into same any hot, suffocating, corrosive, inflammable or explosive liquid, gas, vapor, substance or material of any kind; provided that the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to hot water heaters when properly connected as required by the plumbing code or to boilers installed and operating in accordance with the provisions of the building code. 
(Code 1973, § 31-26; Code 1982, § 29-19) 
Sec. 42-172. - Availability charge. 
(a)  Classification of customers. All customers will be classified into one of the following categories: single-family; townhouse; apartment; commercial; municipal. 
(1)  Single-family and townhouse customers with established winter quarter consumption. Sewer service charges for single-family and townhouse class customers will be based on either the previous smooth winter quarter water usage or the actual water usage during the quarter, whichever is less. 
(2)  Single-family and townhouse customers without established winter quarter consumption. Sewer services charges for single-family and townhouse class customers who have not established a winter quarter consumption will be based on either an average consumption of similar units or the current quarter's water consumption, whichever is less. 
(3)  Commercial, apartment and municipal class customers. Sewer service charges for commercial, apartments and municipal class customers will be billed on the basis of all water consumed during a given month or quarter. 
(4)  Single-family and townhouse customers not connected to public water supply. Sewer service charges for single-family and townhouse class customers who have only a sanitary sewer connection will be based on the number of people at the residence up to a maximum of four. It will be assumed that: 
a.  One person uses 5,000 gallons a quarter. 
b.  Two people use 10,000 gallons a quarter. 
c.  Three people use 15,000 gallons a quarter. 
d.  Four or more people use 19,000 gallons a quarter. 
(5)  Pro-ration of initial and final bills. 
a.  For single-family and townhouse class customers connected to public water supply: new accounts that do not include an entire quarter will be billed based on the lesser of the actual water consumption or the pro-rated (based on the number of days) portion of the household average for the prior winter quarter. 
Final bills will be based on the lesser of the actual water consumption or the pro-rated winter quarter figure for the respective account. 
b.  For single-family and townhouse class customers not connected to public water supply: initial and final bills that do not include an entire winter quarter will be pro-rated based on the number of days actually on service. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  The winter quarter billing period is defined as any quarterly billing period based on meter readings obtained in the months of February through April. 
(2)  Smooth winter quarter is defined as a customer's winter quarter consumption averaged on a daily basis for their meter-reading period and extrapolated to a standard length quarter of 91.25 days (365 divided by 4) or 91.5 (366 divided by 4) during a leap year. 
(3)  For computational purposes, the billing year utilizing the preceding smooth winter quarter begins on July 1 and end the following June 30. 
(c)  Advance quarterly use charge and commodity charges. 
(1)  The first bill a customer receives shall include an advance quarterly use charge of $18.50. 
(2)  The sewer charge as determined by the appropriate method noted above shall be $9.87 per 1,000 gallons of water billed. 
(3)  A fixed charge of $6.00 for quarterly customers and $2.00 for monthly customers shall be included in each bill. 
(d)  Sewer revenue fund. All charges for sewer service collected by the city shall be credited to the sewer revenue fund. 
AVAILABILITY CHARGES 
  Inside and Outside City 
(per unit) Single-family dwelling, detached, semi-detached duplex or townhouse $7,680.00 Apartment or condominium buildings $6,140.00 Motel, hotel unit $1,920.00  
Any building, such as a retirement/nursing home, which contains units that are used as a permanent address, shall be considered a condominium building. 
(e)  Commercial, industrial and other uses. 
(1)  Charges shall be based on the number of drainage fixture units (DFUs) following Tables I and II times $320.00 per DFU. For hotel properties DFUs will be based on the common area of the hotel and exclude the DFUs in each hotel room. For fixtures or equipment discharging continuously or semi-continuously to a wastewater discharge system, the fixture units for such premises shall be increased by two for each gallon per minute of discharge. Continuous or semi-continuous discharge may be such as certified by manufacturer of the fixture or equipment involved or as shall be estimated or otherwise established by the director of public utilities. 
Table I - Table of Drainage Fixture Units (DFUs) 
Type of Plumbing Fixture DFUs One bathroom group consisting of water closet, lavatory, and bathtub or shower stall:   Tank water closet 6   Flush-valve water closet 8 Bathtub (with or without overhead shower) 2 Bidet 3 Combination sink-and-tray 3 Combination sink-and-tray with food disposal unit 4 Dental unit or cuspidor 1 Dental lavatory 1 Drinking fountain 0.5 Dishwasher, domestic 2 Floor drains 1 Kitchen sink, domestic 2 Kitchen sink, domestic with food disposal unit 3 Lavatory 1 Lavatory, barber, beauty parlor 2 Lavatory, surgeon's 2 Laundry tray (1 or 2 compartments) 2 Shower stall, domestic 2 Showers (group) per head 3 Sinks:   Surgeon's 3   Flushing Rim (with valve) 8   Service (trap standard) 3   Service (P trap) 2   Pot, scullery, etc. 4 Urinal, pedestal, siphon jet, blowout 8 Urinal, wall lip 4 Urinal trough (each 2-foot section) 2 Wash sink (circular or multiple) each set of faucets 2 Water closet:   Tank-operated 4   Valve-operated 8  
Fixtures not listed in Table I shall be estimated in accordance with Table II 
Table II - Table of Drainage Fixture Units (DFUs) not listed in Table I 
Fixture Drain or Trap Size DFUs 11/4 inches or smaller 1 11/2 inches 2 2 inches 3 21/2 inches 4 3 inches 5 4 inches 6  
(2)  Front footage charges. 
a.  For any lot, parcel or tract having a street frontage of less than 100 feet, the fixed charge is included in the availability fee. 
b.  For any lot, parcel or tract having a street frontage of greater than 100 feet a fixed charge of $65.00 per front foot over 100 feet will be charged. 
(3)  Inspection charges. An inspection for a sewer connection to the city sewer system shall be $75.00 for each connection. 
(4)  Overhead charges. Overhead charges at the rate of 25 percent, in addition to direct labor, material and equipment costs, shall be applied to all work performed or material and equipment provided or sold by the city to or for the benefit of other parties. 
(f)  Additional regulations. The director of public utilities shall make such rules and regulations as deemed necessary to carry out the provisions of this section. 
(g)  Collected charges credited to sewer improvement fund. All charges collected by the city under the provisions of this section shall be credited to the sewer improvement fund. 
(h)  Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to all sewer connection applications submitted and all deferred availability fees paid on or after the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(Code 1973, § 31-27; Code 1982, § 29-20; Ord. No. 1819, § 29-20, 4-28-2008; Ord. No. 1853, 2-28-2011; Ord. No. 1873, 4-9-2012; Ord. No. 1895, 4-22-2013; Ord. No. 1923, 4-28-2014; Ord. No. 1937, 4-27-2015; Ord. No. 1955, 4-25-2016) 
Note- Ord. No. 1955, adopted Apr. 25, 2016 has an effective date of July 1, 2016. 
Sec. 42-173. - Service charges. 
(a)  To be made against owners or occupants yearly; billed quarterly. Sewer service charges, as set by ordinance by the city council, shall be made against the owner or occupant of the building served on a yearly basis, billed quarterly. 
(b)  Division of system for billing. The sewer system shall be divided into sections; one section to be billed to the users each month for the current quarterly period beginning with that month. Large consumers, as determined by the director of utilities customer service, shall be billed monthly. 
(c)  Due date. All sewer service bills shall be paid within 30 days after date of rendition. 
(d)  Monthly rates. The monthly rates for service to all users shall be as set by ordinance by the city council. 
(Code 1973, §§ 31-28-31-31; Code 1982, § 29-21; Ord. No. 1895, 4-22-2013) 
Cross reference- Billing and collection of charges for use of water and sewer, § 29-28. 
Sec. 42-174. - Disconnection on default of payment or violation. 
    In case of any default in the payment of any charge or other violation of the requirements or regulations of the utilities customer service division, the utilities customer service division will discontinue the water service without further notice. 
(Code 1973, § 31-32; Code 1982, § 29-22) 
Sec. 42-175. - Costs of disconnection and reconnection. 
    When water service has been discontinued from any user on account of default in payment of a sewer bill or for any other violation of the regulations of the department of public utilities, the cost of disconnecting and reconnecting the service shall be paid by the owner or occupant. 
(Code 1973, § 31-33; Code 1982, § 29-23) 
Sec. 42-176. - Permits for connections; inspection of connections. 
    No plumbing connection shall be made to the sewer facilities of the city lying inside or outside the corporate limits of the city until permits for the same shall have been issued by the city and the fees, as set by the city council by ordinance, collected. All connections shall be inspected, as required by the department of public utilities, as well as the appropriate jurisdiction. 
(Code 1973, § 31-35; Code 1982, § 29-24) 
Sec. 42-177. - Prohibited connections. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, other than an authorized representative of the city, to uncover or tap or to injure any sewer main or lateral pipe, or to install, adjust, repair or remove any connection. 
(Code 1973, § 31-36; Code 1982, § 29-25) 
Sec. 42-178. - Serving more than one residence by one connection; exception. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to serve more than one residence or other establishment by one sewer connection; provided that this section shall not be construed to prohibit the extension of the sewer service of a residence or other establishment to the outbuildings properly appertaining thereto. 
(Code 1973, § 31-37; Code 1982, § 29-26) 
Sec. 42-179. - Cost of extensions. 
(a)  The entire cost of sewer line extensions, designed for the future expansion of the sewer system, shall be paid for by the person requesting such extensions. When such extensions are to be made by the department of public utilities, the whole estimated cost of such extensions must be deposited with the treasurer of the city before any work on the extension is started; provided that nothing in this section shall prohibit the council, upon the recommendation of the city manager, from authorizing the expenditure of funds from the sanitary sewer works renewal fund or from other sources for the extension of trunk lines; provided, further, that the city manager may, upon the recommendation of the director of public utilities, enter into an agreement to reimburse persons required by the city to install oversize lines in order to provide for the future expansion of the sewer system; provided that all such agreements shall become null and void after ten years from the date of execution. All such extensions shall become the property of the city. 
(b)  Cost of all future sewer line extensions, as set by the city council by ordinance, shall be deposited with the city treasurer by the person having such extensions made. 
(Code 1973, §§ 31-34, 31-38; Code 1982, § 29-27) 
Secs. 42-180-42-195. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BILLING AND COLLECTION 

Sec. 42-196. - Charges for use of water and sewer. 
    Assessments or fees or charges of every kind involving the use of water and sanitary sewers shall be performed by the utilities customer service division. Rules and other operational procedures may be devised by the departments of public utilities and finance concerning this function. 
(Code 1982, § 29-28; Ord. No. 1128, 1-27-1986) 
Cross reference- Water bills, § 42-29. 
Sec. 42-197. - Annual report. 
    By December 1 of each calendar year, an annual report of the water utility shall be issued. The report shall follow the usual and customary form of reports issued by other municipal utilities, to include, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Assets of the utility; capitalization and liabilities; operating revenue and operating expenses; depreciation; return on investment and other transfers to the general fund; capital improvement projects to include those under construction and those authorized but not yet underway; nonoperating revenue and nonoperating expenses; accumulated income at the beginning and end of the year; cash flows from operating and nonoperating activities, and cash flows from investments. 
(2)  The annual report shall include an independent auditors' report and other such information as determined appropriate by the auditors for inclusion in an annual report. 
(3)  Upon issuance of the annual report, all water customers shall be notified in the next quarter billing statement of the reports existence and where they may obtain a copy. 
(Ord. No. 1787, 5-8-2006) 
Secs. 42-198-42-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION 

Sec. 42-211. - Established; purpose. 
    The public utilities commission is hereby established. The purpose of the commission shall be to provide advice and guidance to the city council and the city manager about the management and operation of the city water and sewer systems. 
(Ord. No. 1793, § 29-30, 8-14-2006) 
Sec. 42-212. - Composition; appointment and term. 
    The commission shall be composed of five members appointed by the city council and shall include three current city councilmembers and two city residents who are not members of the city council. The terms of office of the members of the commission shall be as set by resolution of the city council, not to exceed four years. 
(Ord. No. 1793, § 29-31, 8-14-2006) 
Sec. 42-213. - Organization and procedures. 
    The commission shall annually elect from its membership a chair and vice-chair. The commission may adopt its own rules of procedure that are consistent with law and chapter 2. The commission shall meet at least quarterly and shall keep minutes of its meetings that shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1793, § 29-32, 8-14-2006) 
Secs. 42-214-42-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - UNDERGROUND UTILITIES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings, ch. 6; water conservation, § 42-65 et seq.; cross-connection and backflow prevention control in waterworks generally, § 42-150; cable television, ch. 10; consumer utility taxes, § 40-294 et seq.; outdoor lighting, § 14-127 et seq.; safety standards for underground installation of utilities, § 36-127 et seq.; activities of public utilities relative to trees, shrubs and weeds, § 44-23; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 36; subdivisions, ch. 38; fixtures and equipment for carwashes, § 42-116 et seq.; cross connection and backflow prevention control in waterworks, § 42-150 et seq.; zoning, ch. 48. 

Sec. 42-231. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    New utilities means: 
(1)  All utilities in any new residential subdivision of five or more building lots or living units approved under chapter 38, pertaining to subdivisions. 
(2)  Any service facilities and appurtenances connecting an existing utility with a new structure constructed under the provisions specified in chapter 48, article V, division 7, pertaining to site plans. 
(3)  Any utility or connection constructed in a new location where neither existed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(4)  All utilities in, on or contiguous to any newly platted or dedicated street or public right-of-way approved under chapter 36, pertaining to streets, sidewalks and other public places. 
(5)  The comprehensive installation of new lighting, traffic light standards or other new supporting structures approved under chapter 14, article V, pertaining to outdoor lighting. 
    Utilities means distribution and service connection facilities and appurtenances, for gas; electricity; water; sanitary sewer; storm sewer; communications including telephone, television, radio and telegraph; air conditioning by chilled water; fuel, including but not limited to gasoline, oil or coal; and similar consumable commodities or services. 
(Code 1973, § 39-1; Code 1982, § 36-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 42-232. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to require that all new utility facilities be installed underground. There is growing recognition in this city and the nation that efforts to achieve the objectives of beautification and a harmonious environment conducive to social and economic well-being are measurably defeated by unsightly overhead wires and obstructive utility poles. It is necessary, therefore, that facilities for new utilities be placed underground in order to promote and preserve the health, safety and general welfare of the public and to assure the orderly development of the city. 
(Code 1973, § 39-2; Code 1982, § 36-2) 
Sec. 42-233. - Findings. 
    The city council hereby finds that much of the commercial areas and some of the residential areas are undeveloped or are areas for potential redevelopment; that the city can maintain a favorable competitive economic position in northern Virginia, despite the creation of nearby large shopping centers, if the city continues to develop its assets of location, civic awareness and financial strengths, which in recent years have been evidenced by good planning, excellent buildings, both public and private, improvements of streets and sidewalks, city-owned parking lots and other demonstrations of how a small city can engage in effective beautification. It is also the finding of the city council that the land values of the residential and commercial districts of the city will be enhanced by the prohibition of overhead utility structures. Accordingly, it is the finding of the city council, in order to ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city, that it requires the installation of all new utility facilities underground. Further, it may be determined that a supplemental ordinance be directed toward phasing out existing overhead utilities in defined areas. 
(Code 1973, § 39-3; Code 1982, § 36-3) 
Sec. 42-234. - Underground installations required; exceptions. 
    All new distribution and customer service utilities, installed in the city after July 1, 1970, shall be placed below the surface of the ground; provided that: 
(1)  Equipment such as electric distribution transformers, switchgear, telephone pedestals and air-conditioning apparatus which is normally installed above ground. in accordance with accepted utility practices for underground distribution may be so installed subject to the applicable provisions of chapter 6, pertaining to the building code, chapter 38, pertaining to subdivisions, and chapter 48, pertaining to zoning. 
(2)  Meters, service connections and similar equipment normally attached to the outside wall of the premises it serves may be so installed. 
(3)  Temporary overhead facilities required for construction purposes may be so installed. 
(4)  Any new service or apparatus installed as a replacement for existing equipment that is deteriorated, damaged or in other nonserviceable condition, may be so installed in a manner similar to the equipment it replaces, only if such replacement is not part of a large-scale renovation or modernization project, as in conversion of existing structures to condominiums, in which instance the provisions of this subsection would not apply. 
(Code 1973, § 39-4; Code 1982, § 36-4; Ord. No. 638) 
Sec. 42-235. - Standards of installation. 
    All improvements required in this article shall be in accordance with accepted standards of utility practice for underground construction. 
(Code 1973, § 39-5; Code 1982, § 36-5) 
Sec. 42-236. - Special exceptions. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the city council may grant special exceptions, on a permanent or temporary basis, to the provisions hereof on such terms as it may deem appropriate in instances of emergency or unusual circumstances to any person to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles and overhead lines and associated overhead structures; provided that prior thereto the city shall have made a finding that granting such special exception does not violate the general purposes of this chapter and other pertinent chapters, will not be detrimental to the public interest, welfare, safety, peace or health and that such action will not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 39-6; Code 1982, § 36-6) 
Secs. 42-237-42-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - STORMWATER 

Sec. 42-241. - Authority. 
    The city is authorized by Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2114 to establish a utility and to enact a system of service charges to support a local stormwater management program consistent with the Virginia Stormwater Management Act (Code of Virginia, § 10.1-603.1 et seq.) or any other state or federal regulation governing stormwater management. 
(Ord. No. 1892, 4-22-2013) 
Sec. 42-242. - Purpose. 
    The city council finds that an adequate, sustainable source of revenue for stormwater management is necessary to protect the general health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city. Further, the city council finds that higher amounts of impervious area contribute greater amounts of stormwater and pollutants to the stormwater management system and waters of the commonwealth. Therefore, the city council determines that it is in the best interest of the public to enact a stormwater utility fee that allocates stormwater management program costs to property owners based on impervious area. 
(Ord. No. 1892, 4-22-2013) 
Sec. 42-243. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply to this article unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Billing unit means 200 square feet of impervious area. 
    Director means the director of public works or the director's authorized representative. 
    Impervious area means area covered by hard surfaces such as structures, paving, compacted gravel, concrete, or other manmade features that prevent, restrict, or impede the downward passage of stormwater into the underlying soil. The director may develop a more detailed definition of impervious area as it relates to this article. 
    Improved parcel means any parcel regardless of zone or land use that has 200 square feet or more of impervious area. For the purpose of this article, an improved parcel shall not include a parcel where the amount of impervious area within the city limits is less than 200 square feet regardless of whether the overall parcel has 200 square feet or more of impervious area. 
(Ord. No. 1892, 4-22-2013) 
Sec. 42-244. - Stormwater utility fee. 
(a)  A stormwater utility fee is hereby imposed on every improved parcel in the city that appears on the real property assessment rolls as of January 1st of each year. All stormwater utility fees and other income from the fees shall be deposited into the stormwater management enterprise fund described in section 42-247. 
(b)  The rate per billing unit to be used for calculating the stormwater utility fee shall be reviewed annually and set by the city council by July 1st each year. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, the impervious area for a property shall be determined by the city using aerial photography, as-built drawings, final approved site plans, field surveys or other appropriate engineering and mapping analysis tools. 
(d)  Notwithstanding subsection (a), and consistent with Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2114, the stormwater utility fee shall be waived in its entirety for the following: 
(1)  A federal, state, or local government, or public entity, that holds a permit to discharge stormwater from a municipal separate storm sewer system in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 10.1-603.2 et seq.; except that the waiver of charges shall apply only to property covered by any such permit; 
(2)  Public roads and street rights-of-way that are owned and maintained by state or local agencies including property rights-of-way acquired through the acquisitions process; and 
(3)  Cemeteries provided that the owner has an approved nutrient and pest management plan on file with the department of public works. 
(Ord. No. 1892, 4-22-2013) 
Sec. 42-245. - Stormwater utility fee calculation. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specified in this article, the stormwater utility fee for each parcel in the city shall be calculated in the following manner: 
(1)  Determine the impervious area of the parcel in square feet. 
(2)  Divide the impervious area of the parcel by the billing unit. 
(3)  Round the resulting calculation to the next highest whole number to determine the number of billing units. 
(4)  Multiply the number of billing units determined in subsection (3) by the rate established in subsection 42-244(b) to obtain the stormwater utility fee for the parcel. 
(b)  The fee for any parcel or impervious area held by a common interest community association, as defined in Code of Virginia, § 55-528, shall be calculated in the same manner described in subsection (a) and distributed based on par value, or evenly pro-rated where the par value is not available, among the property owners other than the common area that constitute the common interest community. The director, with the consent of the common interest community association, may adopt alternative methodologies for distributing the fee associated with the common area. 
(Ord. No. 1892, 4-22-2013) 
Sec. 42-246. - Stormwater utility fee credits. 
(a)  The city council shall adopt by resolution a system of credits in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2114.D that provide for full or partial waivers of charges to any person who installs, operates, and maintains a stormwater management facility that achieves a permanent reduction in stormwater flow or pollutant loadings. The amount of the waiver shall be established in part on the percentage reduction in stormwater flow or pollutant loadings, or both, from pre-installation to post-installation of the facility. The system of credits may also, in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2114.E, provide for full or partial waivers of charges to public or private entities that implement or participate in strategies, techniques, or programs that reduce stormwater flow or pollutant loadings, or decrease the cost of maintaining or operating the public stormwater management system. 
(b)  The director shall develop written policies to implement the system of credits. These written policies shall include, but not be limited to, provisions to reduce or eliminate the amount of credit if the director determines that the stormwater management facility is not functioning as intended. No credit will be authorized until the city council approves written policies to implement the system of credits. Nothing shall prevent the city council from modifying the adopted system of credits, and such modifications may apply to holders of existing credits. 
(Ord. No. 1892, 4-22-2013) 
Sec. 42-247. - Stormwater management enterprise fund. 
(a)  A stormwater management enterprise fund is hereby established as a dedicated, separate fund for the sole purpose of recovering costs for the following: 
(1)  The acquisition, as permitted in Code of Virginia, § 15.2-1800, of real and personal property, and interest therein, necessary to construct, operate, and maintain stormwater control facilities; 
(2)  The cost of administration of the activities in subsection (a); 
(3)  Planning, design, engineering, construction, and debt retirement for new facilities and enlargement or improvement of existing facilities, whether publicly or privately owned, that serve to control stormwater; 
(4)  Facility operation and maintenance; 
(5)  Monitoring of stormwater control devices and ambient water quality; and 
(6)  Other activities consistent with the state or federal regulations or permits governing stormwater management, including, but not limited to, public education, watershed planning, inspection and enforcement activities, and pollution prevention planning and implementation. 
(b)  The fund shall consist of revenue generated by the stormwater utility fee, any other deposits that may be made from time to time by the city council, including but not limited to, federal or state grants and revenue from the sale of bonds, and all interest or other income earned on the investment of money in the fund. 
(Ord. No. 1892, 4-22-2013) 
Sec. 42-248. - Billing, interest, and enforcement. 
(a)  The stormwater utility fee shall be billed to the record owner of each parcel subject to the fee in combination with and in the same manner as prescribed by the city for the real property tax. Any fee not paid in full by the applicable due date of the real property tax bill, unless a petition for adjustment has been made in accordance with section 42-249, in which case the due date is 30 calendar days after the date of a final determination of a petition for adjustment, shall be considered delinquent. Payment of the combined stormwater utility fee and the real property tax bill will be applied first to the stormwater utility fee and then all other taxes and fees. 
(b)  A delinquent stormwater utility fee, in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2114.G, shall be subject to a penalty and the legal rate of interest provided in Code of Virginia, § 6.2-301.A. Such penalties and interest shall be applied to late payments of the stormwater utility fee at the same time and in the same manner as such interest would be applied to a late payment of the real property tax. 
(c)  A delinquent stormwater utility fee, along with cumulative penalties and interest, shall constitute a lien on the property ranking on a parity with liens for unpaid taxes and shall be collected in the same manner as provided for the collection of unpaid taxes. 
(Ord. No. 1892, 4-22-2013) 
Sec. 42-249. - Petitions for adjustments. 
(a)  Any owner of a parcel subject to the stormwater utility fee may request an adjustment to the fee by submitting a request in writing to the director within 30 calendar days after the date the bill is mailed or otherwise issued to the owner. Grounds for adjustment of the fee are limited to the following: 
(1)  An error was made regarding the square footage of the impervious area attributed to a parcel; 
(2)  The property is exempt under the provisions of subsection 42-244(d); 
(3)  There is a mathematical error in calculating the stormwater utility fee; 
(4)  The identification of the parcel owner invoiced is in error; or 
(5)  An approved credit was incorrectly applied. 
(b)  The parcel owner shall complete a stormwater utility fee adjustment application form in a format approved by the director. 
(c)  If the application alleges an error in the amount of the impervious area, a plan view of the parcel's impervious area will be provided by the city with labeled dimensions of all impervious areas within the parcel boundaries. If the parcel owner continues to believe that the amount of impervious area is in error, the parcel owner may: 
(1)  Request a meeting with the director; and/or 
(2)  Submit a revised plan signed and sealed by a professional engineer or professional land surveyor licensed in the Commonwealth of Virginia attesting to the accuracy of the impervious area measurements. 
(d)  The requirement for a plan view of the parcel's impervious area required in subsection (c) above, may be waived by the director, if at the sole discretion of the director the error is obvious and is the result of a technical error or oversight by the city. In such case, the city shall be responsible for recalculating the impervious area of the property. 
(e)  The director shall make a determination within 30 calendar days of receipt of a complete submittal for the request for adjustment. In the event that the director finds that the submittal is deficient or incomplete, the director shall offer the owner 30 calendar days to supply the missing information. The 30 calendar day time for a decision will begin at such time as the requested information is provided. If the information requested is not provided to the director within 60 calendar days of the original request, the petition will be deemed withdrawn. 
(f)  A parcel owner may appeal the decision of the director to the city's public utility commission within 30 calendar days of a decision. 
(g)  A decision by the commission on a petition for adjustment is a final decision from which an aggrieved party may appeal to the Circuit Court of Arlington County, Virginia. 
(Ord. No. 1892, 4-22-2013) 
Secs. 42-250-42-275. - Reserved. 
Chapter 44 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Fire prevention, ch. 18; health and sanitation, ch. 20; solid waste, ch. 34; erosion and sedimentation control, ch. 35. 
State Law reference- Planting of trees, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-960; destruction of trees and shrubs in public grounds, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-139; destruction of trees, shrubs, etc., Code of Virginia, § 18.2-140; cutting or destroying trees, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-141. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 44-1-44-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TREES AND SHRUBS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 36. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 44-20. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose and intent of the city: 
(1)  To regulate the removal of trees from public and private property in the city in order to preserve, protect and enhance valuable natural resources entrusted to the state; 
(2)  To protect the health, safety and welfare of its citizens; 
(3)  To establish standards limiting the removal of and ensuring the replacement of trees sufficient to safeguard the ecological and aesthetic environment necessary to a community; 
(4)  To prevent the unnecessary clearing and disturbing of land so as to preserve, as is practicable, the natural and existing growth of vegetation; 
(5)  To replace, when feasible, the removed trees with the same, comparable, or improved species; 
(6)  To provide protective regulations against hazardous trees and diseased trees or shrubs, and the growth of weeds and brush; 
(7)  To control activities relative to trees and plantings upon the streets or public property of the city; 
(8)  To establish a permit procedure for tree contractors; and 
(9)  To provide for a tree commission. 
(Code 1982, § 35-1; Ord. No. 811) 
Sec. 44-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Arborist or urban forester means a person trained in arboriculture, forestry, horticulture, landscape architecture and/or related fields, and experienced in the conservation and preservation of native and ornamental trees in the employ of or under contract to the city, duly appointed by the city manager and primarily charged with the responsibility of enforcing the provisions of this article. 
    Covered area means that area which falls within the dripline of any tree, a vertical line extending from the outermost portion of the canopy to the ground. 
    Destroy means to cut down a tree or to perpetrate any intentional or negligent act which will cause a tree to decline or die within a period of two years. The term "destroy" shall include, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Damage inflicted upon the root system of a tree by: 
a.  The application of toxic substances; 
b.  The operation of equipment and vehicles; or 
c.  The change of natural grade by unapproved excavation or filling within the covered area of a tree; or 
(2)  Damage caused by the unapproved alteration of natural physical conditions. 
    Development means any alteration of the natural environment of improved and unimproved real estate which requires the application and approval of a site plan, subdivision plat or development plan related to regulated land disturbance activities and/or requiring permits, including, but not limited to, demolition, grading, filling, excavation and building. 
    Historic tree means a tree which has been determined by the city council to be of notable historic interest because of its age, size or historic association and has been so designated in the official records of the city. 
    Redevelopment means the process of developing land that is or has been previously developed. 
    Specimen tree means a tree which has been determined by the city council to be notable by virtue of its outstanding size and quality for its particular species and of high value because of its type, size, age or other professional criteria and has been so designated in the official records of the city. 
    Street tree means any tree which has been individually designated by the city council and which grows in the street right-of-way or on private property as authorized by the owner and placed or planted there by the city. 
    Tree means any self-supporting woody plant growing upon the earth which usually provides one main trunk and produces a more or less distinct and elevated head with many branches. 
(1)  For preservation purposes, a tree shall measure no less than two inches in diameter at six inches above ground level. 
(2)  Replacement trees shall measure no less than two inches in diameter at six inches above ground level. The minimum size to be specified on the planting plan shall be two-inch to 21/2-inch caliper as specified in the latest edition of the American Association of Nurserymen, American Standard for Nursery Stock, except as permitted in the public facilities manual. 
    Tree replacement plan means a plan indicating the location, size, quantity, common and botanical name, and type of nursery stock (B and B, BR or container) of replacement trees. 
(Code 1982, § 35-2; Ord. No. 811; Ord. No. 1704, 5-14-2001) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Definitions, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1127.1 B. 
Sec. 44-22. - Removal or treatment of trees or shrubbery on private grounds. 
(a)  The arborist, except in the event of an emergency, shall, in carrying out the duties of the arborist outlined in subsections (b), (c) and (d) of this section, contact the property owner by writing the last known address of such owner, describing the conditions and stating the control necessary for correction and establishing a reasonable time within which the required steps shall be taken on a voluntary basis. 
(b)  The arborist, under the grant of power to municipalities in the state code, may cause or order to be removed any tree or part thereof on private ground which is in unsafe condition, or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewer or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. 
(c)  The arborist shall also have power to: 
(1)  Enter upon any private grounds in the city and to spray or otherwise treat or cause or order to be sprayed or otherwise treated any tree or shrub infected or infested by any parasite, insect or pest, when it shall be necessary in the opinion of the arborist to do so; 
(2)  To prevent the breeding or scattering of any parasite; and 
(3)  To prevent danger to person or property or to trees and shrubs planted in the public streets or other public places. 
(d)  Whenever in the opinion of the arborist, trimming, pruning, removal or treatment of any such tree or shrub located on private grounds shall be deemed prudent and necessary and consistent with the standards of the International Society of Arboriculture as outlined in the American National Standards Institute A3000 and Z133.1 Standards, the arborist shall have the power to trim, treat or remove any such tree or shrub, or cause or order the same to be done. 
(e)  If the required steps are not taken within the specified time, the arborist shall cause or order the same to be done and shall assess the cost to the owner of the property. 
(Code 1982, § 35-3; Ord. No. 811; Ord. No. 1659, 10-25-1999) 
Sec. 44-23. - Activities of public utilities. 
(a)  The authority of the arborist shall extend to the control of the activities of utility companies in the matter of treating, trimming, planting or removing trees or shrubs on the public grounds and streets of the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any such company to in any manner treat, trim, plant or remove trees or shrubs on any property, grounds or streets of the city without the written permission of the arborist, who is hereby expressly given the right to withdraw any permission where inspection by the arborist indicates that the work has not been or is not being done in compliance with good horticultural standards. 
(Code 1982, § 35-5; Ord. No. 811) 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 29; underground utilities, § 42-231 et seq. 
Sec. 44-24. - Plantings along streets and public use easements. 
(a)  The planting, pruning or other treatment of trees upon the streets and public use easements shall be under the direction of the arborist. No tree upon any street or public use easement in the city shall be destroyed, cut down or otherwise removed without the consent of the arborist. No trees or plants of any kind shall be planted upon any street, public use easement or public property except with the consent of the arborist. 
(b)  No trees shall be planted at public expense upon private property unless a public use easement has been granted; except, that, with the consent of the owner, trees may be planted upon the line between any street and the abutting private property, and trees may be planted in connection with public works projects which have disturbed private property and where the city has easements, on condition that the planting, pruning, removal or other treatment of the trees so planted shall be under the control of the arborist. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to girdle, break, bend, wound, tack signs or notices upon or, in any manner, injure any tree planted upon any public use easement or street or on the line within the corporate limits, except with the approval of the arborist. 
(Code 1982, § 35-6; Ord. No. 811) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 36. 
Sec. 44-25. - Violations and penalties; remedies. 
    Any person, whether as an owner, lessee, principal, agent, employee or otherwise, who violates any of the provisions of this article or permits any such violation or fails to comply with any of the requirements, or who erects any building or who uses any building or any land in violation of any detailed statement of plan submitted by such person and approved under the provision of this article shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day upon which such violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. Furthermore, the arborist, through the city attorney, may apply to the circuit court of the county for injunctive relief to enjoin a violation or a threatened violation of this article, it being determined that vegetation in general and trees in particular are unique and thus a proper subject of equitable relief. 
(Code 1982, § 35-10; Ord. No. 811; Ord. No. 1704, 5-14-2001) 
Secs. 44-26-44-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 44-56. - Tree contractors. 
(a)  In addition to any other license or permit which may be required by this Code, any person who shall solicit or otherwise seek to engage in the business of tree maintenance and preservation by pruning or fertilizing or of tree removal, in whole or in part, shall be required to obtain a permit from the city arborist. 
(b)  The permit shall be applied for in the office of the city arborist on forms prescribed by the city arborist and shall contain information as required by the city arborist as to reasonably protect the consumer and to ensure the qualifications of the person proposing to perform the services. 
(c)  Every applicant shall file with the arborist a surety bond running to the city in the amount of $1,000.00 with a corporate surety licensed to do business in the state, conditioned that the applicant shall fully comply with all provisions of this article and other ordinances of the city and statutes of the state, and guaranteeing to any person of the city that all money paid shall be accounted for and applied according to the representations of the contractor and that the contractor shall complete the agreed tasks in a workmanlike manner. 
(d)  Every applicant shall file evidence of possession of workers compensation and liability insurance in the minimum amounts of $1,000,000.00 for bodily injury or death and $100,000.00 for property damage, indemnifying the city or any person injured or damaged resulting from the pursuit of such endeavor as herein described. 
(e)  Persons within the purview of this article shall pay a permit fee of $25.00 annually, which permit may be renewed at the end of a calendar year after first being obtained. 
(f)  Unless, upon an investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant is found to be unsatisfactory or incompatible with the purposes of this article, the city arborist shall within ten days issue such permit containing the information by attachment contained in the application provided the security required shall have been furnished. A 72-hour temporary permit may be issued in the sound discretion of the city arborist. 
(Code 1982, § 35-7; Ord. No. 811; Ord. No. 1659, 10-25-1999) 
Sec. 44-57. - Tree commission. 
(a)  Established; composition; term. A tree commission is hereby established. The commission shall be composed of five commissioners appointed by the city council from among the eligible voters' residents in the city and such ex officio members as may be designated by the council. The commissioners shall serve for terms of three years; however, of those initially appointed, two shall serve for three years, two shall serve for two years, and one shall serve for one year. Upon the expiration of a term of office, the commissioner holding that office may continue to serve until a successor shall be qualified. Any vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner in which commissioners are regularly chosen. 
(b)  Officers. The chair and vice-chair of the tree commission shall be elected by the commissioners from among themselves within two months following the annual installation of new fullterm commissioners. 
(c)  Duties. The tree commission shall perform the following duties: 
(1)  The commission shall advise the city manager regarding rules and regulations promulgated under this article and shall assist the arborist in the performance of such arborist's duties. 
(2)  The commission shall recommend to the city council any legislation, plans, policies and programs complementary to the intent and purpose of this article. 
(d)  Requirements. The tree commission shall: 
(1)  Establish its own bylaws and rules of procedure consistent with the state code, city Charter, and this Code; 
(2)  Meet in regular sessions, open to the public, on dates established by the commission and in special sessions, as necessary; 
(3)  Post with the city clerk notices of all meetings and provide agendas which shall be available to the public at least three days prior to meetings, except in cases of emergency; 
(4)  Maintain and file with the city clerk approved minutes of its meetings; and 
(5)  Follow, unless otherwise provided, the general requirements for citizen boards, commissions and committees of the city, as set forth in chapter 2. 
(Code 1982, § 35-8; Ord. No. 811) 
Sec. 44-58. - Appeals. 
    An appeal to the city manager may be taken by any person aggrieved by any decision of the city arborist relative to the administration of this article. An appeal shall be taken within ten working days from the date of the issuance of the arborist's written order, by filing with the city arborist and the city manager a notice of appeal specifying the grounds. The city arborist shall then transmit to the city manager the record upon which the appeal is based. All decisions by the city manager can be appealed to a court of record. The city manager shall solicit the opinion of the tree commission, hear the appeal, and render a decision within 15 working days of receipt of the notice of appeal. An appeal stays all compliance with the action being appealed, unless the city arborist certifies to the city manager that by reason of stated facts a stay would, in such arborist's opinion, cause imminent endangerment to life or property. In such cases, compliance shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be granted by the city manager, or by a court of record, on application and on notice to the city arborist and on due cause shown. 
(Code 1982, § 35-19; Ord. No. 1659, 10-25-1999) 
Secs. 44-59-44-89. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 44-90. - Historic or specimen trees. 
(a)  The tree commission may recommend to the city council that certain trees located within the city be officially designated as historic or specimen trees. Prior to such recommendation, the tree commission shall obtain the comments and recommendations of the arborist and shall notify the owner of property on which the tree is located. The tree commission shall present its recommendation to the city council for determination, considering the reports of the arborist and the tree commission. The city council shall hold a public hearing prior to officially designating any historic or specimen trees. The initial action on such a procedure may be taken by a citizen, citizen's group, or organization by submitting a complete report to the tree commission describing the trees in question and their significance in needing protection. 
(b)  In the event that the application of this chapter regulating the removal of heritage, specimen, memorial or street trees results in any taking of private property for a public purpose or use, the city shall compensate by fee or other consideration the property owner for such taking, to the extent that such claim is recognized and compensable under state or federal law, and shall notify the owner of such owner's right to seek such fee or compensation. 
(Code 1982, § 35-9; Ord. No. 811; Ord. No. 1704, 5-14-2001) 
State Law reference- Tree conservation, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-1127.1. 
Secs. 44-91-44-107. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - TREE REMOVAL 

Sec. 44-108. - Applicability of article. 
    The terms and provisions of this article shall apply to real property in the city as follows: 
(1)  All undeveloped property and property undergoing redevelopment. 
(2)  Yard area of all developed property except residential property zoned R-1A and R-1B; provided that the covered area of historic and specimen trees shall be covered by the terms of this article. 
(3)  Covered area of historic or specimen trees. 
(4)  Public rights-of-way, parks and public grounds. 
(Code 1982, § 35-11; Ord. No. 811) 
Sec. 44-109. - Permit required. 
(a)  A tree removal permit shall be required before any tree on property described in section 44-20 may be destroyed or removed. 
(b)  When a site plan or other development plan is required, application for a tree removal permit shall consist of a plan acceptable to the arborist in form and content, submitted as part of the site plan or other development plan. The arborist shall determine the plan's compliance with the requirements of the city as promulgated in a public facilities manual. No plan shall be approved which does not comply with these requirements. 
(c)  When no site plan or other development plan is required, application for a tree removal permit shall be submitted to the arborist in a form which provides the information deemed necessary by the arborist. Where no emergency exists, the arborist shall act upon a tree removal permit application within eight days from receipt of application. 
(Code 1982, § 35-12; Ord. No. 811; Ord. No. 1236, 9-13-1988) 
Cross reference- Business, professional, occupational licenses, § 40-456 et seq. 
Sec. 44-110. - Permit review and issuance. 
(a)  Factors to consider. In addition to reviewing for conformance to standards and guidelines contained in the public facilities manual, the following factors shall also be taken into consideration: 
(1)  The extent to which tree clearing is shown to avoid excessive clearing and still permit the applicant to achieve the proposed development or land use. 
(2)  The extent to which the actual or intended use of the property is in accordance with the regulations of the zoning district in which the property lies requires clearing of trees. 
(3)  The hardship to the applicant which will result from a modification or rejection of the required permit. 
(4)  The desirability of preserving any tree by reason of its size, age or some other outstanding quality, such as uniqueness, rarity or status as a landmark or species specimen. 
(5)  The extent to which the area would be subject to environmental degradation due to removal of the trees. 
(6)  The heightened desirability of preserving tree cover in densely developed or densely populated areas. 
(7)  Whether the tree is diseased, injured beyond restoration, in danger of falling, interferes with utility services or creates unsafe visual clearance. 
(b)  Replacement of trees. When warranted in the judgment of the arborist, the applicant may be required to replace, in accordance with a tree replacement plan, any tree being removed with a suitable replacement tree elsewhere on the site. In determining whether the replacement of trees is reasonable and shall be required, the arborist shall consider the intended use of the property together with an evaluation of the following: 
(1)  Existing tree coverage, size and type; 
(2)  Number of trees to be removed; 
(3)  Area to be covered with structures, parking and driveways; 
(4)  Grading plan and drainage requirements; and 
(5)  Character of the site and its environs. 
(c)  Approval. If the permit application conforms to standards and guidelines and there are no objections resulting from consideration of the factors listed in subsection (a) of this section, the permit application shall be approved. 
(d)  Rejection. If the permit application does not conform to standards and guidelines or there is an objection resulting from consideration of the factors listed in subsection (a) of this section, the permit application shall be rejected. The arborist may require that the application be modified to bring it into conformance with the standards and guidelines or to eliminate any objections to the application. 
(Code 1982, § 35-13; Ord. No. 811) 
Sec. 44-111. - Area to be cleared. 
    The area of land to be cleared of trees and other vegetation in conjunction with proposed development or land use shall not include any trees which are unique by reason of size, age or some other outstanding quality, such as rarity or status as a landmark or species specimen. Subject to the arborist's approval, the area to be cleared shall generally be limited to that area needed for: 
(1)  Street construction and necessary slope construction. 
(2)  Public service or utility easements and rights-of-way. This shall include area for utility line installation with any construction easements necessary for such installation and easements for maintenance access. These easements shall not be cleared prior to actual line installation. 
(3)  Building roof coverage area and ancillary structures such as patios and porches plus 15 feet on all sides for construction activity. 
(4)  Driveways, alleyways, walkways, parking lots and other land area necessary to the installation of the proposed development or use. 
(5)  Sediment basins. Only those trees within the area necessary for construction of the dam, the area in which sediment will collect, and the area necessary for construction and maintenance of the basin shall be cleared of trees. 
(Code 1982, § 35-14; Ord. No. 811) 
Secs. 44-112-44-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - TREE PRESERVATION AND MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT AND BOND 

Sec. 44-136. - Purpose and amount of bond. 
    Prior to approval of the plan required by this article and prior to the issuance of building and development permits, there shall be executed by the owner or the owner's agent, and submitted with the plans, an agreement to establish the measures provided for on the plans for the protection of existing trees, together with a cash bond, to be deposited in an interest bearing escrow account upon which the city may draw, in accordance with the agreement, in an amount equal to the total replacement cost of the protected trees plus the cost of the measures required by the agreement for the protection of the trees. Deposit of such funds shall be in a qualified security or insured savings account and any interest earned shall be credited to the owner or agent. The agreement and bond shall be provided for the installation, maintenance and performance of these protective measures and to ensure the repair and replacement, if necessary, of the protected existing trees. 
(Code 1982, § 35-15(a); Ord. No. 811; Ord. No. 953; Ord. No. 1042, 3-28-1983; Ord. No. 1236, 9-13-1988; Ord. No. 1659, 10-25-1999) 
Sec. 44-137. - Replacement cost of protected trees. 
    The replacement cost of the protected trees shall be fixed at the time the agreement is executed and shall be based upon the most recent Guide for Plant Appraisal prepared by the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers. In fixing the replacement cost of any existing tree, the city shall use the cost of a specimen tree of similar kind which is available from a nursery in the region and which is closest in trunk diameter to the existing tree. The replacement cost shall include the nursery's cost to install and guarantee the replacement tree for one year. The cost of the measures required for the protection of the trees shall also be fixed as of the time the agreement is executed and shall be based upon the standards for protective measures as set out in the most recent Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook (handbook), prepared by the Virginia Soil and Water Conservation Commission, chapter 3, STD and SPEC 3.38. Protective measures may include those items set out in the handbook, as well as fertilization, disease and insect treatments and pruning. 
(Code 1982, § 35-15(a)(1); Ord. No. 811; Ord. No. 953; Ord. No. 1042, 3-28-1983; Ord. No. 1236, 9-13-1988; Ord. No. 1659, 10-25-1999) 
Sec. 44-138. - Other forms of security allowed. 
    In the event the amount of the bond is fixed in excess of $2,000.00, a surety bond, letter of credit, certified check or other similar forms may be provided in lieu of a cash bond for the amount in excess of $2,000.00, if the particular form is approved by the city attorney. 
(Code 1982, § 35-15(a)(2); Ord. No. 811; Ord. No. 953; Ord. No. 1042, 3-28-1983; Ord. No. 1236, 9-13-1988; Ord. No. 1659, 10-25-1999) 
Sec. 44-139. - Procedure for administration of bond and terms of bond. 
(a)  The agreement and the plan shall describe the kind of measures to be taken and the materials to be used to protect the trees from the stress of construction. The owner or the agent of the owner shall notify the city arborist in writing at least three days prior to the installation of the protective measures. The arborist shall then inspect the measures after they are installed to ensure they meet the requirements set out in the agreement. The arborist shall notify the owner or the owner's agent in writing when the inspection is complete as to whether or not compliance has been achieved. No construction activities, which include, but are not limited to, the placement of heavy equipment on the site, excavations, earth movement, or erection of any structures, shall be done by the owner or the agent of the owner until the arborist has determined that the measures have been installed according to the agreement. These measures shall remain in place and shall not be modified until all construction on the real estate covered by the agreement is completed. The arborist shall inspect the area for compliance from time to time. The agreement may be amended only by a written instrument and only upon the consent of the arborist. 
(b)  The owner or the agent of the owner shall notify the arborist in writing when all construction on the real estate covered by the agreement is completed. The arborist shall then inspect the area and, upon determining that all construction in that area is completed, the arborist shall notify the owner or the owner's agent in writing that the protective measures may be removed. No additional construction shall take place on the real estate subject to the agreement after the protective measures have been removed unless the written approval of the arborist is obtained. Approval shall be given upon a determination that the construction will not damage the protected trees. The arborist shall also inspect the trees at this time to determine what damage, if any, has been caused by the stress of construction, as that term is defined in the handbook in the subsection entitled Stresses of Construction. The arborist shall also notify the owner or the owner's agent in writing if any trees must be repaired or replaced because of damage caused by the stress of the construction or shall refund half of the bond if no repairs or replacements are needed. Upon notification by the arborist that repairs or replacements are to be made, the owner or the agent of the owner shall make the required repairs and replacements and shall notify the arborist when the repairs and replacements are complete. The arborist shall inspect the repairs and replacement and shall notify the owner when it is determined that the required repairs and replacements have been adequately performed. One-half of the bond shall then be refunded. 
(c)  The remaining one-half of the bond shall be held for a period of two years from the date of the arborist's notification to the owner that the required repairs or replacement have been completed. The purpose of retaining this portion of the bond is to ensure trees which are damaged by construction, but where the injury becomes apparent only after construction is completed, will be repaired or replaced. At the end of this two-year period, the owner or the owner's agent may apply to the city arborist in writing for a discharge of the unexpended or unobligated portion of such bond. If the protected trees have survived in good health based upon the guidelines set out in the handbook in the section entitled Tree Preservation and Protection, the arborist shall release the bond within 30 days of receipt of the application. The bond shall not be discharged until all required repairs and replacements have been made. 
(Code 1982, § 35-15(b)-(d); Ord. No. 811; Ord. No. 953; Ord. No. 1042, 3-28-1983; Ord. No. 1236, 9-13-1988; Ord. No. 1659, 10-25-1999) 
Sec. 44-140. - Refusal to comply. 
    If the owner or the owner's agent refuses to comply with the requirements of the arborist as made pursuant to section 44-139(a), the city may, at its option, have the work performed by others or by its own forces. In either case, all costs incurred by the city shall be reimbursed from the bond or other funds being held. In the event the owner or such owner's agent has during the two-year period, sold all or a portion of the real estate subject to the agreement, the original owner or the agent of such owner shall continue to be responsible for all measures required by the agreement and for all trees in open space including those located in common areas and on individual fee-simple lots. The original owner or his agent or the purchaser as the case may be shall take the measures, and repair or replace trees as required by the arborist. If the new owner of a single-family residential property refuses to permit the original owner or the arborist to make the required protective measures, inspections, repairs, or replacements, the original owner shall be considered as having complied with this section. 
(Code 1982, § 35-15(e); Ord. No. 811; Ord. No. 953; Ord. No. 1042, 3-28-1983; Ord. No. 1236, 9-13-1988; Ord. No. 1659, 10-25-1999) 
Sec. 44-141. - Failure to comply with plan. 
    If the city arborist determines that the permit holder has failed to comply with the plan, the city arborist shall immediately serve upon the permit holder a notice to comply which shall be sent by registered or certified mail to the address specified by the permit holder in his permit application. Such notice shall set forth specifically the measures needed to come into compliance with such plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the permit holder fails to comply within the time specified, such permit holder may be subject to revocation of the permit and the cash bond may be used by the city at the direction of the city arborist to correct the noted deficiencies; furthermore, such permit holder could be deemed to be in violation of this division and upon conviction could be subject to the penalties provided by this article. 
(Code 1982, § 35-16; Ord. No. 811) 
Sec. 44-142. - Exceptions; waiver. 
(a)  In the event that any tree shall be determined to be in a hazardous or dangerous condition so as to endanger the public health, welfare or safety, and require immediate removal without delay, verbal authorization may be given by the arborist and the tree removed without obtaining a permit as herein required. 
(b)  During the period of an emergency, such as a tornado, ice storm, flood or any other act of nature, the requirements of this division may be waived by the city manager or the city manager's designee. 
(Code 1982, § 35-17; Ord. No. 811) 
Sec. 44-143. - Replacement of destroyed trees destroyed. 
    When trees are destroyed in violation of this division, replacement trees shall be required, unless exemption is granted by the arborist. The size, species and quantity of these replacements shall be determined by the arborist based on the value of the trees removed as calculated by the latest formula published by the International Society of Arboriculture. 
(Code 1982, § 35-18; Ord. No. 811) 
Chapter 46 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority of city to regulate and license taxicabs, §§ 2.04, 2.07. 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 26; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 36. 
State Law reference- Authority of city to regulate taxicabs, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2015; authority to license and regulate drivers of taxicabs and similar for-hire vehicles and control the operation of such vehicles, Code of Virginia, § 46.2-310. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the operation of public vehicles, taxicabs, and other for-hire vehicles within the city in order to provide the citizens of the city with safe, reliable, adequate and efficient service and to prescribe a schedule of reasonable rates for the services regulated herein. 
(Code 1982, § 34.1-1; Ord. No. 1606, § 2, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 46-2. - Compliance with chapter provisions. 
    The operation of public vehicles, taxicabs and for-hire vehicles within the city shall be subject to the conditions, regulations and restrictions set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 34.1-2; Ord. No. 1606, § 2, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 46-3. - Designation of bus routes. 
    The city council shall have complete control over the designation of all bus routes within the city. 
(Code 1982, § 34.1-3; Ord. No. 1606, § 2, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 46-4. - Drivers to take shortest route to destination. 
    Unless directed otherwise by the passenger, the driver of each taxicab, operated pursuant to this chapter, shall drive over the shortest practical route from each point at which the taxicab is engaged by any passenger to the point of destination of such passenger. 
(Code 1982, § 34.1-4; Ord. No. 1606, § 2, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 46-5. - Authority of chief of police. 
(a)  The chief of police shall designate a hack inspector who shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The chief of police or designee is authorized to administer the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 34.1-5; Ord. No. 1606, § 2, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 46-6. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Call stand means a dedicated telephone installed in a public location as authorized by the city manager for the taking of calls and the dispatching of taxicabs. 
    Certificate means a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the city council, authorizing the holder thereof to conduct a taxicab business in the city. 
    Chief of police means the chief of police of the City of Falls Church, Virginia. 
    City manager means the manager of the City of Falls Church, Virginia. 
    Committee means the Falls Church Citizens Advisory Committee on Transportation. 
    Cruising means the driving of a taxicab upon the highways, roads, streets or other public ways and places in the city in search of or soliciting prospective passengers for-hire. 
    Driver means the individual who is driving or physically operating the taxicab or other public vehicle. 
    Hacker's license means the license issued pursuant to this chapter, permitting a driver to operate a taxicab which is certified in the City of Falls Church pursuant to this chapter. 
    Handicapped person means any individual who has a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more major life activities. 
    Major life activities means functions such as, but not limited to, caring for one's self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning or working. 
    Manifest means a daily record, prepared by a taxicab driver, of all trips by such driver, showing the time and place of origin, the destination, the number of passengers and the amount of fare of each trip. 
    Operator's certificate means generally the operating authority required by the provisions of this chapter to be obtained by an individual, company, partnership, corporation or other organization to engage in the taxicab business upon the highways, roads, streets or public ways and places in the city, and specifically, when so indicated, to individual numbered certificates issued by the council under such grant of operating authority pursuant to this chapter. 
    Owner means any person to whom a certificate of public convenience and necessity has been issued. 
    Parking means stopping the taxicab along the edge of the highway, road, street or other public way or place for the purpose of soliciting prospective passengers. 
    Passenger means a person carried or transported in consideration of a fare. 
    Personal service means any service, at the request of the passenger, which requires the driver to leave the vicinity of the taxicab. 
    Proof of handicapped status includes, but is not limited to, a handicapped identification card issued by either the Virginia Division of Motor Vehicles or the Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority, or a certificate from a physician. 
    Public vehicle means any motor vehicle used for the transportation of passengers for-hire within the city, other than buses being operated under franchise and over fixed routes between fixed termini. The term "taxicab" also means a public vehicle. 
    Rate means the fares and charges for transportation as approved by ordinance by the city council. 
    Rate card means a card furnished by the owner and approved by the hack inspector for display in each taxicab which contains the rates then in force. 
    Taxicab means a vehicle for passenger conveyance held for public hire, and carrying passengers to destinations without following any fixed routes, the owner of which has obtained an operator's certificate in the city. 
    Taximeter means an instrument approved by the chief of police for use in taxicabs certificated by the city by which the fare for-hire of a taxicab is computed for mileage and for waiting time and upon which such fare is plainly visible to the passenger. 
    Taxistand means a designated location which has been marked for passenger hire by taxicab owner or operator. Taxistands may be exclusive to certain taxicabs or open to all certificated taxicabs. 
(Code 1982, § 34.1-6; Ord. No. 1606, § 2, 5-26-1998) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 46-7. - Accident reports. 
    The driver of every taxicab or for-hire vehicle operated pursuant to this chapter which is involved in any accident shall file an accident report as required by the commonwealth division of motor vehicles and the Code of Virginia, and shall submit a copy of the accident report to the hack inspector. 
(Code 1982, § 34.1-7; Ord. No. 1606, § 2, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 46-8. - Hack inspector. 
    The chief of police shall appoint either a sworn officer or a civilian to serve, at the pleasure of the chief, as hack inspector to administer, police, and enforce this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 34.1-8; Ord. No. 1606, § 2, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 46-9. - Duty of the hack inspector; inspections; correction of defects. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the hack inspector to make or cause to be made periodic inspections of vehicles operated on the streets of the city, pursuant to this section, and the hack inspector shall have the power at all reasonable times to inspect any vehicle or the equipment used in connection therewith. The owner of any such vehicle shall make or cause to be made such repairs or adjustments, as may be ordered by the hack inspector. 
(b)  The following shall be adhered to: 
(1)  All proper stickers are in place; 
(2)  All headlights work properly; 
(3)  All tail lights work properly; 
(4)  All brake lights work properly; 
(5)  All emergency flashers work properly; 
(6)  All turn signals work properly; 
(7)  All backup lights work properly; 
(8)  All pin lights work properly; 
(9)  All cruising lights work properly; 
(10)  All wipers work properly; 
(11)  The horn works properly; 
(12)  The tires have sufficient tread depth; and 
(13)  The exterior, interior and trunk are clean. 
(Code 1982, § 34.1-9; Ord. No. 1606, § 2, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 46-10. - Vehicles to be in safe condition. 
    Every vehicle, and the equipment used in connection therewith, operated on the streets of the Commonwealth, pursuant to this chapter, shall, at all times, be kept in proper and safe physical condition as determined by the hack inspector. 
(Code 1982, § 34.1-10; Ord. No. 1606, § 2, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 46-11. - Upholstery. 
    All taxicabs shall be upholstered in leather or plastic. 
(Code 1982, § 34.1-11; Ord. No. 1606, § 2, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 46-12. - Vehicles to be clean. 
    All taxicabs and for-hire vehicles, operated pursuant to this chapter, shall, at all times, be kept reasonably clean and sanitary as determined by the hack inspector. 
(Code 1982, § 34.1-12; Ord. No. 1606, § 2, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 46-13. - Cleanliness and appearance of drivers. 
    Drivers of vehicles, operated pursuant to this chapter, shall be clean and dressed in neat, clean clothing at all times when serving the public. Whenever a driver's appearance is significantly changed by haircut or hair style, or modification, addition or removal of a beard, moustache, sideburns, toupee, wig, hair coloring, or the like, such driver shall submit, within 30 days of such change, a new photograph in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 34.1-13; Ord. No. 1606, § 2, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 46-14. - Taxicab service. 
    All persons engaged in the taxicab business in the city operating under the provisions of this chapter shall render an overall service to the public desiring to use taxicabs. Holders of certificates of public convenience and necessity shall maintain a central place of business which shall be kept open 24 hours a day for the purpose of receiving calls and dispatching cabs. They shall answer all calls received by them for service inside the city as soon as they can do so. If the services cannot be rendered within a reasonable time, they shall then notify the prospective passengers how long it will be before the call can be answered and give the reason. 
(1)  Refusal to accept call. Certificate holders shall not refuse to accept a call anywhere within the city at any time when such holder has available cabs. 
(2)  Solicitation of passengers. No driver shall solicit passengers for a taxicab, except when sitting in the driver's compartment of such taxicab or while standing immediately adjacent to the curbside. 
(3)  Receipt and discharge of passengers. Drivers of taxicabs shall not receive or discharge passengers in the roadway but shall pull up to the right-hand sidewalk as nearly as possible or, in the absence of a sidewalk, to the extreme right side of the road, and there receive or discharge passengers. Upon one-way streets, however, passengers may be discharged at either the right or left sidewalk or side of the roadway in the absence of a sidewalk. 
(4)  Cruising. No driver shall cruise in search of passengers on the highways, roads, streets or other areas open to public vehicular traffic. This includes driving through parking lots where taxicabs are frequently called, looking for fares. 
(5)  Number of passengers. No driver shall permit more persons to be carried in a taxicab as passengers than the rated seating capacity of such taxicab, as stated in the license for the vehicle issued by the chief of police. A child in arms shall not be counted as a passenger. 
(6)  False calls for service; interfering with service. It shall be unlawful for any person to make misleading, false or unauthorized calls for vehicle service, or to in any way hinder, retard or interfere with the furnishing of transportation by vehicles in the city operated pursuant to this chapter. 
(7)  Refusal of passenger to pay legal fare. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride in a taxicab operated pursuant to this section on the streets of the city with the intent to obtain passenger service without paying the lawful fares under the schedule set out in section 46-15. Refusal to pay for service shall be prima facie evidence of such intent under this section. 
(8)  Load refusal. No driver may refuse transportation to any orderly person from any place in the city to another place in any vehicle while operating as a taxicab, except under the following conditions: 
a.  Such vehicle is already engaged by another passenger; 
b.  Such vehicle is in route to pick up a passenger for service in response to an order for service received by telephone, radio, or otherwise, in which case, a not-in-service, not-for-hire, or on-call sign must be exhibited; 
c.  Such vehicle is out of service because of the end of the driver's shift or for other reasons, in which case a not-for-hire or off-duty sign shall be displayed. None of the circumstances referred to in this subsection shall permit refusal while a taxicab occupies a taxicab stand of the certificate holder; or 
d.  The driver determines that his life would be endangered by picking up said person. 
(9)  Receipts. The driver of any taxicab shall, upon demand by the passenger, render to such passenger a receipt for the amount paid, either by mechanically printed receipt or by specially prepared receipt on which shall be the name of owner, license number or motor number, amount of meter reading or charges and date of transaction. 
(10)  Use of tobacco; radio. No driver, while their taxicab is occupied by a passenger, shall smoke or play a radio or a similar device other than the one used for communication with such driver's dispatcher, if the passenger request that the driver not do so. 
(11)  Front seat occupancy. At no time shall the front seat of a taxicab be occupied by more than two persons, excluding the driver. 
(12)  Additional passengers. When a taxicab is occupied by a passenger, the driver shall not accept additional passengers unless the driver has the concurrence of all passengers. 
(13)  Deception of passengers. It shall be unlawful for a driver to deceive or attempt to deceive any passenger as to the rate of fare to be charged or to take a longer route to a destination than necessary, unless requested to do so by the passenger. 
(14)  Advance payment. Any driver may, at their discretion, demand estimated payment in advance of the rendering of any service. Adjustments shall be made at the passenger's destination in accordance with the rates and charges established by this chapter. 
(15)  Acceptance of checks. Acceptance of checks in payment of fares and charges for transportation shall be at the discretion of the driver; provided such policy of driver discretion or a policy of refusal of all checks shall be conspicuously posted in the taxicab so as to provide notice to any affected passengers. If the driver's policy is not so posted, the driver shall accept checks. 
(16)  Lost articles. Any article found in a taxicab shall be returned with reasonable promptness to the owner, if they are known, or the owner shall be promptly notified of the whereabouts of the article so that they may claim it. If the owner is not known, the driver shall immediately inform the dispatcher and return the article, at the close of the driver's tour of duty, to the certificate holder's base of business. The certificate holder shall maintain the lost article in a safe place for at least seven days and, if the lost article has an apparent value of $50.00 or more, it shall be turned over to the chief of police. The chief of police shall hold the article until claimed by the owner. If no claim is received within 90 days, the article shall be returned to the driver. 
(17)  Alcoholic beverages. It shall be unlawful for a driver knowingly to transport alcoholic beverages in the taxicab unless such beverages are in the possession of a passenger. 
(18)  Length of work day. No driver shall operate or be required to operate a taxicab for more than 13 hours in any 24-hour period, nor shall any driver operate a taxicab if the driver's health condition may impair such driver's ability to operate the vehicle. 
(Code 1982, § 34.1-14; Ord. No. 1606, § 2, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 46-15. - Rates. 
(a)  Rates, fares and charges for transportation and related services performed by certificate holders and their driver agents shall be as follows: 
(1)  Mileage. For the first one-sixth of a mile the rate shall be $1.90. The rate for each succeeding one-sixth mile or fraction thereof shall be $0.25. 
(2)  Additional passengers. For each passenger carried in excess of one, regardless of distance traveled (except there shall be no charge for passengers under the age of 12), the charge shall be $1.00. In cases where more than one passenger enters a taxicab at the same time bound for different destinations, except as otherwise provided herein, the fare shall be charged as follows: whenever a passenger gets out the fare showing shall be paid, the meter reset, and the last passenger shall pay the remaining fee. 
(3)  Waiting time. For each 60 seconds of waiting time there shall be an additional charge of $0.25. Waiting time shall include: 
a.  Time consumed while the taxicab is waiting and available to passengers beginning five minutes after the time of arrival at the place to which it has been called, but no time shall be charged for premature response to a call; 
b.  Time consumed while the taxicab is stopped for traffic to speeds less than ten miles per hour; and 
c.  Time consumed for delays or stopovers in route at the direction of the passenger. 
Waiting time shall not include time lost on account of the inefficiency of a taxicab or driver. 
(4)  Luggage and grocery bags. For each grocery bag in excess of two per passenger, there shall be an additional charge of not more than $0.25 per bag, not to exceed $1.00 per passenger. For each luggage piece, there shall be an additional charge of $0.50. For each trunk, there shall be an additional charge of $2.00. These charges for transportation of hand baggage and trunks handled by the driver may only be imposed if the passenger is informed of the charge at the point of pickup. Hand baggage includes large bags of groceries or articles of similar size. A trunk is defined as a piece of luggage having a minimum content of three cubic feet. 
(5)  Personal services. For each personal service, there shall be an additional charge of not more than $0.75. The term "personal service" is defined as any service requested by the passenger which requires the operator to leave the vicinity of the taxicab. Each time an operator is required to leave the vicinity of the taxicab at the request of the passenger shall constitute a separate personal service for which a separate charge may be made. No such charge shall be made for persons who are blind, handicapped or disabled. 
(6)  Pet charges. Animals shall be transported only at the discretion of the driver and only if the passenger agrees to keep the animal under control. A charge for each such animal shall not exceed $1.00. For all seeing-eye dogs, hearing dogs and service dogs, there shall be no charge. An additional charge of $4.00 may be made if the taxicab is left in an unsanitary condition which requires the taxicab to be washed immediately after the completion of the trip. 
(7)  Airport surcharge. Where an airport surcharge is paid by the taxicab driver, that surcharge may be added to the fare of the trip, causing the surcharge to be assessed to the passenger. 
(8)  Toll charges. Any toll paid by the driver while in route to the destination of the passenger may be added to the fare, provided that the passenger is informed of the applicable toll prior to beginning travel on the toll road and given the option of taking another route if available. If more than one passenger is transported, the driver may not recover more than the total toll actually paid during any trip. 
(9)  Discount rates. Taxicab companies are permitted, but not required, to offer discount rates of up to 25 percent to persons 60 years and older or handicapped persons. Details of any discount program offered by a taxicab company must be posted in each of the company's taxicabs. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the certificate holder or driver of any taxicab to charge, or knowingly allow to be charged, any fare or service charge, except as provided in this section. 
(Code 1982, § 34.1-15; Ord. No. 1606, § 2, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 46-16. - Meters. 
(a)  In the computing of any fare, the miles traveled shall be computed from the point the passenger is received to the point of discharge of such passenger and such distance shall be computed by an accurate instrument which shall register accurately the distance traveled in units at least as small as one-sixth of a mile. A taximeter, set in accordance with the rates established in this chapter and which computes and clearly indicates the fare, shall meet the requirements of this section. 
(b)  Any such instrument, as required by subsection (a) of this section, shall, prior to being used, be inspected for accuracy by the chief of police, or the chief's designated agent, and upon approval shall be sealed by a tamper-proof seal. All such devices shall be capable of being so sealed. The chief of police may accept current meter certificates of accuracy from the county. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with any such device required or to change in any manner, or cause to be changed, any part of such device or any part of any vehicle to which such device is attached, directly or indirectly, which can alter the accuracy of such device, and does cause such device to measure inaccurately the distance traveled or fare charged. 
(d)  Any such device required shall be subject to inspection at any time by the chief of police, or the chief's designated agent. 
(Code 1982, § 34.1-16; Ord. No. 1606, § 2, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 46-17. - Manifest keeping and records of vehicles in use, etc. 
(a)  Each driver shall complete a daily manifest. The required information shall be recorded on the driver's manifest at the beginning and end of each driver's tour of duty. These readings shall not be transferred from one taxicab to another. If a driver changes taxicabs during a tour of duty; a separate manifest shall be maintained for each such cab. Each driver shall record the following: 
(1)  The date and time of day, stated as to a.m., p.m. or military time, the driver began operation and stopped operation on the street; 
(2)  The taxicab number and the driver's name; 
(3)  All trips made each day, showing the time and place of origin, destination, time of arrival, number of passengers and the amount of the fare for each trip, recorded at the beginning and end of each trip; 
(4)  The readings from the taximeter for: 
a.  Total miles; 
b.  Paid miles; 
c.  Trips; 
d.  Units; and 
e.  Extras; 
(5)  The odometer reading at the beginning and end of each driver's tour of duty in a given taxicab. 
All completed manifests shall be returned to the certificate holder by the driver as soon as is practical after the end of the tour of duty of the driver. 
(b)  A certificate holder shall retain and preserve all records required by this chapter to be maintained for a period of no less than three years. Such records may be kept in any reasonable form in ordinary business practice; provided, however, that manifests must be preserved as originally filed, although their contents may be abstracted for other record or filing requirements. 
(c)  The manifests shall be made available within five business days after request for inspection. If it should become necessary for the hack inspector to remove manifests or other records from the certificate holder's offices, the certificate holder shall be given a receipt reasonably identifying the items so removed. 
(Code 1982, § 34.1-17; Ord. No. 1606, § 2, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 46-18. - Investigation of complaints. 
(a)  The Falls Church Citizens Advisory Committee on Transportation (the committee) shall, in addition to the performance of such other duties and responsibilities as may be imposed upon it, consider and act upon complaints by citizens concerning the operation of taxicabs in the city, in a manner more specifically set out in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  The committee shall receive written complaints by citizens concerning the operation of taxicabs in the city. The committee shall investigate the complaint in a manner it deems appropriate. When necessary, the committee may call upon the police or other city departments to assist in the investigation. In any event, the investigation shall provide the person or entity who has been charged with conduct which may be a violation of the city Code notice of the accusations and a meaningful opportunity to be heard. The holder of the certificate of convenience under which an accused person drives shall also be notified of the complaint and the holder shall be given a meaningful opportunity to be heard during the investigation. If the committee determines that the complaint lacks reasonable grounds upon which to base a violation of the taxicab ordinance, the committee, in its discretion, may close the matter or order further investigation as may be necessary. The committee may attempt to reconcile the matter between the complainant and the person charged; however, if reconciliation is not successful, the committee shall state in writing its findings, the factual basis for its findings, and its recommendation. The committee shall then transmit the report to the city council. 
(Code 1982, § 34.1-18; Ord. No. 1606, § 2, 5-26-1998) 
Secs. 46-19-46-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CERTIFICATE OF PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY; INSURANCE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Business, professional, occupational licenses, § 40-456 et seq. 

Sec. 46-40. - Required. 
    No person shall operate or permit a taxicab owned or controlled by him to be operated as a vehicle for-hire within the city without having first obtained a certificate of public convenience and necessity from the city council. 
(Code 1982, § 34.1-19; Ord. No. 1606, § 2, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 46-41. - Application-Contents. 
    An application, in duplicate, for a certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be made by the owner or proposed owner to the city manager and shall furnish the following information verified under oath: 
(1)  The full name and home and business address of the applicant. 
(2)  The financial ability and responsibility of the applicant. 
(3)  The name and address of person lending money or furnishing capital to the applicant and amounts of unpaid judgments and their origin. 
(4)  The convictions or pleas of guilty, if any, for violations of law. 
(5)  The location of depots, terminals, callbox stands, off-street parking, waiting room and sanitary facilities. 
(6)  The number, kind, seating capacity, design and color scheme of each public vehicle. 
(7)  The experience of the applicant in transportation of passengers for-hire. 
(8)  The reasons why the applicant believes public convenience and necessity require granting of his application. 
(Code 1982, § 34.1-20; Ord. No. 1606, § 2, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 46-42. - Same-Filing; investigation. 
    An application shall be filed in duplicate by the owner or proposed owner with the city manager and published once by the applicant between October 1 and October 15, both inclusive. After such filing, the city manager shall furnish a copy to the chief of police who shall investigate the matter and report in writing to the city manager prior to November 1. The chief of police may request an extension of time in which to make such report. 
(Code 1982, § 34.1-21; Ord. No. 1606, § 2, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 46-43. - Same-Public hearings. 
    The city council shall hear requests for applications between November 1 and December 31, annually. Notice shall be mailed, as to the time and place of the meeting, to all holders of certificates and applicants for certificates to the address shown on the certificates and by publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the city. Applications shall be mailed at least ten days prior to the hearing, but the hearing may be continued from time to time without notice. All hearings shall be advertised according to law. 
(Code 1982, § 34.1-22; Ord. No. 1606, § 2, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 46-44. - Same-Determination by council. 
    The city council, upon such application and upon consideration of all reports and recommendations tendered to it by the city manager, shall determine whether the public convenience and necessity require the operation of the public vehicle for which the application is filed. The city council may grant a certificate for a lesser number of vehicles than that specified in the application. 
(Code 1982, § 34.1-23; Ord. No. 1606, § 2, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 46-45. - Issuance; contents; term; annual investigation. 
    Upon determination by the city council to grant a certificate as provided in the preceding section, the clerk shall transmit such certificate to the applicant, giving the name of the owner, the number, the kind and description of vehicle, the location and character of stands, parking areas, callboxes and termini, the date of issuance and the expiration of the certificate, which certificate shall expire at the end of day, December 31 of the second succeeding year. The chief of police shall investigate the matter annually, as provided for in section 46-41. 
(Code 1982, § 34.1-24; Ord. No. 1606, § 2, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 46-46. - Transfer of certificate. 
    No certificate of public convenience and necessity may be sold, assigned, mortgaged or otherwise transferred without the consent of the city council. 
(Code 1982, § 34.1-25; Ord. No. 1606, § 2, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 46-47. - Revocation or suspension of certificate. 
(a)  Certificates of public convenience and necessity may be suspended for a period of 30 to 120 days or revoked by the city council for any of the following: 
(1)  Failure to operate the authorized taxicabs in such manner as to serve the public adequately. 
(2)  Failure to maintain taxicabs in good order and repair. 
(3)  Failure to maintain insurance as required by this chapter. 
(4)  Repeated violations, by the certificate holder or the certificate holder's drivers, of this Code or of the vehicle laws of the state. 
(5)  Failure to report any accident as required by this chapter. 
(6)  Failure to pay any fees lawfully assessed upon the ownership or operation of any vehicle licensed under this chapter. 
(b)  If the city council revokes a certificate of public convenience and necessity, and notifies the holder by certified mail directed to the address shown on the application for the certificate, the holder of the revoked certificate, or the holder's agent, may not reapply for a certificate for 365 days from the date of revocation. 
(c)  The certificate holder shall have the right to present his case in person or be represented by counsel licensed to practice law in the commonwealth. No certificate shall be revoked or suspended by the city council unless the certificate holder has at least ten days notice by personal service, or by certified mail to the address shown on the certificate, of the grounds for revocation or suspension and the time and place of the hearing thereon. A hearing shall be heard by the city council. 
(d)  The city council may revoke a certificate for such a period of time in excess of 120 days as they may, in their discretion, see fit; provided, however, that whenever a certificate has been revoked, the city council shall not issue a new certificate to the same person or company for at least a period of one year after the revocation. 
(Code 1982, § 34.1-26; Ord. No. 1606, § 2, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 46-48. - Insurance requirements; self-insurance requirements. 
(a)  No certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be issued or continued in operation unless there is in full force and effect a public liability automobile insurance policy for each vehicle certified in the amount of at least $100,000.00 for bodily injury or death to any person and in the amount of at least $300,000.00 for injuries or death to more than one person sustained in the same accident, and in the amount of $25,000.00 for property damages resulting from any one accident. 
(b)  Such insurance policy shall inure to the benefit of any person who may be injured or his estate or survivors in the event of death, or to the benefit of any persons sustaining damage to property, for which the certificate holder may be liable. 
(c)  Evidence of such insurance shall be filed with the chief of police prior to the issuance of any operator's certificate and shall include provisions for notice by the insurance carrier to the chief of police prior to termination of such coverage. 
(d)  If the minimum state automobile insurance requirement exceeds the rates, as specified in this section, in any particular instance, those requirements shall automatically apply. 
(e)  Coverage in the amounts specified in subsection (a) of this section may alternatively be met by a self-insurance certificate which has been adopted and approved by the commonwealth, provided that such self-insurance certificate shall be in full force and effect at all times and that evidence of such a policy shall be filed with the chief of police prior to the issuance of any operator's certificates and shall include provision for notice by the commonwealth to the chief of police prior to termination of such coverage; and provided further, if the minimum state insurance requirements do not equal or exceed the requirements of this section, the certificate holder may self-insure up to the amount of $100,000.00 and must carry an umbrella insurance policy against all risks specified in this section in an amount at least equal to the amounts specified in subsection (a) of this section; and further provided that: 
(1)  Application to the chief of police for approval to partially meet city insurance requirements through self-insurance up to $100,000.00 shall be made by the certificate holder or the certificate holder's duly authorized agent, under oath. 
(2)  Proof shall be provided that all requirements for self-insurance established by the state department of motor vehicles and the state corporation commission have been met. 
(3)  The certificate holder must file all documents, statements, etc., required by the state department of motor vehicles and the state corporation commission with the city police department, simultaneous with the filing requirements established by the state department of motor vehicles and the state corporation commission. 
(4)  If at any time it should appear that the certificate holder no longer meets the criteria required for approval as a self-insurer as set forth herein or fails to file any required documents, the certificate holder shall be given written notice by the chief of police identifying the failure of criteria or filing default. The written notice shall stipulate a reasonable date and time by which the certificate holder must furnish evidence, satisfactory to the chief of police, that the approval criteria are again met or the default cured. Failure to timely respond to the notice, failure to meet approval criteria or failure to cure a default shall result in revocation of the right to self-insure. 
(f)  Nothing in this subsection shall preclude the suspension of a certificate holder's certificate, pursuant to other provisions of local law, for failure to maintain adequate insurance during the time a certificate holder fails to meet the criteria for approval as a self-insurer. 
(Code 1982, § 34.1-27; Ord. No. 1606, § 2, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 46-49. - Exception to insurance requirement. 
    The city council may waive the posting of any bond or insurance required by the preceding section when the owner has complied with all requirements of the state for surety bonds and insurance; provided that the surety or insurer files with the city a certificate stating the amount of the indemnity or insurance and certifying that a rider in the bonds or policy guarantees 30 days notice to the city before such bonds or policies can be canceled. 
(Code 1982, § 34.1-28; Ord. No. 1606, § 2, 5-26-1998) 
Secs. 46-50-46-71. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TAXICAB DRIVER'S LICENSE 

Sec. 46-72. - Required. 
    No person shall operate a taxicab for-hire within the city, and no person who owns or controls a taxicab shall permit it to be so driven, and no taxicab licensed by the city shall be so driven at any time for-hire, unless the driver of the taxicab shall have first obtained and shall have then in force a taxicab driver's license issued under the provision of this article. 
(Code 1982, § 34.1-29; Ord. No. 1606, § 2, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 46-73. - Application. 
    An application for a taxicab driver's license shall be filed with the chief of police on forms provided by the city. The application shall be verified under oath and shall contain the following items: 
(1)  A concise history of their employment; 
(2)  Fingerprints; 
(3)  A recent photograph; and 
(4)  A medical history. 
(Code 1982, § 34.1-30; Ord. No. 1606, § 2, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 46-74. - Requirements for eligibility. 
    No driver's permit, under this section, shall be issued to any person: 
(1)  Under 21 years of age; 
(2)  Ever convicted, pleaded nolo contendere or forfeited on a charge of a felony involving moral turpitude, or convicted, pleaded nolo contendere or forfeited on a charge of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within the last five years. However, the chief of police may issue a driver's permit to an applicant, notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, if the chief of police determines that the public interest would be best served; 
(3)  Having a record of repeated violations of any traffic safety or criminal laws of the city or any state or the federal government or minus six points or greater on current driving record; 
(4)  Having had their driver's permit or similar permit permanently revoked in any other jurisdiction; 
(5)  Ever convicted, pleaded nolo contendere or forfeited on a charge of hit and run, leaving the scene of an accident or any similar charge where injury to a person was involved; 
(6)  Of such bad character or responsibility that such person's fitness to properly serve the public is doubtful; 
(7)  Not being the owner or employee or agent of the owner of a taxicab or for-hire vehicle licensed to operate in the city; or 
(8)  Not having held a valid driver's license for a period of at least six months. 
(Code 1982, § 34.1-31; Ord. No. 1606, § 2, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 46-75. - Fee. 
    At the time the application for a taxicab driver's license is filed, the applicant shall pay to the city the sum of $7.50 for a new license and a sum of $5.00 for a license renewal or replacement. 
(Code 1982, § 34.1-32; Ord. No. 1606, § 2, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 46-76. - Motor vehicle operator's permit. 
    Before any application for a taxicab driver's license is finally passed upon by the chief of police, the applicant must show, by way of a current driver's transcript from their licensing state, they have a current commercial motor vehicle operator's license, issued by the licensing agency of the state of their domicile. 
(Code 1982, § 34.1-33; Ord. No. 1606, § 2, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 46-77. - Medical examination of applicants. 
    In instances where the chief of police has reasonable cause to believe, based upon medical history provided by the applicant, that a disease or infirmity of the applicant for a driver's permit under this section might make the applicant unsafe or unsatisfactory as a driver, prior to a driver's permit being issued or renewed, the applicant shall furnish a certificate from a physician licensed to practice medicine in Virginia, Maryland or the District of Columbia certifying that the applicant is not afflicted with any disease or infirmity to the best of the physician's knowledge which might make the applicant an unsafe or unsatisfactory driver. 
(Code 1982, § 34.1-34; Ord. No. 1606, § 2, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 46-78. - Investigation of applicant. 
    The hack inspector shall conduct an investigation of each applicant for a taxicab driver's license. A report of such investigation and a copy of the traffic and police record of the applicant, if any, shall be attached to the application. 
(Code 1982, § 34.1-35; Ord. No. 1606, § 2, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 46-79. - Approval or rejection of application. 
    The chief of police, upon consideration of the application for a taxicab driver's license and the reports required to be attached thereto, shall approve or reject the application. If the application is rejected, the applicant may request a personal appearance before the city manager to offer evidence why the application should be reconsidered. 
(Code 1982, § 34.1-36; Ord. No. 1606, § 2, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 46-80. - Issuance; term; annual fee. 
    Upon approval of an application for a taxicab driver's license, the chief of police shall issue a license to the applicant which shall bear the name, photograph and permit number of the applicant. Such license shall be in effect for one calendar year from the date of issue. A license valid for one year shall be issued upon the payment of $5.00 and the investigation as stated in section 46-78. 
(Code 1982, § 34.1-37; Ord. No. 1606, § 2, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 46-81. - Display. 
    Every driver licensed under this article shall post such driver's taxicab license in such a place as to be in full view of all passengers while such driver is operating a taxicab. 
(Code 1982, § 34.1-38; Ord. No. 1606, § 2, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 46-82. - Expiration of permit. 
    All drivers' permits issued under this article shall expire one year from the date of issuance of the driver's permit, unless suspended or revoked earlier. 
(Code 1982, § 34.1-39; Ord. No. 1606, § 2, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 46-83. - Temporary suspension of permits. 
    The chief of police shall have the power to suspend, subject to appeal to the city manager, any driver's permit and the privileges thereby entailed for a period not to exceed five days for any one or more of the following causes: 
(1)  Transportation of a person who is not a bona fide passenger in a taxicab while on duty; 
(2)  Failure of or refusal to proceed with all reasonable dispatch by the shortest practical route to a destination requested by a passenger; 
(3)  Waiting for passengers or taking on additional passengers without the consent of a passenger already in the cab; 
(4)  Refusal to transport any orderly person applying for transportation when the taxicab has not been previously engaged by another; 
(5)  Failure, refusal or neglect to carry or record the entries in the manifest as required by this chapter; 
(6)  Failure, refusal or neglect to keep the taxicab clean; 
(7)  Failure, refusal or neglect to observe and comply with orders given by a police officer by sign or word; 
(8)  Failure to post and display the driver's permit as required by this article; or 
(9)  Failure, refusal or neglect to notify the hack inspector in writing of a change in address or telephone number within the period specified by regulation, and such period or part thereof shall constitute a separable basis for a suspension. 
(Code 1982, § 34.1-40; Ord. No. 1606, § 2, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 46-84. - Suspension and revocation of permits by city manager. 
(a)  The city manager shall have the power to suspend or revoke any driver's permit issued under the provisions of this article for any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Violation of any law involving moral turpitude; 
(2)  Failure to report any accident in which the driver is involved; 
(3)  Violation of any law prohibiting the operation of a motor vehicle while under the influence of any intoxicating beverage or drug; 
(4)  Operation of a taxicab or for-hire vehicle known by the driver not to be in good order or safe repair; 
(5)  Repeated violations of traffic or safety laws of local, state or federal government; 
(6)  Affliction with a disease or infirmity which might make the holder of a driver's permit an unsafe or an unsatisfactory driver; 
(7)  Violation of any law prohibiting hit and run driving, leaving the scene of an accident, or similar law; 
(8)  Failure to serve the public adequately; 
(9)  Failure to operate a taximeter as required by this chapter; 
(10)  Making false statements in any area of this chapter; 
(11)  Repeated failure to be clean and dressed in neat clothing at all times when serving the public; 
(12)  Violation of any provision of this chapter; 
(13)  Doing any act, or the failure to do any act, which would jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of the public; or 
(14)  Repeated suspension pursuant section 46-83. 
(b)  In any hearing by the city manager under this chapter, a conviction, plea of nolo contendere or forfeiture shall be conclusive evidence of a violation. 
(c)  No driver's permit shall be suspended or revoked until the holder of the permit has had at least ten days notice by personal service or by certified mail to the address shown on the permit, of the grounds for suspension or revocation, and the time and place of a hearing. 
(d)  A hearing shall be heard by the city manager, and the city attorney, if requested by the hack inspector, shall present the case against the permit holder. The permit holder may present his own case or be represented by counsel. 
(e)  A suspension by the city manager shall be for not less than 30 days or more than 120 days. The city manager may revoke a driver's permit for such period of time in excess of 120 days as the city manager may in his discretion see fit; provided, however, that whenever a driver's permit has been revoked, the city shall not issue a new permit to the same person for at least a period of one year after revocation. The decision of the city manager is final in all cases and there shall be no rehearing, except in the case of newly discovered pertinent facts. 
(f)  When a person has had his permit revoked and desires another, after waiting the required time, such person may apply as if he were seeking a new permit. 
(Code 1982, § 34.1-41; Ord. No. 1606, § 2, 5-26-1998) 
Sec. 46-85. - Reciprocity. 
    The city manager is authorized to waive such provisions of this article as such manager deems expedient and reasonable, and to substitute a certification by Fairfax County that the same or higher standards have been complied with and that such applicant for a city taxicab driver's license has been granted a Fairfax County taxicab driver's license in accordance with that county's ordinances and regulations. 
(Code 1982, § 34.1-42; Ord. No. 1606, § 2, 5-26-1998; Ord. No. 1791, 6-26-2006) 
Chapter 48 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Planning, zoning and subdivision control, ch. 17. 
Cross reference- Planning department, § 2-90 et seq.; architectural advisory board, § 2-137 et seq.; buildings, ch. 6; condominiums, § 6-148 et seq.; massage therapy establishments and services, § 8-20 et seq.; food and food service establishments, § 8-272 et seq.; housing, ch. 22; libraries, ch. 24; outdoor lighting, § 14-127 et seq.; water recreation facilities, § 8-425 et seq.; utilities, ch. 42; subdivisions, ch. 38; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 36; subdivisions, ch. 38; underground utilities, § 42-231 et seq. 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt and restrictions regarding zoning, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2280 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 48-1. - Preamble. 
(a)  Authority. By act of the General Assembly of Virginia as provided in Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2280 et seq., and amendments thereto, authorizing councils to divide the area as may be deemed best suited to carry out the purpose of this article, and in such districts may establish setback building lines, regulate and restrict the location, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, or use of buildings and other structures, their height, area and bulk, and the percentage of the lot to be occupied by buildings or other structures, the size of yards, courts, and other open spaces, and the trade, industry, residence, and other specific uses of the premises in such districts. 
(1)  Additional zoning powers are granted by chapter 17 of the city Charter, approved April 4, 1950, and amendments thereto. 
(2)  The planning commission, in compliance with the city Charter, has made a comprehensive study of present conditions and expected future growth of the city, and has prepared and adopted a master plan for said city, and has prepared a zoning ordinance based on such plan. 
(3)  For the purpose of promoting health, safety, morals, comfort, prosperity and the general welfare requiring it, this chapter is adopted as the zoning ordinance, together with the accompanying zoning map adopted herewith as an integral part of the ordinance and to be known as the Official Zoning District Map of Falls Church, Virginia. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to lessen congestion in the streets, secure safety from fire, panic and other danger, promote health, sanitation and general welfare, provide adequate light and air, prevent the overcrowding of land, avoid the undue concentration of population, facilitate public and private transportation and the supplying of public utility services and sewage disposal, and facilitate provision for schools, parks, playgrounds and other public improvements and requirements, and in general bring about the orderly physical development of the community by confining particular uses to defined areas, all in accordance with the city Charter. 
(c)  Intent. The city exists primarily as a pleasant place of residence. In view of the above, it is the intent of this chapter to: 
(1)  Preserve and protect the existing residential areas by encouraging the continued use of the land for residential purposes, encouraging the discontinuance of existing uses that would not be permitted under the provisions of this chapter, discouraging any use which would generate traffic on minor streets other than normal traffic to serve residents on those streets, limiting home occupations and home offices and transient residential uses such as boardinghouses and tourist homes. 
(2)  Continue the basic low-density single-family character of the community, yet allow for a little greater variety in the types of dwelling accommodations available for persons with different requirements. 
(3)  Create an opportunity for major retail business and service development in designated areas. 
(4)  Provide as much space as possible for desirable types of industry in designated areas. 
(5)  Anticipate and provide for increasing recreational needs. 
It is essential that all of the uses of land and buildings within the city be so related as to provide for economy in government and mutually support each other in order that the fullest benefit may be derived from residential, commercial and industrial areas. 
(d)  Interpretation and application. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements. Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction than is imposed or required by other provisions of law or by other rules, regulations, or ordinances, or by private restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall control. Where this chapter imposes a lesser restriction than is imposed or required by other provisions of law or by other rules, regulations, or ordinances, the provisions thereof shall control. 
(e)  Validity. If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 81-1; Code 1982, § 38-1) 
Sec. 48-2. - Definitions. 
(a)  Not construed as regulatory. Unless the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall be used in the interpretation and construction of this chapter. These definitions are included to provide the intended meaning of certain words and are not to be construed as regulatory. 
(b)  Tense, plurality, etc. All words in the present tense include the future tense. All words in the plural number include the singular, and vice versa. The word "lot" includes the word "plot;" the word "building" includes the words "use" and "structure;" and the word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. 
(c)  Words, terms, and phrases. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory dwelling unit means a dwelling unit which is in the same structure as, under the same ownership as, and subordinate to a one-family dwelling, and which is intended for use as a complete, independent living facility. The accessory dwelling unit includes permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation for use by one family within the limits set forth in this Code pertaining to health, building, or other relevant provisions of the law. 
    Accessory use or structure means a use or structure subordinate to the principal use or structure on the same lot and serving a purpose customarily incidental thereto. (See illustration 1 at the end of this section.) 
    Actual construction. See Construction, actual. 
    Adult use shall have the meaning ascribed to this term in City Code section 8-702. 
    Advertisement means any writing, printing, picture, painting, display, emblem, drawing, sign or device which is intended to solicit patronage or support of the public or to invite or draw attention to any goods, merchandise, real property, or commercial business, services, entertainment or amusement, manufactured, produced, conducted, furnished or dealt in by any person, or for any political party or for the candidacy of any individual for nomination to public office. 
    Advertising structure means any rigid or semi-rigid material, bracing, supports or framework, with or without advertisement display thereon, situated upon or attached to real property principally for the purpose of furnishing a background, base or support upon which an advertisement may be posted or displayed. 
    Affordable dwelling unit means a housing unit for which the rental and/or sale price is regulated pursuant to the provisions of article VII of this chapter, pertaining to the affordable dwelling unit program. 
    Alley means a passage or way open to public travel which affords a subordinate means of vehicular access to abutting lots and is not intended for general vehicular circulation. (See illustration 1 at the end of this section.) 
    Amusement arcade means any establishment, except those with a floor area greater than 15,000 square feet, in which more than four amusement machines are located and available for use and operated as a principal or accessory use. In an establishment with a floor area greater than 15,000 square feet, an amusement arcade shall exist as an accessory use, if more than 15 amusement machines are located and available for use or if more than five percent of the floor area of such establishment is devoted to amusement machine use. 
    Amusement machine means a mechanical and/or electrical device which provides entertainment to one or more persons by virtue of video or mechanical displays, lights, sounds, motion, or games of skill or chance. Musical instruments, music players, jukeboxes, vending machines and dispensers are not included. 
    Apartment means a room or suite of rooms fitted especially with cooking and housekeeping facilities used, leased and/or owned as a dwelling. An apartment shall not be construed to mean a townhouse dwelling. 
    Apartment building means a structure containing separate residential apartments either leased or owned; also called apartment house or multifamily dwelling. 
    Approving authority means those persons delegated the responsibility of approving any portion or part of the requirements of this chapter. 
    Architect means an individual who is recognized by the State of Virginia and/or who is registered with the Virginia Department of Professional and Occupational Regulation as a professional architect. 
    As built site plan. See Site plan, as built. 
    Assisted living facilities means a special type of residential institution that provides personal care and support services to people who need help with daily living activities as a result of physical or cognitive disability, but do not require full-time daily medical care, distinguished from an independent living facility. 
    Base flood, 100-year flood means a flood that, on the average, is likely to occur once every 100 years, (i.e., has a one percent chance of occurring each year, although the flood may occur in any year). 
    Base flood elevation (BFE). The Federal Emergency Management Agency designated 100-year water surface elevation. 
    Bed and breakfast establishment means a single-family dwelling unit in which accommodations limited to no more than five guestrooms are rented for periods not to exceed 14 consecutive days per guest. 
    Block means that property abutting on one side of a street lying between the nearest two intersecting or intercepting streets or nearest intersecting or intercepting streets and railroad right-of-way or unsubdivided acreage. (See illustration 1 at the end of this section.) 
    Board of zoning appeals means the board appointed to review appeals made by individuals with regard to decisions of the zoning administrator in the interpretation of this chapter or requests for variances to this chapter. 
    Boardinghouse, lodginghouse or roominghouse means a building other than a hotel, motel or tourist home where meals, lodgings or both are provided for compensation, for four to eight persons, not transients. 
    Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, used or intended to be used for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels. The term "building" shall include tent, cabin and house trailer. Where divided by party walls, each portion of a building shall be deemed a separate building, except as otherwise provided herein. 
    Building capacity means the seating capacity of a structure or the number of employees shall be the maximum which can be accommodated on the premises, as certified in writing by the division of inspections. 
    Building footprint means the surface area occupied by a building, expressed in square feet. 
    Bulk plane means an imaginary inclined plane rising over a lot, drawn at a specific angle from the vertical at the curbline or property line, if no curb exists, and restricting the vertical building development. (See illustration in subsection 48-1081(c)(5).) 
    Business sign. See Sign, business. 
    Centerline, street, means a line lying midway between the right-of-way lines of a street. (See illustration 4 at the end of this section.) 
    Clinic for human care means a medical services establishment or organization in which three or more medical or dental practitioners offer chiefly outpatient services from a single site. 
    Commercial use means any use for which the primary purpose is to conduct the buying or selling of commodities and services, to exclude any uses that are exclusively related to residential uses. 
    Common open space. See Open space, common. 
    Compact car means an automobile that is no wider than six feet, nor longer than 16 feet. 
    Conditional zoning means the allowing of reasonable conditions governing the use of the property in question, as a part of amending the zoning district map, such conditions being in addition to the regulations provided for a particular zoning district by the overall zoning chapter. 
    Condominium means the ownership of a single unit in a multiple-unit structure with common elements. 
    Condominium project means a plan or project whereby four or more apartments, townhouses, rooms, office spaces or other units in existing or proposed buildings or structures are offered or proposed for sale as condominiums. 
    Construction, actual, means the placing of construction materials in a permanent position and fastening them permanently, or extensive grading including demolition or removal of existing structures necessary for the development. 
    Construction costs means the cost to build, particularly an improvement; includes the direct costs of labor and materials plus the contractor's indirect costs. Construction costs may include the appraisal, building permits, zoning fees, tap fees, city review fees, utilities, occupancy permits, miscellaneous permit/fees, architectural/engineering costs, construction loan interest, legal fees, builder's risk insurance, liability insurance, real estate taxes, project supervision, soft cost contingency, development fees, and closing costs. 
    Construction standards means the department of public works design and construction standards as adopted by the city council. 
    Convenience store. See Store, convenience. 
    Conventional television or radio antenna means any receiving antenna other than a satellite television antenna. 
    Cornice means a horizontal molded projection which crowns or finishes the wall of a building. 
    Cottage housing development means a cluster of small single-family houses sharing common amenities and developed on a tract of land that is under single ownership or unified control. 
    Curbline means the established line at the face of the nearest curb of the abutting public street. In the absence of a curb, the curbline shall be established according to the projected width of the street indicated on the major thoroughfare plan or, in the absence thereof, shall be determined by article V, division 6 of this chapter. (See illustration 1 at the end of this section.) 
    Dental and optical laboratories means laboratories engaged in the manufacture of artificial dentures, bridges, etc., or eyeglasses, for the purpose of filling prescriptions submitted by members of the dental and ophthalmologic professions. 
    Developed recreation space. See Recreation space, developed. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading streets and paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials. 
    District means a portion of the incorporated territory of the city within which certain uniform regulations and requirements or various combinations apply under the provisions of this chapter. 
(1)  The term "R district" means any R-1A, R-1B, R-TH, or R-M district; 
(2)  The term "T district" means any T-1 or T-2 district; 
(3)  The term "B district" means any B-1, B-2, or B-3 district; and 
    Drive-through or drive-through facility. Whether a principle, conditional, or accessory use, the definition for a drive through is: Any facility where goods are sold to or services provided to a person riding on or seated within a motor vehicle, except as provided in this definition; or any facility where services or inspections are performed on motor vehicles where the motor vehicles stand or wait in a line immediately prior to the service being performed. 
(1)  The term "drive-through" includes, but is not limited to, drive-through windows at a financial institution, a dry cleaner, a restaurant; carwash; a motor vehicle lube and oil change facility and motor vehicle inspection stations. 
(2)  The term "drive-through" does not include motor vehicle service facilities where motor vehicles to be serviced are parked before being serviced in contrast to standing in a line adjacent to the bay where services are done; it also does not include the fueling component of a motor vehicle service station. A motor vehicle service station using only one bay for inspections shall not be considered a drive-through. 
    Driveway means that space specifically designated and reserved on the site for the movement of vehicles from one site to another or from a site to a public street. (See illustration 1 at the end of this section.) 
    Drug paraphernalia. 
(1)  The term "drug paraphernalia" means all equipment, products, and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body marijuana and/or a controlled dangerous substance as defined in Code of Virginia, §§ 54.1-3446, 54.1-3448, 54.1-3450, 54.1-3452, 54.1-3454. The term "drug paraphernalia includes, but is not limited to: 
a.  Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, or harvesting of any species of plant which is marijuana or a controlled dangerous substance or from which a controlled dangerous substance can be derived; 
b.  Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing marijuana and/or controlled dangerous substances; 
c.  Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is marijuana or a controlled dangerous substance; 
d.  Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of marijuana and/or controlled dangerous substances; 
e.  Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in weighing or measuring marijuana and/or controlled dangerous substances; 
f.  Dilutents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use, or designed for use in cutting marijuana and/or controlled dangerous substances; 
g.  Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marijuana; 
h.  Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding marijuana and/or controlled dangerous substances; 
i.  Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of marijuana and/or controlled dangerous substances; 
j.  Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in storing or concealing marijuana and/or controlled dangerous substances; 
k.  Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting marijuana and/or controlled dangerous substances into the human body; 
l.  Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, such as: 
1.  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls; 
2.  Water pipes; 
3.  Carburetion tubes and devices; 
4.  Smoking and carburetion masks; 
5.  Roach clips; meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand; 
6.  Miniature cocaine spoons, and cocaine vials; 
7.  Chamber pipes; 
8.  Carburetor pipes; 
9.  Electric pipes; 
10.  Air-driven pipes; 
11.  Chillums; 
12.  Bongs; 
13.  Ice pipes or chillers. 
(2)  In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, the zoning administrator, the agent of the zoning administrator, or the chief of police should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following: 
a.  Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use; 
b.  Prior convictions, if any, of an owner or of anyone in control of the object, under any state or federal law relating to marijuana or any controlled dangerous substance; 
c.  The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of this chapter, Code of Virginia, § 18.2-248.2, or to marijuana or a controlled dangerous substance; 
d.  The existence of any residue of marijuana or controlled dangerous substances on the object; 
e.  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he knows, or should reasonably know, intended to use the object to facilitate a violation of this chapter or the Code of Virginia, § 18.2-248.2; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of this chapter or the Code of Virginia, § 18.2-248.2, shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use, or designed for use, as drug paraphernalia; 
f.  Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use; 
g.  Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use; 
h.  National and local advertising concerning its use; 
i.  The manner in which the object is displayed for sale; 
j.  Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products; 
k.  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object or objects to the total sales of the business enterprise; 
l.  The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community; 
m.  Expert testimony concerning its use. 
If any provision of this definition or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of the ordinance adopting this definition which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of the adopting ordinance are severable. 
    Drug paraphernalia establishment means any retail sales establishment wherein drug paraphernalia is displayed, sold, offered for sale or given away. 
    Dwelling, cluster, means one of a group of two or more one-family, two-family, and/or townhouse units that, together, comprise a planned, unified development. 
    Dwelling, multifamily, means a residential structure containing three or more separate dwelling units (apartments), either leased or owned, located on a single lot or parcel of ground. A multiple-family dwelling, commonly known as an apartment building, generally has a common outside entrance for all the dwelling units, and the units are generally designed side by side or one above another. A multiple-family dwelling shall not be construed to mean a townhouse dwelling. 
    Dwelling, one-family, means a detached building containing one dwelling unit. 
    Dwelling, townhouse, means one of a series of three, but not more than eight, attached one-family dwellings separated from one another by continuous vertical walls without openings from basement floor to roof, having complementary but not identical facades or treatment of materials, and not more than two abutting dwellings having the same front yard setback. 
    Dwelling, two-family, means a building containing two dwelling units. For purposes of lot and yard requirements, a two-family dwelling may be placed on a single lot or may be placed on two contiguous lots, provided a party wall is constructed over the common boundary. 
    Dwelling unit means one or more rooms in a residential building or residential portion of a building which are arranged, designed, used or intended for use as a complete, independent living facility which includes permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation for use by one family or housekeeping unit. 
    Easement means a grant by a property owner of the use of the land of the property owner by another party for a specific purpose. 
    Engineer means an individual who is recognized by the State of Virginia and/or who is registered with the Virginia Department of Professional and Occupational Regulation as a professional engineer. 
    Erect means to attach, affix, build, construct, hang, place or suspend. The term "erect" shall also include the painting of wall signs. 
    Facing or surface means the plane upon, against or through which an advertisement is displayed or illustrated. 
    Family refers to one person living alone or two or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption, or who are living in an approved foster care program, with not more than two domestic servants living in the house as roomers; or a group of not more than eight persons not related by blood, marriage, or adoption living together as a single housekeeping unit, within the limits set forth in this Code pertaining to health, building or other relevant provisions of the law except a group home, residential institution, or a boardinghouse or roominghouse. 
    Flood. 
(1)  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry areas from: 
a.  The overflow of inland waters. 
b.  The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff or surface waters from any source. 
(2)  The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding. 
    Flood, 100-year means a flood that, on the average, is likely to occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one percent change of occurring each year, although the flood may occur in any year). 
    Floodplain refers to: 
(1)  A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream, or watercourse which is subject to partial or complete inundation; 
(2)  An area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff or surface waters from any source. 
    Floodprone area means any land susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. 
    Floodway means the designated area of the floodplain required to carry and discharge floodwaters of a given magnitude. For the purposes of this chapter, the floodway shall be capable of accommodating a flood of the 100-year magnitude. 
    Floor area shall be interpreted as being the gross floor area. Gross floor area shall be the sum of the gross horizontal area of the floor or several floors of a building measured from the exterior faces of all exterior walls or from the centerlines of party walls if the portions of a building are to be computed separately including basements and habitable penthouses. (See illustration 3 at the end of this section.) 
    Floor area ratio (FAR) means a mathematical expression of the bulk or intensity of land development, determined by dividing the gross floor area of all buildings at or above grade level on a given parcel of land by the gross square footage of that same parcel of land. No parking structure or parking space shall be counted against the permitted floor area. 
    Fueling bay means an area designated for the fueling of a motor vehicle. 
    Garage, carport, means an open accessory structure for the storage of private noncommercial motor vehicles of families resident upon the premises, the capacity of which does not exceed one vehicle for each family, plus two additional vehicles. 
    Garage, private, means a completely enclosed accessory structure for the storage only of the private motor vehicles of the families resident upon the premises, the capacity of which does not exceed one vehicle for each family, plus two additional vehicles. (See illustration 1 at the end of this section.) 
    Grade level means the average natural topographical elevation or average elevation established either by artificial earth movement or hard-surfacing at which the major portion of the adjacent site area lies; except, that no specially constructed or graded area, ornamental or protective earthwork or raised landscaped areas shall be determinant of grade level. (See illustration 3 at the end of this section.) 
    Grade level, finished , means the grade level immediately adjacent to the building footprint, not otherwise deemed to be the natural grade level. The term "finished grade level" shall include ground disturbance, subject to a grading plan or that serves to increase allowable building height. 
    Grade level, natural , means the ground level immediately adjacent to the building footprint, with no adjustment having been made to the existing undisturbed ground level. The term "natural grade level" may include minor ground disturbances associated with landscaping, repairs to existing structures as required by the building official, or other incidental grade adjustments that do not serve to allow an increase in the height of an existing building or that would otherwise be possible prior to the ground disturbance. 
    Ground cover means a group of living plants other than grass approximately six inches in height when mature which is planted in such a manner as to permit a finished appearance and reasonably complete coverage within one year after planting. 
    Group home means a dwelling unit in which individuals with mental illness, intellectual disability, or developmental disabilities reside, with one or more resident or nonresident staff persons. For the purposes of this subsection, mental illness and developmental disability shall not include current illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance as defined in § 54.1-3401 of the Code of Virginia. No conditions more restrictive than those imposed on residences occupied by persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption shall be imposed on such facility. For purposes of this subsection, "residential facility" means any group home or other residential facility for which the department of behavioral health and developmental services is the licensing authority pursuant to the Code of Virginia. A group home with more than eight residents shall be deemed to be a residential institution. 
    Guestroom means a sleeping room which is designed or intended for occupancy by or which is occupied by one or more guests for compensation, but in which no provision is made for cooking, and not including dormitories for sleeping purposes. 
    Hedge means two or more living shrubs planted and maintained so as to form a continuous, unbroken, visual screen. 
    Height of a building (in feet) means the vertical distance measured from the average grade of the building footprint to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, or the deck line of a mansard roof, or the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs. Average grade shall be determined using the finished grade level or the natural grade level, whichever is lower. 
    Height of a building (in stories) means the greatest number of stories in any part of the building. 
    Historic area means an area containing buildings or places in which historic events occurred or having special public value because of notable architectural or other features relating to the cultural or artistic heritage of the community, of such significance as to warrant conservation and preservation. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements of individual listing on the National Register; or is designated for protection by the city as a historic structure; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic structures and places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Home occupation means an occupation whose activity at the site is conducted entirely within the private dwelling which is clearly incidental and secondary to the principal use as a dwelling; which occupies less than 25 percent of the floor area of the dwelling; which does not involve display or sale of goods on the premises; and which does not use any equipment or process that creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference, detectable at the lot line. The term "home occupation" includes such activities as sewing, cooking, handicraft making, laundering, a home office or studio, and the like. The term "home occupation" shall not include such activities as a clinic, hospital, nursing home, barbershop, beauty shop, tea room, tourist home, kennel, animal hospital, and the like. A home occupation shall be classified and regulated as either a minor or major home occupation, as defined in this definition: 
(1)  Major home occupation means a home occupation in which not more than one person, other than members of the family residing on the premises, is employed on the premises, which has not more than one unilluminated sign (not exceeding one square foot in area) as visible exterior evidence of conduct of the occupation and which accommodates both dwelling and home occupation parking needs off the street. 
(2)  Minor home occupation means a home occupation in which no persons other than members of the family residing on the premises are engaged in the occupation, which has no visible exterior evidence of the conduct the occupation, which does not create need for off-street parking beyond normal dwelling needs, which does not generate additional traffic and in which no equipment is used other than that normally used in household, domestic or general office use. 
    Hotel means any building, or portion thereof, containing 12 or more guestrooms which are designed or intended to be used, let, or hired out primarily for transient occupancy. 
    House trailer means any vehicle or structure, including a mobile home, designed or equipped for movement upon a public street and designed or used for living purposes. 
    Impervious land cover means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents natural infiltration of water into the soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Nonvegetated roofs; 
(2)  Buildings; 
(3)  Streets; 
(4)  Parking areas; 
(5)  Sidewalks; 
(6)  Driveways; 
(7)  Any concrete, asphalt, or compacted gravel surface. 
(8)  Exception: Structures smaller than 200 square feet that do not require a building permit shall not count toward lot coverage or impervious lot coverage. For purposes of calculating impervious land cover, driveways, walks and patios using pervious materials may be reduced by up to 25 percent. Materials eligible for a reduction in area include, but are not limited to, pervious pavers, "grasscrete", "grassblock" or other similar material. 
    Industrial research and development organization means organizations engaged in research directed to the discovery, invention or development of new processes or products of an industrial nature. While the manufacturing activity would usually terminate with the production of a prototype, production of standardized versions of the prototype as a continuing activity of the organization is permitted subject to the limitations of section 48-546(5). 
    Inn and bed and breakfast means a structure, either new or renovated, with fewer than 12 guestrooms or suites, for use by transients as overnight accommodation. 
    Inoperable vehicle means any motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer which is not legally operable on a public street due to one or more of the following: 
(1)  Damage to or removal or deflation of one or more tires or wheels. 
(2)  Damage to or removal of the engine or any other essential part (such as, but not limited to, the transmission, rear end, or windshield) required for the safe operation of the vehicle. 
(3)  Lack of a valid state registration plate or plates. 
(4)  Lack of a valid state inspection certificate, if required to operate the vehicle on a public street in the state in which the vehicle is registered. 
(5)  Any condition which causes the vehicle to be an imminent health, safety, or fire hazard. 
    Institution for human care means a facility, such as, but not limited to, a hospital or clinic which provides full medical care to humans. 
    Junkyard means any area where waste, or discarded or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, baled, packed, stored, disassembled or handled, including automobile graveyards, auto wrecking yards, housewrecking yards, used lumberyards, and places or yards for storage of salvaged housewrecking and structural steel materials and equipment; but not including areas where such uses are conducted within completely enclosed buildings, and not including pawn shops and establishments for the sale, purchase, or storage of used furniture or household equipment, used cars in operating condition, salvaged machinery, or the processing of used, discarded or salvaged materials as part of a manufacturing operation. 
    Kennel means any place in or at which three or more dogs, more than three months of age, are boarded for a fee. 
    Land use intensity rating means a numerical scale which represents the capability of a parcel of land and its surrounding neighborhood to absorb an intensity of impact from the use of that land. 
    Landscaped area means an area planted in grass, trees, shrubs or other natural greenery, or containing any form of landscaping or architectural treatment designed by a registered landscape architect. 
    Landscaped open space means a pervious surface landscaped with a combination of trees and shrubs. 
    Loading space means a space or a portion of any area designed, required, or by its nature used as an area for the temporary parking of motor vehicles while transferring, loading or unloading goods, merchandise, products or while performing services. 
    Lot means any parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal building and its accessory uses and structures, together with such open spaces as are required by this chapter, which adheres to the minimum requirements prescribed in the respective zoning districts. 
    Lot, corner, means one or more lots considered as a single entity, any portion of which borders on: 
(1)  Two intersecting streets; or 
(2)  Two intersecting chords of a single street; 
wherein the interior angle of intersection does not exceed 140 degrees. (See illustration 1 at the end of this section.) 
    Lot depth means the mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. (See illustration 2 at the end of this section.) 
    Lot, double frontage, means a lot fronting on two nonintersecting streets. (See illustration at the end of this section 1 at the end of this section.) 
    Lot line, front, means the line separating the lot from a street upon which it fronts. On a corner lot or double frontage lot, each lot line that separates the lot from a street shall be considered a front lot line. (See illustration 2 at the end of this section.) 
    Lot line, rear, means the lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line. On a corner lot or double frontage lot, there shall not be a rear lot line. (See illustration 2 at the end of this section.) 
    Lot line, side, means any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. (See illustration 2 at the end of this section.) 
    Lot, pipestem, means a lot, which is occupied or intended to be occupied by a one-family dwelling, the width of which is less than 30 feet at any point between the front lot line and the building setback line, the width being determined by a line which is perpendicular to any side lot line. 
    Lot width means the width of the lot measured at the front building setback line. (See illustration 2 at the end of this section.) 
    Low income means a household income that does not exceed 60 percent of the median income for the Washington Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area (PMSA), as determined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), with adjustments for household size. 
Note- HUD income determinations are updated annually and are available from local HUD offices for the appropriate jurisdictions. 
    Manufactured home means a structure subject to federal regulations, which is transportable in one or more sections; is eight body feet or more in width and 40 body feet or more in length in the traveling mode, or is 320 or more square feet when erected on site; is built on a permanent chassis; is designed to be used as a single-family dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required facilities; and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained in the structure. 
    Manufactured home park/subdivision means a parcel, or contiguous parcels, of land divided into two or more lots for rent or sale. 
    Medical laboratories means laboratories serving the medical profession by the testing and analysis of specimens submitted by physicians. Activities of such laboratories are confined to serving the medical profession. 
    Mixed-use redevelopment (MUR) means a project within an area designated on the City of Falls Church Comprehensive Plan's Future Land Use Plan Map as a special area to be redeveloped with mixed-uses within mixed-use redevelopment areas as defined herein. 
    Mixed-use shared parking means city-authorized joint use of parking facilities for any property or building that is under the same ownership or for which recorded shared parking agreements exist, that is used for two or more purposes, and takes into account the various individual uses and their different peak demands peak demands for parking and loading spaces during different times of the day and days of the week. 
    Mixed-use within mixed-use redevelopment (MUR) areas means a combination of principal uses permitted by right within mixed-use redevelopment areas, integrated within an area or within individual buildings. 
    Moderate income means household income that is at least 61 percent and not more than 80 percent of the median income for the Washington Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area (PMSA), as determined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), with adjustments for household size. 
    Motel means a building or group of buildings containing 12 or more guestrooms or suites each, which is designed or intended to be used, let or hired out primarily for transient occupancy, in which each room or suite has a separate outside entrance and an adjacent parking area. 
    Multiple-tenancy structure means any commercial or office building containing two or more businesses, establishments, facilities or offices, provided that such structure has more than one floor or common entranceway. 
    Municipal center area means an area of public buildings and adjacent designated properties where the public can be efficiently served in the varied transactions of public affairs. It is an area harmoniously controlled and in conformity with the civic interests and cultural achievements of the community served. 
    New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of the initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, the term "new construction" means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    Nonconforming use means a building, structure or premises legally devoted to, or occupied by, or for a use that does not conform to the provisions of this chapter or any amendments thereto for the district in which located. 
    Off-site means any area which does not fall within the boundary of the land to be developed. 
    Off-street parking. See " Parking, off-street. " 
    Off-street parking space. See " Parking space, off-street. " 
    Office building means a structure in which at least two-thirds of the habitable floor area is devoted to office use in which services, clerical work, professional duties, or the like, are carried out. 
    Office space ratio. See " Open space, office ratio. " 
    On-site means that area which is within the boundary of any land to be developed. 
    Open space, common, means all open space set aside for the common use of all residents and not dedicated to public use. 
    Open space, office ratio, means a number which, when multiplied by the square footage of floor area devoted to office use, establishes the minimum required open space on the site. 
    Open space, residential ratio, means a number which, when multiplied by the actual residential floor area in square feet, establishes the minimum open space required on the site. 
    Open space, residential recreation ratio, means a number which, when multiplied by the actual residential floor area in square feet, establishes the minimum required developed recreation space on the site. 
    Open space, usable, means outdoor, privately owned, landscaped area devoted to passive recreational or park space which may be in common use, and which conforms to the minimum requirements prescribed for the appropriate district, which shall not be in roadways, drives, aisles, off-street parking or loading spaces, in which there shall be no permanent structure except for artificial lighting, pedestrian ways, flagpoles, benches and decorative, monumental or ornamental fixtures, and which shall be accessible and available to all the occupants of the building. 
    Overhang, structural, means a projecting integral part of a building. 
    Owner means a party having title to the described property. 
    Parapet wall means any protective wall or barrier at the edge of or projecting above any balcony or roof. 
    Parking, enclosed, means any area on a building lot containing required off-street parking wholly within an accessory structure or substructure. 
    Parking lot means an area with demarcated spaces designed for the temporary storage of motor vehicles in the absence of their owners or operators. 
    Parking lot, public, means an area containing one or more parking spaces for self-propelled passenger vehicles, designed exclusively for and available to the public as an accommodation for patrons or customers, either with or without charge. 
    Parking, off-street, means any space specifically allotted to the parking of motor vehicles; such space shall not be within dedicated right-of-way lines. 
    Parking space means a space or a portion of any area designed, required, or by its nature used as an area for the temporary storage of passenger vehicles. 
    Parking space, off-street, means a space to contain passenger vehicles wholly segregated, except for entranceways, by means of walls, fences, curbs and landscaped areas, from any public street, alley or public right-of-way. 
    Persons with disabilities means any persons who are unable to engage in any substantial gainful activity because of any physical or mental impairments that are expected to result in death or have lasted or can be expected to last continuously for at least 12 months. 
    Physical and life science research laboratories means laboratories engaged solely in experimental and development activities in the physical and life science fields conducted entirely indoors; using processes and equipment having proper electronic shielding; that are not likely to be dangerous or offensive (because of odor, dust, fire, explosion, or other reason); that are not likely to produce objectionable noise, vibration, smoke, or other effect; and involving only negligible amounts of delivery, storage or shipment of materials or products. 
    Prenatal and early infant care counseling and support facility means psychological, social, economic or educational services provided to pregnant women and those with children less than 18 months old. The term "prenatal and early infant care counseling and support facility" also may include the accessory use of storing and providing furniture needed for infant care, but it does not include medical services. 
    Professional office means enclosed space used wholly for the transaction of remunerative endeavors by one or more persons or corporations licensed and taxed under the provisions of chapter 40. 
    Professional office building means a building of which 50 percent or more of the total floor area is used for professional offices. 
    Public building/facility means areas or structures owned or controlled by a governmental authority or other political subdivisions. 
    Recreation vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Residential institution means a facility which functions primarily as a living quarters for groups of individuals, either with or without medical services available; including, but not limited to, rest homes, nursing homes, convalescent homes, orphanages and similar uses, except a secure or detention facility, which shall mean a public or private locked residential facility which has construction fixtures designed to prevent escape and to restrict the movement and activities of persons held in lawful custody. 
    Residential open space ratio. See " Open space, residential ratio. " 
    Residential recreation space ratio. See " Open space, residential recreation ratio. " 
    Revised site plan. See " Site plan, revised. " 
    Right-of-way lines means lines which separate private property from existing or dedicated public property containing or proposed to contain publicly owned street surfaces, gutter, curb, planted strips or sidewalks. Where a public street is designated on the major thoroughfare plan, all requirements of this chapter which relate to rights-of-way shall be measured from the indicated proposed right-of-way lines. (See illustration 4 at the end of this section.) 
    Roofline means either the uppermost edge of the roof or the top of the parapet, whichever forms the top line of the building silhouette; and where a building has several roof levels, the roofline shall be the one belonging to that portion of the building on which wall the sign is located. (See illustration 3 at the end of this section.) 
    Satellite television antenna means an apparatus capable of receiving communications from geostationary orbital satellites. 
    Scientific research organization means research organizations engaged in study and investigation in the fields of engineering, social sciences, psychology, education, mathematics, instrumentation, calibration, economics and the like which utilize scholarly inquiry sometimes assisted by computer-type equipment, with the object of expanding knowledge in the specified field, but excludes experimentation involving the use of animals. 
    Self-storage warehouse means a facility consisting of one or more buildings within which individual, self-contained units are leased for the storage of personal, business and household goods, and in which each lessee has direct access to the leased unit and the items stored therein. 
    Seniors means any persons who are not less than 62 years of age at the time of application. 
    Service bay means an area designated for the repairing and/or maintaining of a motor vehicle. 
    Setback line, building, means a line prescribed by the zoning district regulations delineating those above grade level portions of any lot into which no building or structure shall project. (See illustration 2 at the end of this section.) 
    Shopping center means a ground-level commercial development of eight or more retail sales and service establishments and/or one acre or more of land in a single parcel of common ownership, providing common parking facilities for all establishments, having multiple tenancy of a single or several large common structures, and being of a single development or of several phases of a single comprehensive development. 
    Sign means any letter, figure, design, symbol, trademark or illuminating device intended to attract attention to any place, subject, person, firm, corporation, public performance, article, machine or merchandise painted, printed or constructed and displayed in any manner out of doors as a recognized commercial, industrial, political, institutional, eleemosynary or other advertisement as defined in this section. Interior signs, if located on a window or within a distance of the window equal to the greatest dimension of the window or if obviously intended for viewing from the exterior, shall be considered a sign. 
    Sign, business, means any advertisement sign directing attention to a business, commodity, entertainment, facility, profession or service, conducted, sold or offered on the same lot where the sign is located. 
    Sign, interior. See " Sign. " 
    Site area shall be interpreted as being composed of the greatest rectangular area or series of contiguous rectangular areas enclosing all, or the designated portions of the use so regulated, and shall include all areas devoted or accessory to such controlled principal use. 
    Site area, gross, means all that property shown on a site plan which, at the time of site plan submittal, is owned or controlled by the person or entity under whose authority the site plan is being submitted. 
    Site plan means detailed drawings indicating all building construction and improvements required by article V, division 7 of this chapter. 
    Site plan, as built, means a certification of building location as well as all on-site and off-site improvements, as approved. 
    Site plan, revised, means a site plan showing any proposed changes or revisions to an existing, previously approved site plan. 
    Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
a.  Human genitals and/or pubic region; 
b.  Buttocks; and 
c.  Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities means human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast. 
    Standing space means a space or portion of any area designed, required, or by its nature used as an area for the temporary stopping of a motor vehicle, while under the control of its operator, for the purposes of embarking or discharging passengers, baggage or merchandise, or for the purposes of utilizing special motor vehicle-oriented services, including but not limited to drive-in banks, carwashes and automobile inspection stations. 
    Start of construction means the date the building permit was issued, provided that actual state of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The term "actual start" means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as, the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings; such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the term "actual start of construction" means the first alteration on any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Store, convenience, means a small retail establishment offering for sale a limited variety of food items, or household products, primarily for consumption and/or use in a dwelling. 
    Story means that portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the space between such floor and the ceiling next above it. A mezzanine floor shall be counted as a story if it covers more than one-third the area of the floor next below it or if the vertical distance from the floor next below it to the floor next above it is 24 feet or more. A basement shall be counted as a story, for the purpose of height measurement, if its ceiling is over five feet above the level from which the height of the building is measured, or if it is used as a separate dwelling unit by other than a janitor or other employee and his family. (See illustration 3 at the end of this section.) 
    Story, half, means a partial story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two opposite exterior sides are not more than two feet above the floor of such story; provided that any such story used as a separate dwelling unit, other than by a janitor or other employee and his family, shall be counted as a full story. (See illustration 3 at the end of this section.) 
    Street means a public thoroughfare, however designated by name, which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. (See illustrations 1 and 4 at the end of this section.) 
    Street, centerline. See " Centerline, street. " (See illustration 4 at the end of this section.) 
    Street line means parallel lines delineating the extreme horizontal width of a cross section of existing street surface. If, on the major thoroughfare plan, a street is proposed for widening, the proposed right-of-way lines shall be the street lines. (See illustration 4 at the end of this section.) 
    Street width means the shortest distance between lines delineating the horizontal width of a cross section of street surface. (See illustration 4 at the end of this section.) 
    Structural alteration means any change in the structural members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders. 
    Structural trim means the molding, battens, cappings, nailing strips, latticing and platforms which are attached to a sign structure. 
    Structure means anything constructed by an assembly of materials, the use of which requires a fixed location on the ground or is attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. 
(1)  The term "substantial improvement" includes structures which have incurred substantial damage regardless of the actual repair work performed. 
(2)  The term does not, however, include either: 
a.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to ensure safe living conditions; or 
b.  Any alteration of a historic structure; provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
    Surface. See " Facing. " 
    Surveyor means an individual who is recognized by the State of Virginia and/or who is registered with the Virginia Department of Professional and Occupational Regulation as a registered surveyor. 
    Temporary shelter means a brief or limited use of a structure for providing overnight sleeping accommodations at no or nominal charge to the persons provided the accommodation. A temporary shelter may not be operated for profitable purposes or to directly advance a profitable purpose. 
    Temporary stand means a structure of a nonpermanent nature, placed on a lot for not more than 30 days within any one calendar year. 
    Theater means a place for the presentation of motion pictures and/or live presentation of any of the performing arts. 
    Tourist home means a dwelling, otherwise permitted in the district in which the same is situated, in which not more than four guestrooms are provided for transients. 
    Travel lanes means that space specifically designated and reserved on the site for the movement of vehicular traffic. 
    Tree means any self-supporting woody plant growing upon the earth which usually provides one main trunk and produces a more or less distinct and elevated head with many branches. Trees shall measure no less than two inches in diameter at six inches above ground level. 
    Usable open space. See " Open space, usable. " 
    Yard means an open space on the same lot with a building, a group of buildings, or a use, which space is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as herein provided. (See illustration 2 at the end of this section.) 
    Yard, front, means a yard extending from side lot line to side lot line, between the front lot line and the front building setback line. (See illustration 2 at the end of this section.) 
    Yard, rear, means a yard extending across the full width of the lot from side lot line to side lot line, between the rear lot line and the rear building setback line. (See illustration 2 at the end of this section.) 
    Yard, side, means a yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the side lot line and the nearest side building setback line. For double frontage and corner lots that have no rear yards, the side yard shall be understood to extend from one front yard to the other front yard. (See illustration 2 at the end of this section.) 
(d)  Graphics. The following illustrations relate to the definitions within this section: 




(Code 1973, § 81-2; Code 1982, § 38-2; Ord. No. 609; Ord. No. 666; Ord. No. 724; Ord. No. 804; Ord. No. 866; Ord. No. 894; Ord. No. 908; Ord. No. 962, 3-23-1981; Ord. No. 987, 11-9-1981; Ord. No. 993, 1-11-1982; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1015, 7-12-1982; Ord. No. 1039, 2-28-1983; Ord. No. 1131, 3-10-1986; Ord. No. 1138, 5-12-1986; Ord. No. 1139, 5-27-1986; Ord. No. 1154, 8-11-1986; Ord. No. 1203, 10-13-1987; Ord. No. 1250, 2-27-1989; Ord. No. 1263, 5-22-1989; Ord. No. 1277, § 1, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1278, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1338, 12-10-1990; Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1531, 12-11-1995; Ord. No. 1541, 3-25-1996; Ord. No. 1583, 7-14-1997; Ord. No. 1627, 9-28-1998; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1710, 10-22-2001; Ord. No. 1721, 6-10-2002; Ord. No. 1734, 5-12-2003; Ord. No. 1792, § 38-2, 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 1846, 6-28-2010; Ord. No. 1915, 3-24-2014; Ord. No. 1966, 2-13-2017; Ord. No. 1991, 12-18-2018) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 48-3. - General regulations. 
(a)  Use of land and buildings. Except as hereinafter specified, no land, building, structure or premises shall hereafter be used, designed or intended to be used, and no building or part thereof shall be located, erected, moved, structurally altered, reconstructed, enlarged or converted, except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is or is to be located. 
(b)  Height limit. Except as hereinafter specified, no building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed in height the limit hereinafter designated for the district in which such building is located. 
(c)  Yards. Except as hereinafter specified, no building shall be erected, nor shall any existing building be altered, enlarged or rebuilt, nor shall any open space surrounding any building or use be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except in conformity with the yard, lot area and other lot and building location regulations hereinafter designated for the district in which such building, use or open space is located. 
(d)  Yard duplication. No yard or other open space on one lot shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for a building or use on any other lot. Except as specified for dwelling groups, no yard or open space provided about any building, for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter, shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building or use. 
(Code 1973, § 81-4; Code 1982, § 38-3) 
Sec. 48-4. - Applicants for special exceptions and use permits. 
    The city council, planning commission, or board of zoning appeals shall require any applicant for a special exception, or a special use permit, amendments to this chapter or variance to make complete disclosure in the application of the equitable ownership of the real estate to be affected including, in the case of corporate ownership, the name of stockholders, officers and directors and in any case the names and addresses of all of the real parties of interest. However, the requirement of listing names of stockholders, officers and directors shall not apply to a corporation whose stock is traded on a national or local stock exchange and having more that 500 shareholders. 
(Code 1982, § 38-44; Ord. No. 1738, 6-23-2003) 
State Law reference- Authority to require disclosure under oath regarding property interest of local officials, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2287; authority to require disclosure of real parties in interest, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2289. 
Secs. 48-5-48-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 48-27-48-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 48-56. - Zoning administrator. 
(a)  There is hereby established the office of zoning administrator, who shall be responsible to the city manager. It shall be the duty of the zoning administrator, assisted by the police department and the department of public works, to administer and enforce this chapter, including the ordering in writing of the remedying of any condition found in violation of this chapter, and the bringing of legal action to ensure compliance with this chapter, including injunction, abatement or other appropriate action or proceeding. 
(b)  The zoning administrator shall enforce the conditions, if any, attached to an amendment to the zoning district map as provided in division 3 of this article. Such enforcements shall include, in addition to the actions and proceedings stated in subsection (a) of this section, a guarantee, satisfactory to the city council, in an amount sufficient for and conditioned upon the construction of any physical improvements required by the conditions, or a contract for the construction of such improvements and the contractor's guarantee, in like amount and so conditioned, which guarantee may be reduced or released upon the submission of satisfactory evidence that construction of such improvements has been completed in whole or in part. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved, or any officer, department or commission of the city affected by any decision of the zoning administrator, may take an appeal therefrom to the board of zoning appeals as provided in article III of this chapter. Except any zoning applicant who is aggrieved by a decision of the zoning administrator pursuant to the enforcement of conditions pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, may petition the city council for the review of the decision of the zoning administrator. 
(Code 1973, § 81-12; Code 1982, § 38-7(a); Ord. No. 894) 
State Law reference- Zoning administrator, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2209, 15.2-2210, 15.2-2286A.4, 15.2-2292B, 15.2-2299-15.2-2310, 15.2-2311, 15.2-2314. 
Sec. 48-57. - Permits and licenses. 
    Every official and public employee of the city who is vested with the authority to issue any permit or license shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter. The city manager shall provide by executive order that the application for any such permit or license shall be referred to the zoning administrator for an approval based on its conformity with this chapter. Any permit or license issued in conflict with the provisions of this chapter shall be null and void. 
(Code 1973, § 81-12; Code 1982, § 38-7(b); Ord. No. 894) 
Sec. 48-58. - Certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an owner or agent of the owner, person or tenant to use or permit the use of any structure or land or part thereof, existing or hereafter erected, constructed, changed, converted or enlarged, wholly or partly or for any person (not employees), tenant or corporation, occupying any space in such structures until a certificate of occupancy has been approved by the zoning administrator. Such certificate shall show that such structure or premises, or part thereof, and the proposed use are in full conformity with the provisions of this chapter. It shall be the duty of the zoning administrator to approve such certificate if the structure or premises, or a part thereof, and the proposed use is found to conform to all the requirements of this chapter. If it is reported to the city that a use requiring a certificate of occupancy exists in any structure and no certificate has been issued, it shall be the duty of the zoning administrator to investigate and require a certificate. The zoning administrator may request a review of the application for a certificate of occupancy by the planning commission in order to determine if the contemplated use is in accordance with this chapter. Applications for a certificate of occupancy shall be made at the time of applying for a building permit in the office of the division of inspections. If no building permit is required, then such application shall be made before any use or occupancy is begun, changed or extended. 
(b)  The procedures to obtain a certificate of occupancy are as follows: 
(1)  The applicant for a certificate of occupancy shall present the case of the applicant on a form obtainable in the division of inspections or department of public works. 
(2)  The applicant shall apply to the office of the zoning administrator for approval of the use. 
(3)  The applicant shall apply to the fire marshal for approval. 
(4)  After all required inspections have been made and reported, and after a determination has been made that the granting of a permit is warranted, the director of public works shall enter approval for issuance of a permit by the building official. 
(5)  The applicant shall be notified by the division of inspections by phone or regular mail of the approval or rejection of the certificate. Once approved, the certificate shall be obtained at the office of the division of inspections, within ten days of notification. The division of inspections shall enforce any violations of this subsection. 
All complaints to the city or information that a person or other, occupying space in a structure and not having a certificate of occupancy as required under section 48-57, shall first be investigated by the zoning administrator and made to comply with this section. 
(c)  On all new or altered commercial structures, the application shall be accompanied by a plot plan in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual location, shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon or to be changed in its use, in whole or in part, the shapes, sizes and location of any buildings already on the lot, and the exact location, size and height of each proposed building, including any building on adjacent property having a bearing on the matter. Any other information necessary to the enforcement of this chapter shall also be shown on such application and/or plan. In the case of proposed uses which are subject to the site plan provisions of article V, division 7 of this chapter, no separate plot plan is required. The requirements for a plot plan will be satisfied by the nine copies of the site plan required to be submitted in accordance with article V, division 7 of this chapter. One copy of the approved plan shall be returned to the applicant when approved by the zoning administrator. The division of inspections shall issue the final approved certificate when inspection has shown compliance with all the requirements of this Code and that the fees have been paid to the city treasurer. 
(Code 1973, § 81-12; Code 1982, § 38-7(c); Ord. No. 894) 
Sec. 48-59. - Fees. 
    A fee shall be charged for each original certificate of occupancy, in an amount to be determined from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1973, § 81-12; Code 1982, § 38-7(d); Ord. No. 894) 
Sec. 48-60. - Building permits. 
    All work, uses, repairs or changes that are required to obtain a building permit by the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code or similar regulating authority shall obtain zoning approval by the zoning administrator prior to the issuance of the permit by the building official. 
(Code 1973, § 81-12; Code 1982, § 38-7(e); Ord. No. 894; Ord. No. 1872, 3-12-2012) 
Sec. 48-61. - Right of entry of city officials. 
    The zoning administrator or the building inspector, or any authorized person so designated, upon proper identification, shall have the right to enter premises for the purpose of making an inspection or acquiring information to determine whether or not the premises and use of premises conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 81-12; Code 1982, § 38-7(f); Ord. No. 894) 
Sec. 48-62. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to locate, erect, construct, reconstruct, enlarge, change, maintain, or use any building or land in violation of any regulation in this chapter, or of any certificate of occupancy issued, hereunder. Any owner or agent of the owner, person, tenant or corporation violating any regulations in, or any provision of, this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of section 33-9 and the penalties found in section 33-10. No provision herein shall be construed to allow the imposition of civil penalties: (i) for activities related to land development; or (ii) for violation of any provision of a local zoning ordinance relating to the posting of signs on public property or public rights-of-way. 
(b)  Exception. The zoning administrator is authorized to seek the penalties provided in section 1-12 for violation of sections 48-58, 48-60 and sections. 48-1134 through 48-1150, after a notice to comply has been sent to the property owner or the occupant of the property and the violation remains uncorrected. 
(Code 1973, § 81-12; Code 1982, § 38-7(g); Ord. No. 894; Ord. No. 1872, 3-12-2012) 
Sec. 48-63. - Prevention of violations. 
    Nothing in this chapter is intended to prevent or to substitute for any legal or equitable remedies, otherwise provided by law to the city, or to property owners or other citizens, which might afford relief in the prevention or abatement of violations of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 81-12; Code 1982, § 38-7(h); Ord. No. 894) 
Secs. 48-64-48-84. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 48-85. - Power to amend. 
    In accordance with provisions of chapter 17 of the City Charter, the council may, by ordinance, amend, supplement or repeal from time to time any of the provisions of this chapter, or the boundary or classification of any district established hereunder. Any such change may be initiated on its own motion, or on recommendation of the planning commission, or on petition of the owner of record of the subject property, executors, administrators, assigns, contract owners, trustees or, in the event of corporate ownership, by a duly designated officer and the petition shall be duly acknowledged before some officer authorized to take acknowledgment of deeds. 
(Code 1973, § 81-6; Code 1982, § 38-4(a); Ord. No. 796; Ord. No. 886; Ord. No. 894; Ord. No. 1092, 1-14-1985; Ord. No. 1332, 11-12-1990; Ord. No. 1468, 3-14-1994; Ord. No. 1616, 7-13-1998; Ord. No. 1695, 3-26-2001; Ord. No. 1734, 5-12-2003) 
Charter reference- Amendment of regulations, §§ 17.10-17.14. 
State Law reference- Notice of amendments, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2204-15.2-2207. 
Sec. 48-86. - Procedure. 
(a)  Before adopting any proposed amendment, supplement or change to this chapter, the city council shall refer it to the planning commission for a recommendation. The planning commission shall hold at least one public hearing on such matter prior to making a recommendation to the city council. The commission shall provide advertising, written notice and posting of the public hearing in accordance with subsections (c), (d) and (e) of this section. 
(b)  The city council shall also hold at least one public hearing on such matter. The council shall provide advertising and posting of the public hearing in accordance with subsections (c) and (e) of this section. In adopting or rejecting an ordinance to amend, supplement or change these regulations, or the boundaries or classification of any district, the council shall act in accord with the applicable sections of chapter 17 of the City Charter. 
(c)  The subject of the public hearing need not be advertised in full, but may be advertised by reference. Every such advertisement shall contain a reference to the place within the city where copies of the proposed ordinances or amendments may be examined. 
(d)  The planning commission shall not recommend nor the city council adopt any ordinance or amendment until notice of intention so to do has been published once a week for two successive weeks in some newspaper published or having general circulation in the city; provided, that such notice for both the commission and the council may be published concurrently. Such notice shall specify the time and place of hearing at which persons affected may appear and present their views, not less than six days nor more than 21 days after the second advertisement shall appear in such newspaper. The commission and council may hold a joint public hearing after public notice as set forth hereinabove. If such joint hearing is held, then public notice as set forth in this subsection need be given only by the council. The term "two successive weeks," as used in this section, shall mean that such notice shall be published at least twice in such newspaper, with not less than six days elapsing between the first and second publication. 
(e)  When a proposed amendment of this chapter involves a change in the zoning classification of 25 or less parcels of land, then, in addition to the advertising as required in this section, written notice shall be given by the planning commission at least ten days before its hearing to the owners, the owner's agent or the occupant of each parcel involved, and to the owners, agent or the occupant of all property within 150 feet, including property immediately across the street or road from the property affected. Notice shall also be given to the owner, the owner's agent or the occupant of all property within 150 feet, including property immediately across the street from the property affected which lies in an adjoining county. The measurement of the 150-foot requirement, as specified in this subsection, shall not include the width of public streets or rights-of-way. Notice sent by certified mail to the last known address of such owner, as shown on the current real estate tax assessment books, shall be deemed adequate compliance with this requirement. If the hearing is continued, notice shall be remailed. Whenever the notices required hereby are sent by an agency, department or division of the city, such notices may be sent by first class mail; provided that a representative of such agency, department or division shall make affidavit that such mailings have been made and file such affidavit with the papers in the case. 
(f)  When a proposed amendment of this chapter involves a change in any district boundary, 15 days' notice of the public hearing shall be given by conspicuous notices posted along the boundary lines of any land involved. 
(Code 1973, § 81-6; Code 1982, § 38-4(b); Ord. No. 796; Ord. No. 886; Ord. No. 894; Ord. No. 1092, 1-14-1985; Ord. No. 1332, 11-12-1990; Ord. No. 1468, 3-14-1994; Ord. No. 1616, 7-13-1998; Ord. No. 1695, 3-26-2001; Ord. No. 1734, 5-12-2003) 
Charter reference- Amendment of regulations, §§ 17.10-17.14. 
State Law reference- Notice of amendments, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2204-15.2-2207. 
Sec. 48-87. - Application requirements for amendment to zoning district map. 
    All applications for amendments to the zoning district map shall be filed on forms provided by the city and shall include the following: 
(1)  Three copies of a certified plat of the subject property with the boundaries outlined in red. The certified plat shall show: 
a.  Metes and bounds of all property lines and of each zoning district. 
b.  Total area of property presented in acres. 
c.  Scale and north arrow. 
d.  Location of all existing buildings and structures. 
e.  Names and route numbers of all boundary roads or streets, and the width of existing rights-of-way. 
f.  Name and certificate number of person preparing the plat. 
(2)  Three copies of a legal description of the property, including metes and bounds of each zoning district proposed. 
(3)  Three copies of a written statement of justification, dated and signed. 
(4)  Preliminary survey documents. An accurate survey of existing features on and around the site, as provided for in section 48-1135. 
(Code 1973, § 81-6; Code 1982, § 38-4(c); Ord. No. 796; Ord. No. 886; Ord. No. 894; Ord. No. 1092, 1-14-1985; Ord. No. 1332, 11-12-1990; Ord. No. 1468, 3-14-1994; Ord. No. 1616, 7-13-1998; Ord. No. 1695, 3-26-2001; Ord. No. 1734, 5-12-2003) 
Charter reference- Amendment of regulations, §§ 17.10-17.14. 
State Law reference- Notice of amendments, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2204-15.2-2207. 
Sec. 48-88. - Conditional zoning. 
(a)  As a part of the petition to amend the official zoning district map, reasonable conditions as authorized by Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2286 may be proffered voluntarily by the property owner. Once proffered and accepted as part of an amendment to the official zoning district map, such conditions shall continue in effect until a subsequent amendment changes the zoning of the property covered by such conditions. However, such conditions shall continue if the subsequent amendment is part of a comprehensive implementation of new or substantially revised zoning ordinances. 
(b)  Twenty copies of a conceptual development plan shall be submitted with information set forth in this subsection; provided that such conceptual development plan or any element thereof need not be submitted if the planning commission has determined that such plan or element is not necessary for the adequate review of the rezoning application, and that such development as proposed upon rezoning generates no significant adverse impact upon the community or upon the public facilities available to the property. If the applicant places any proffers or conditions, as provided for in this section, on or in the generalized development plan, such proffered conditions shall be clearly identified as such. Such conceptual development plan shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Topography with a minimum contour interval of five feet. 
(2)  A schematic land use plan, at an appropriate scale, showing the proposed traffic circulation plan including major streets and major pedestrian, bike and/or bridle paths; all proposed major open space areas; the approximate location of all proposed community and public facilities and the proposed plan for all major sanitary sewer and storm drainage improvements; and a schedule showing the number of parking spaces provided and the number required. 
(3)  A delineation of those general areas that have scenic assets or natural features deserving of protection and preservation, and a statement of how such will be accomplished. 
(4)  A statement explaining the relationship of the development to the adopted master plan. 
(5)  A statement and visual presentation of protection of adjacent and neighboring properties from any adverse effects generated by the proposed development; to include vehicular access and site circulation plans; proposed measures of perimeter landscape screening; a minimum ten-foot-wide buffer area generally located between the screening and the proposed use or building in the development; dimensions and treatment of all peripheral yards that will be provided for the site, and other necessary mitigating measures. The buffer shall contain screening elements at least six feet in height consisting of either a masonry wall, a combined earthen berm and dense landscaping, a solid wood fence, or a combination of any of these screening elements. 
(6)  A statement setting forth the maximum height of all proposed buildings in the development, and the general location of all those buildings where the height is proposed to exceed 40 feet. 
(7)  A statement setting forth the maximum gross floor area and floor area ratio proposed for all uses other than residential. 
(8)  A statement or presentation setting forth the maximum number of dwelling units proposed and the density. 
(9)  A statement certifying that the proposed development conforms to the provisions of all applicable ordinances, regulations and adopted standards. Any waiver, exception or variance sought by the applicant from such ordinances, regulations and standards shall be specifically noted on the development plan. 
(10)  A statement of those special amenities that are proposed within the development. 
(11)  A statement of the public improvements, both on site and off site, that are proposed for dedication and/or construction, and an estimate of the timing of providing such improvements. 
(12)  Any additional information that the applicant may desire to proffer in the consideration of the application. 
(c)  All data containing proffered conditions shall be submitted in writing or by use of demonstrative materials. Such data shall be filed with the planning department not less than 28 days prior to the scheduled date of the public hearing before the planning commission. 
(d)  All written proffers shall be filed in triplicate, and all plans, profiles, elevations and other illustrative materials containing proffered conditions shall be filed in 20 copies, and shall be presented on a sheet having a maximum size of 24 inches by 36 inches. If prepared on more than one sheet, match lines shall clearly indicate where the several sheets joint. 
(e)  All statements, plans, profiles, elevations and other demonstrative materials containing proffered conditions shall become part of the record of the public hearing on the application for an amendment to the zoning district map; any model shall be accompanied by eight inches by ten inches clear photographs showing a top view, an isometric view and each side view of the model. 
(f)  All statements, plans, profiles, elevations and other demonstrative materials containing proffered conditions shall clearly indicate what is being proffered, in the event that a single document contains both proffered conditions and other data not included in the proffer. 
(g)  Each separate statement, plan, profile, elevation or other demonstrative material containing a proffered condition shall bear the following statement, signed by the applicant and the owner of the subject property: "I hereby proffer that the development of the subject property shall be in strict accordance with the conditions set forth in this submission." 
(h)  Proffered conditions shall be interpreted to include written statements, development plans, profiles, elevations and/or demonstrative materials. The applicant shall be responsible for proffering conditions in a clear and understandable manner and for providing demonstrative material if needed to understand the implications of each proffered condition. 
(i)  Once proffered conditions are filed as required in subsection (b) of this section, no additional proffered condition shall be made prior to the planning commission's public hearing on the subject application. Any substantive change in the proffer filed at the planning commission's public hearing may result in continuance of the public hearing in order to provide time for review by the commission and other interested parties. 
(j)  Should additional or modified conditions be proffered at the council's public hearing, which conditions were not proffered at the planning commission's public hearing, the application shall be the subject of another public hearing before the planning commission, and subsequently, before the council. 
(k)  If the amendment to the official zoning district map is adopted by the city council subject to the conditions proffered by the applicant and owner as set forth above, then the property in question shall be appropriately annotated on the zoning district map referencing the conditions as adopted. 
(l)  Such conditions shall become a part of the zoning regulations applicable to the property in question, unless subsequently changed by an amendment to the zoning district map, and such conditions shall be in addition to the specific and general regulations set forth in this chapter for the zoning district in question. 
(m)  Upon approval of an application and proffered conditions, any site plan, subdivision plat or development plan thereafter submitted for the development of the property in question shall be in substantial conformity with all proffered statements, plans, profiles, elevations, or other demonstrative materials, and no development shall be approved by any city official in the absence of such substantial conformity. 
(n)  For the purposes of this section, the term "substantial conformity" shall mean that level of conformity which leaves a reasonable margin for adjustment due to final engineering data, but which conforms with the general nature of the development, the specific uses and the general layout depicted by the plans, profiles, elevations and other demonstrative materials presented by the applicant. 
(o)  Once conditions have been approved and there is cause for an amendment which would not be in substantial conformity with the proffered conditions, then an application shall be filed for an amendment. The planning commission may waive any submission requirement for zoning map amendments, if such requirements are not necessary for an adequate review of the request to modify an approved condition. However, all such applications shall be subject to the public hearings required hereinabove. 
(Code 1973, § 81-6; Code 1982, § 38-4(d); Ord. No. 796; Ord. No. 886; Ord. No. 894; Ord. No. 1092, 1-14-1985; Ord. No. 1332, 11-12-1990; Ord. No. 1468, 3-14-1994; Ord. No. 1616, 7-13-1998; Ord. No. 1695, 3-26-2001; Ord. No. 1734, 5-12-2003) 
Charter reference- Amendment of regulations, §§ 17.10-17.14. 
State Law reference- Notice of amendments, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2204-15.2-2207. 
Sec. 48-89. - Repeat petitions. 
    When the council has finally adopted or rejected an ordinance to amend, supplement, or change these regulations, or the boundaries or classification of any district, or when an applicant withdraws his application following planning commission recommendation, the council shall not be required to consider another petition requesting substantially the same change until at least one year has elapsed. 
(Code 1973, § 81-6; Code 1982, § 38-4(e); Ord. No. 796; Ord. No. 886; Ord. No. 894; Ord. No. 1092, 1-14-1985; Ord. No. 1332, 11-12-1990; Ord. No. 1468, 3-14-1994; Ord. No. 1616, 7-13-1998; Ord. No. 1695, 3-26-2001; Ord. No. 1734, 5-12-2003) 
Charter reference- Amendment of regulations, §§ 17.10-17.14. 
State Law reference- Notice of amendments, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2204-15.2-2207. 
Sec. 48-90. - Special exception. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to provide procedures and criteria for city council approval of special exceptions as permitted within the zoning districts. 
(b)  In accord with the provisions of chapter 17 of the city Charter, the city council may provide for the regulation and restriction of the use of land, buildings and structures in the respective zoning districts of the city. The city council may also exercise its discretion by allowing for special exceptions to specific regulations and restrictions of the designated zoning districts of the city. 
(c)  All applications for special exceptions shall result in development that promotes the health, safety, and welfare of persons living and working in the area. 
(d)  The intent of this subsection is to allow for the consideration of all opportunities available to add to the office, retail, hotel, and other commercial uses in the city. Residential uses will be considered if they contribute significant positive net revenue benefits to the city and build community. Review of proposals will be guided by the needs of the city, market and economic conditions, and special characteristics of the parcel being considered. These special exceptions applications will be evaluated using the following primary and secondary criteria. The primary criteria are essential to the character and well-being of the city, whereas the secondary criteria are discretionary in nature. 
(1)  Primary criteria: 
a.  The resulting development conforms to the city's adopted comprehensive plan and design guidelines; 
b.  The resulting development provides for significant net new commercial square footage and allows for a mix of commercial and residential uses; 
c.  The resulting development produces substantial positive net new commercial and residential revenue to the city; 
d.  The resulting development in which 75 percent or more of its residential units qualify as affordable housing for low and moderate income purchasers or renters may be exempted from primary criteria contained in subsections (d)(1)b and c of this section. 
(2)  Following the evaluation of applications using the primary criteria in subsection (d)(1) of this section, the following secondary criteria will be applied: 
a.  The resulting development is not disproportionate to surrounding land uses and planned land uses in size, bulk, or scale; 
b.  The resulting development does not overburden the existing community facilities, including the school, transportation, and water and sewer systems; 
c.  The resulting development provides community benefits, such as affordable housing, as it is described in article VII of this chapter; 
d.  The resulting development contributes to a vibrant, pedestrian-oriented environment, both on site and in relation to adjoining properties, with street level activity throughout the day and evening; 
e.  The resulting development offers creative use of landscaping, open space and/or public parks, public plazas, and walkways connecting to adjoining properties; 
f.  The resulting development provides a variety of commercial services and products that are attractive to and meet the needs of all city residents for entertainment, art, recreation, dining, retail, and an array of consumable goods; 
g.  The resulting development encourages local or independent businesses; 
h.  The resulting development provides for a reduction of single-use parking requirements through the use of shared parking; 
i.  The resulting development encourages multi-modal transportation through design and other techniques, to reduce the reliance on single-occupancy vehicles, and utilizes sheltered stops for mass transit whenever feasible; and 
j.  The resulting development utilizes (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) LEED criteria in the design of the project. 
(e)  Special exceptions for cottage housing development will be evaluated using the following criteria that are considered essential to the character and well-being of the city: 
(1)  The cottage housing development provides an age-restricted community, as provided for under the Federal Housing for Older Persons Act of 1995, as amended from time to time; 
(2)  The cottage housing development provides a coordinated site design that encourages social interaction, minimizes the amount of impervious surfaces, and promotes low impact development; 
(3)  The cottage housing development includes community amenities for its residents such as common open space, community buildings and connectivity to surrounding areas that provides for neighborhood interaction, security, and a sense of community; 
(4)  The cottage housing development contributes to the neighborhood by including design details that provides a visual connection between the development and the surrounding neighborhood; 
(5)  The cottage housing development meets the standards for Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) silver certification or an equivalent residential green building certification program in the design of the project. If LEED certification is used, it should incorporate SITES (sustainable landscape) criteria to the extent practical; and 
(6)  The entire site area of a cottage housing development is located within 500 linear feet of a designated revitalization area. 
(f)  As a part of a petition for a special exception, the city council may impose conditions, as deemed necessary in the public interest to ensure compliance with the provisions in section 48-85. The city manager, or designee, shall lead the negotiation of conditions for the special exception. 
(g)  Development phasing, as presented in the phasing plan, shall be governed by the development conditions stated in the resolution. 
(h)  No occupancy permit shall be issued for any special use until the applicant has complied with all conditions. 
(i)  A special exception will expire within 36 months of the date of approval, if either the use or any new proposed construction is not commenced within such 36-month time period. 
(j)  Process. The process for making application for a special exception is as follows: 
(1)  Each application for a special exception shall be made to the planning director by the property owner, contract purchaser, or lessee. At the time of application, the applicant shall pay a fee in accordance with a schedule established by the city council. 
(2)  Each application for a special exception shall be reviewed by staff. Following the initial staff review, the public hearing process shall proceed as described in section 48-86. 
(3)  Application requirements. Each application for a special exception shall include: 
a.  A conceptual development plan, prepared at a scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet; 
b.  Location and dimensions of the lot lines and rights-of-way; 
c.  Locations and dimensions of all structures and proposed uses within structures, driveways, curb cuts, and parking and loading spaces and aisles; 
d.  Sketch of architectural elevations of each facade indicating the height of the structures, architectural style, and building materials; 
e.  Statement regarding the impacts on existing community facilities, including the transportation, schools, and water and sewer systems; 
f.  Statement regarding conformance with the city's adopted comprehensive plan and design guidelines; 
g.  Statement and data regarding the projected net revenues from the project for special exceptions described in subsection (d); 
h.  Additional materials, as determined by the planning director, such as a fiscal impact assessment, traffic impact assessment, massing model, cross section drawing, or any other materials may be required to evaluate the proposal; 
i.  Statement explaining how the application meets the criteria described in subsections (d)(1) and (2) of this section, or subsection (e), as applicable; and 
j.  A phasing plan, if applicable. 
(k)  Requests for special exceptions shall be considered following a review and report from the city manager and city attorney of all state statutes referencing municipality's granting of special exceptions prior to city council consideration. 
(l)  Requests for special exceptions may be granted in whole, granted in modified form, or denied by the city council after considering the requirements listed in subsection (j)(3) of this section. 
(Code 1973, § 81-6; Code 1982, § 38-4(f); Ord. No. 796; Ord. No. 886; Ord. No. 894; Ord. No. 1092, 1-14-1985; Ord. No. 1332, 11-12-1990; Ord. No. 1468, 3-14-1994; Ord. No. 1616, 7-13-1998; Ord. No. 1695, 3-26-2001; Ord. No. 1734, 5-12-2003; Ord. No. 1822, 8-11-2008; Ord. No. 1966, 2-13-2017) 
Charter reference- Amendment of regulations, §§ 17.10-17.14. 
State Law reference- Notice of amendments, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2204-15.2-2207. 
Sec. 48-91. - Fees. 
    A filing fee, as may be determined from time to time by resolution of the council, shall be charged for accepting any petition for a zoning amendment, supplement or change. 
(Code 1973, § 81-6; Code 1982, § 38-4(g); Ord. No. 796; Ord. No. 886; Ord. No. 894; Ord. No. 1092, 1-14-1985; Ord. No. 1332, 11-12-1990; Ord. No. 1468, 3-14-1994; Ord. No. 1616, 7-13-1998; Ord. No. 1695, 3-26-2001; Ord. No. 1734, 5-12-2003) 
Charter reference- Amendment of regulations, §§ 17.10-17.14. 
State Law reference- Notice of amendments, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2204-15.2-2207. 
Secs. 48-92-48-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - OFFICIAL DESIGNS 

Sec. 48-111. - Power to prepare. 
    The planning commission may prepare and recommend to the council an official design for any area of the city located in the O-D district and containing a minimum area of not less than five acres. Such official design may show the proposed use and development of land within the area, the location, height, area, bulk, size, design, use and appearance of buildings, arrangement of open spaces, location are arrangement of driveways, walkways and vehicular parking areas, and such other matters as will produce an orderly, harmonious and appropriate development of the area with due regard to its special characteristics and peculiar suitability for particular uses. In addition to the uses permitted in article IV, division 13 of this chapter, other uses may be permitted by such design as may be appropriate to the general character of development proposed for the area. 
(Code 1973, § 81-8; Code 1982, § 38-5(a)) 
Sec. 48-112. - Procedure. 
    Before recommending any official design to the council, the planning commission shall hold a hearing thereon, the time and place of which shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least 15 days in advance. A postcard notice of such hearing shall be mailed 15 days in advance to the owner of each property within the area, as shown on the records of the commissioner of revenue. Upon receipt of the planning commission's recommendation, the council may adopt the official design by resolution, provided the area lies within an O-D, official design district shown upon the official zoning district map. 
(Code 1973, § 81-8; Code 1982, § 38-5(b)) 
Sec. 48-113. - Effect of adoption. 
    From and after the time of adoption of an official design as provided herein, and its incorporation into the master plan of the city as required by the Charter, no structure shall be erected or built, and no existing structure shall be moved, altered or enlarged, nor shall any land be used, within the area covered by such design, except in conformity with such design. 
(Code 1973, § 81-8; Code 1982, § 38-5(c)) 
Secs. 48-114-48-139. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - NONCONFORMING USES 

Sec. 48-140. - Intent. 
    It is the intent of this division that nonconforming uses are inconsistent with the purpose of this chapter. They are recognized and permitted to continue only because they are antecedent to the chapter, that they are restricted closely, and that although they may be continued, they shall not be enlarged or extended. 
(Code 1973, § 81-10; Code 1982, § 38-6(a); Ord. No. 1191, 6-22-1987; Ord. No. 1686, 8-14-2000) 
Sec. 48-141. - Continuation. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, any lawful use, building or structure existing at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this division is derived may be continued, even though such use, building or structure may not conform to the provisions for the district in which it is located. Such use, building, or structure shall be deemed a nonconforming use. 
(Code 1973, § 81-10; Code 1982, § 38-6(b); Ord. No. 1191, 6-22-1987; Ord. No. 1686, 8-14-2000) 
Sec. 48-142. - Limitations. 
    Nonconforming uses or buildings shall not be enlarged, extended, reconstructed, substituted or structurally altered, except when required to do so by law or order, unless the use is changed to a use permitted in the district in which it is located, except as follows: 
(1)  Extension. Any such use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this division is derived, but may not be extended to occupy any land outside such building. The nonconforming use of land may not be extended. 
(2)  Replacement. If any building in or on which a nonconforming use is maintained is moved for any distance whatsoever, or if such building is removed or demolished, or if such building is damaged by fire, flood, storm or any means whatsoever to an extent equal to 75 percent of its assessed value for the year in which such damage occurs, the right of such assessed value for the year in which such damage occurs, the right of such nonconforming use to continue shall cease at the time of such moving, removal or damage and no further use shall be made of the property, except as permitted in the district in which it is located. 
(3)  Extension of a residential structure in the R-1A, R-1B, or R-C district. In an R-1A, R-1B, or R-C district, where an existing residential structure is nonconforming with respect to any current setback requirement, a structural addition which would occupy a required side and rear yard setback area may be approved by the zoning administrator; provided that: 
a.  No portion of the addition would be closer to a front or side lot line than the existing structure; 
b.  No portion of the addition would be less than ten feet from a side lot line in an R-1A district, less than seven feet from a side lot line in an R-1B district, or less than ten feet from the side or rear perimeter setback line for the R-C district; and 
c.  No portion of the addition would extend from the existing structure toward the required rear yard a distance greater than 15 feet in the R-1A and R-1B districts. 
However, the zoning administrator may deny such application and refer the application to the board of zoning appeals for consideration of a variance, as set forth in section 48-172(3); when, in the judgment of the zoning administrator, the application presents an unusual or peculiar circumstance such as the configuration of the lot, topography, safety, or other conditions which would adversely affect neighboring properties. 
(Code 1973, § 81-10; Code 1982, § 38-6(c); Ord. No. 1191, 6-22-1987; Ord. No. 1686, 8-14-2000) 
Sec. 48-143. - Discontinuance. 
(a)  Any building, structure or premises where a nonconforming use has ceased for one year or more shall not again be put to a nonconforming use. 
(b)  All nonconforming uses of land not involving any building or structure having an assessed value of more than $500.00, and all nonconforming buildings and structures having an assessed value of not more than $500.00 each, and all signs, billboards and commercial advertising structures may be continued for a period of two years after the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived, after which time they shall be made to conform to the provisions of this chapter or shall be removed. 
(c)  Any other nonconforming use in an R district which is first permitted in a B-2, B-3, or M-1 district, or which is not permitted in any district, may be continued for a period of ten years after the adoption hereof; except, where the building inspector finds that a nonconforming use is located in a building of less than 30 years of age, or substantial alteration has taken place at least to the extent that the value of the alteration was 25 percent of the assessed value of such building at the time of alteration, then the nonconforming use may be continued until the building becomes 30 years old, or until 30 years from the date of completion of such alteration shall have elapsed, after any of which the nonconforming use shall cease. 
(Code 1973, § 81-10; Code 1982, § 38-6(d); Ord. No. 1191, 6-22-1987; Ord. No. 1686, 8-14-2000) 
Secs. 48-144-48-169. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Board of zoning appeals, §§ 17.15-17.23. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Board of zoning appeals, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2308-15.2-2314. 

Sec. 48-170. - Establishment and composition. 
    The board of zoning appeals, established as provided by law, shall have the powers and duties prescribed by law. The board of zoning appeals (hereinafter called "the board") shall elect one of its members chair and one vice-chair, and shall appoint a secretary. The chair, or, in absence of the chair, the vice-chair may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. 
(Code 1973, § 81-20; Code 1982, § 38-8) 
State Law reference- Appointment, membership, officers, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2308B, C. 
Sec. 48-171. - Meetings; quorum; minutes; voting; rules. 
    All meetings of the board shall be public. The presence of three members shall be necessary for a quorum. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, including a full record of its findings and showing the vote of each member on every question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating that fact. The board may, from time to time, adopt such rules as it may deem necessary in order to carry into effect the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 81-21; Code 1982, § 38-9) 
Sec. 48-172. - Powers. 
    In accordance with the chapter 17 of the City Charter, the board shall have the powers hereinafter set forth: 
(1)  Judicial. The board shall have the power to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination by the administrative officer in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Interpretation of map. The board shall have the power to hear and decide applications for interpretation of the official zoning district map, where there is any uncertainty as to the location of a district boundary. Where the actual street or lot layout differs from the layout indicated on such map, the board, after notice to the owners of the property and after public hearing, shall interpret the map in such a way as to carry out the intent and purpose of this chapter for the particular section or district in question. 
(3)  Extension of a residential structure in the R-1A or R-1B district. In an R-1A, R-1B, or R-C district, where an existing residential structure is nonconforming with respect to any current setback requirement and the provisions of subsection 48-142(3) do not apply, the board may grant a variance for a structural addition which would occupy a required setback area based upon consideration of peculiar circumstances such as configuration of the lot, interior circulation, existing utilities serving the structure, existing driveways, topographic features, and similar existing conditions, provided that no portion of the addition would encroach further into the required setback area than the existing structure. 
(4)  Public buildings, utilities and services. The board shall have the power, upon application, to permit the use of land or the construction or use of buildings or structures, in any district, by any agency of the city, county, state or United States, when reasonably necessary in the public interest; provided that such construction or use shall adequately safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the occupants of the adjoining and surrounding property, shall not unreasonably impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, shall not increase congestion on the streets and shall not increase public danger from fire or otherwise effect public safety. 
(5)  Special use permits. 
a.  With the exception of a drive-through and drive-through facilities, which shall be regulated as provided for in section 48-867, the board shall have the power to hear and decide applications for such special use permits as are authorized by this chapter. 
b.  In considering an application for a special use permit, the board shall give due regard to the nature and condition of all adjacent uses and structures, and the probable effect upon them of the proposed use. The board shall also take into account the proposed special characteristics, design, method of operation, effect on traffic conditions, or any other aspects of the particular use or structure. If it should find, after the hearing and after considering the report of the planning commission, that the proposed establishment or use will not adversely affect the peace, health or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood, nor be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood, but will be in accordance with the general purpose and objectives of the land use plan and other parts of the official master plan, and of this chapter, the board may authorize the issuance, by the zoning administrator, of a special use permit. In those instances where the board finds that the proposed use may be likely to have an adverse effect as above, the board shall determine whether such effect can be avoided by the imposition of any special requirements or conditions with respect to location, construction, equipment, maintenance or operation, in addition to those expressly stipulated in this chapter for the particular use. If such determination is in the affirmative, the board may authorize the issuance of a special use permit and shall stipulate the requirements or conditions which apply, which requirements and conditions shall be indicated on an approved copy of the plans attached to the permit, or shall be recorded by such other method as may be appropriate; but if such determination is in the negative, the permit shall be denied. The board may require satisfactory evidence and guarantee or bond that the conditions stipulated will be and will continue to be complied with. 
(6)  Variances. The board shall have the power, upon application, to grant variations in any of the regulations prescribed by this chapter, in individual cases where a property owner can show that the property was acquired in good faith and where by reason of the exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of the property at the time of the effective date of the ordinances from which this chapter is derived, or where by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary or exceptional situation, the strict application of the terms of this chapter would actually prohibit or would unreasonably restrict the use of the property, or where the board is satisfied, upon the evidence heard by it that the granting of such variation would alleviate a clearly demonstrable hardship approaching confiscation, as distinguished from a special privilege or convenience sought by the owner; provided, that all variations granted shall be in harmony with the intent, spirit and purpose of this chapter. In granting a variation, the board may attach such conditions regarding the location, character or other features of the proposed building, structure or use as it may deem advisable in the interest of the furtherance of the purpose of this chapter. This provision shall not be construed to permit the board, under the guise of a variance, to change the use of the land. 
(7)  Issuance and expiration. 
a.  Any special use permit or variance may be authorized and issued for either a limited or an indefinite period of time, subject in any case to lapse if not implemented within one year, except as provided in subsections (7)b. and c. of this section, and shall be revocable by the board at any time for failure to adhere to the applicable conditions. Before revoking any such permit or variance, however, the board shall conduct a public hearing, after giving the grantee at least ten days' written notice of the time and place of such hearing. 
b.  Any special use permit or variance which has not been implemented within one year of issuance shall lapse and become void except as provided in subsection (7)c. of this section. A special use permit or variance shall be deemed to have been implemented when substantial construction is started, if it related to construction of a building or facility, or when initiated, if it related to a use involving no construction. 
c.  The zoning administrator may, upon written application by the grantee, authorize one extension, for a period not to exceed 12 months, of a permit or variance that has not been implemented within the initial one-year period; provided that the failure to implement has been due to causes beyond the control of the grantee and provided that the application for the extension is made within 90 days before the expiration of the initial one-year period of validity. 
(Code 1973, § 81-22; Code 1982, § 38-10; Ord. No. 742; Ord. No. 1191, 6-22-1987; Ord. No. 1365, 6-24-1991; Ord. No. 1686, 8-14-2000; Ord. No. 1865, 8-8-11) 
State Law reference- Powers and duties of boards of zoning appeals, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2309. 
Sec. 48-173. - Procedure on applications and appeals. 
(a)  Applications. An application to the board for a variance, special use permit, interpretation of map, or any other action in which the board has original jurisdiction under these provisions, may be made by any property owner, tenant, government official, department head, board, commission or bureau. Such application shall be made to the zoning administrator on forms provided for that purpose, in accordance with rules which shall be adopted by the board. All information required by such forms, or otherwise required by the board in order that it might be fully informed, shall be furnished by the applicant. The zoning administrator shall ensure that the matter is placed promptly on the docket of the board, that a public hearing is held not less than 15 days after it has been properly advertised, and that written notice of such hearing is given to the parties in interest. The zoning administrator shall also transmit a copy of the application to the planning commission, so the commission may send a recommendation to the board from the standpoint of any related master plan or other city planning considerations. No application shall be transmitted to either the board or commission until it has been given the necessary study by and includes the recommendations of all the appropriate department heads and/or other agencies. In respect to applications for special use permits, the planning commission shall send a recommendation to the board of zoning appeals, and the board shall not take action on the matter until it has received such recommendation from the commission. 
(b)  Appeals. An appeal to the board may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any officer, department, board, commission or agency affected by any decision of the zoning administrator relative to the administration of this chapter. An appeal shall be taken within such reasonable time as shall be prescribed by the board by general rule, by filing with the zoning administrator and with the secretary of the board a notice of appeal specifying the grounds. The zoning administrator shall transmit to the board all the records upon which the appeal action is based. An appeal stays all compliance with the action being appealed, unless the zoning administrator certifies to the board that by reason of stated facts a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, compliance shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board or by a court of record, on application and on notice to the zoning administrator and on due cause shown. 
(c)  Action by the board. The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an application or appeal, shall give public notice, as well as written notice to the parties in interest and shall decide the issue within a reasonable time. In exercising its powers, the board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify, the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed, and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as should be made and to that end shall have all the powers of the zoning administrator. The concurring affirmative vote of three members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the zoning administrator or to decide in favor of the applicant in any matter in which it has original jurisdiction. The board shall act by formal resolution which shall set forth the reason for its decision and the vote of each member participating, all of which shall be spread upon its records and shall be open to public inspection. The board may, upon the affirmative vote of three members, reconsider any decision; provided there is new evidence to be presented which could not reasonably have been presented at the original hearing. Every decision of the board shall be based on sworn testimony or on first-hand knowledge, which finding of fact shall be reduced to writing and included in the record. 
(d)  Notification and advertising. At least one public hearing shall be held by the board of zoning appeals on each application or appeal brought before it. The board of zoning appeals shall provide advertising of the public hearing as is required of the planning commission in section 48-86(c). 
(e)  Written notification. In addition to the advertising as required in subsection (d) of this section, written notice shall also be given by the board of zoning appeals, at least ten days before its hearing, to the owners, their agent or the occupant of all abutting property and property immediately across the street or road from the affected property for applications for sign variances and to owner or owners, their agent or the occupant of all properties within 100 feet of the affected property for applications for all other matters. Notice shall also be given to the owners, the agents of the owners, or the occupants of all abutting property and property immediately across the street or road from the affected property, which lies in an adjoining county. 
(f)  Notice by first class mail; affidavit. Whenever the notices required by this section are sent by an agency, department, or division of the city, such notice may be sent by first class mail; provided that a representative of such agency, department or division shall make affidavit that such mailings have been made and file such affidavit with the papers in the case. 
(Code 1973, § 81-24; Code 1982, § 38-11; Ord. No. 1092, 1-14-1985) 
State Law reference- Applications for special exceptions and variances, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2310; appeals to board, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2311; procedure on appeal, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2312, 15.2-2313. 
Sec. 48-174. - Appeals to the court. 
    Any person or any public official, board, bureau, department, commission or agency, affected by any decision of the board, may appeal such decision to a court of appropriate jurisdiction, upon such grounds and in such manner, as provided by the City Charter. 
(Code 1973, § 81-26; Code 1982, § 38-12) 
State Law reference- Certiorari to review decisions of board, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2314. 
Sec. 48-175. - Fees. 
    The zoning and land development permits, applications and reviews found in this chapter shall be subject to the schedule of fees found in chapter 15, "Fees". 
(Code 1973, § 81-28; Code 1982, § 38-13; Ord. No. 1831, 5-26-2009; Ord. No. 1863, 5-9-2011) 
Secs. 48-176-48-203. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DISTRICTS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Zoning power, § 17.10. 
State Law reference- Authority to establish districts and regulations, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2280. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 48-204. - Division of city into districts. 
    For the purposes of this article, the city is hereby divided into districts as follows: 
R-1A, Low density residential district 
R-1B, Medium density residential district 
R-C, Cluster residence district 
R-TH, Townhouse residence district 
R-M, Multifamily residential district 
T-1, Transitional district 
T-2, Transitional district 
B-1, Limited business district 
B-2, Central business district 
B-3, General business district 
M-1, Light industry district 
O-D, Official design district 
FP, Floodplain district 
HCC, Historic and cultural conservation district 
(Code 1973, § 81-30; Code 1982, § 38-14; Ord. No. 666) 
Sec. 48-205. - District boundaries and map. 
(a)  The boundaries of the several districts created herein are hereby established as shown on the official zoning district map of the city, which map and all the notations, references and other matters shown thereon shall be and are hereby made a part of this chapter. Such map, properly signed and attested, shall be and remain on file in the office of the zoning administrator, and a certified copy shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  The district boundaries shown on the official zoning district map are intended to follow lot lines, property lines, or street centerlines or alleys as they existed at the time of adoption of the ordinances from which this chapter is derived. Except, where a district boundary obviously does not follow any such line, and is not defined by dimensions or other means, it shall be determined by scaling. 
(c)  In case any territory has not been clearly included within one or more of the districts established herein, or in case any territory is annexed to or otherwise becomes a part of the incorporated area of the city, such territory shall be deemed to be classified in the R-1A district, until otherwise classified by amendment as provided herein. 
(d)  The official zoning district map shall show by an appropriate symbol on the map the existence of conditions attaching to the zoning on the map. The zoning administrator shall keep in his office and make available for public inspection a conditional zoning index. The index shall provide ready access to the ordinance creating the conditions which apply to the property in question, in addition to the specific and general regulations set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 81-31; Code 1982, § 38-15; Ord. No. 894) 
Secs. 48-206-48-233. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - R-1A, LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 48-234. - Intent. 
    The R1-A, low density residential district shall be comprised generally of land designated for low-density residential use on the adopted master plan. This district is created for the purposes of maintaining the single-family residential character of the city, preserving the integrity of residential neighborhoods, meeting the residential needs of the population, preserving attractive residential open space and providing space for natural landscaping. 
(Code 1973, § 81-32; Code 1982, § 38-16(a); Ord. No. 789; Ord. No. 908; Ord. No. 987, 11-9-1981; Ord. No. 1039, 2-28-1983; Ord. No. 1084, 10-9-1984; Ord. No. 1142, 6-23-1986; Ord. No. 1338, 12-10-1990; Ord. No. 1632, 2-8-1999; Ord. No. 1721, 6-10-2002; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 1792, § 38-16, 8-14-2006) 
Sec. 48-235. - Principal uses permitted by right. 
    Principal uses permitted by right in the R-1A, low density residential district are as follows: 
(1)  One-family dwellings. 
(2)  Churches, parish houses, parochial schools and similar religious facilities. 
(3)  Public parks, playgrounds, community centers, libraries, museums and schools and similar public facilities. 
(4)  Water and sewage pumping stations and water supply reservoirs owned by the city or a public water authority. 
(5)  Gardens. 
(6)  Group homes for no more than eight individuals as defined in section 48-2. 
(Code 1973, § 81-32; Code 1982, § 38-16(b); Ord. No. 789; Ord. No. 908; Ord. No. 987, 11-9-1981; Ord. No. 1039, 2-28-1983; Ord. No. 1084, 10-9-1984; Ord. No. 1142, 6-23-1986; Ord. No. 1338, 12-10-1990; Ord. No. 1632, 2-8-1999; Ord. No. 1721, 6-10-2002; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 1792, § 38-16, 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 1911, 11-25-2013; Ord. No. 1991, 12-18-2018) 
State Law reference- Special use permit for certain residential uses prohibited, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2288.1; group homes, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2291; family day homes, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2292. 
Sec. 48-236. - Conditional uses permitted by special use permit. 
    Conditional uses permitted by special use permit in the R-1A, low density residential district are as follows: 
(1)  Private schools, special schools or day care facilities complying with the provisions of the state code. 
(2)  Telephone exchanges and other public utility buildings and structures necessary to the furnishing of service in the vicinity, but not public business offices and storage, repair or maintenance buildings or yards. 
(3)  Private clubs, lodges, and recreational or community facilities, none of which shall be of commercial nature. 
(4)  Cemeteries. 
(5)  Hospitals for human care. 
(6)  Residential institutions, including, but not limited to, rest homes, nursing homes, convalescent homes, orphanages and similar uses, except a secure or detention facility, which shall mean a public or private locked residential facility which has construction fixtures designed to prevent escape and to restrict the movement and activities of persons held in lawful custody. 
(7)  Amateur radio or amateur television stations or citizens band transmitters, except any transmitters that cause radio or television interference off the property within normal bands of FM or AM commercial broadcasting. 
(8)  Museums, other than those permitted by right. 
(9)  Group homes, not otherwise permitted by right above. 
(10)  Major home occupation as an accessory use to a one-family dwelling. 
(11)  An accessory dwelling unit, in strict accordance with the following requirements and consistent with the public health, safety and welfare: 
a.  Either the accessory dwelling unit or the principal dwelling unit shall be occupied by an owner. In the event the occupying owner dies, the special use permit for the accessory unit shall expire 180 days from the date of the owner's death, unless within this 180-day period the new owner also occupies the accessory unit or the principal dwelling and states in writing to the zoning administrator that the new owner wants to continue the accessory unit under the terms of the existing permit. 
b.  In the event the occupying owner vacates the premises, the special use permit for the accessory dwelling unit shall expire 90 days from the date on which the owner vacates the premises. 
c.  When title to the property changes hands, the special use permit for the accessory dwelling unit shall expire 90 days from the date on which title changes hands, unless within this 90-day period the new owner also occupies the accessory unit or the principal dwelling and states in writing to the zoning administrator that he wants to continue the accessory unit under the terms of the existing permit. 
d.  Only one accessory dwelling unit shall be permitted per principal dwelling unit. 
e.  The habitable floor area of the accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed one-half the habitable floor area of the principal dwelling unit. 
f.  One off-street parking space shall be required for each accessory dwelling unit in addition to the parking required for the principal dwelling unit, except stacked parking spaces shall be permitted. In the event the principal dwelling has no off-street parking, the principal dwelling shall be brought into conformance with the existing parking requirements. 
g.  No new exterior entrance shall be installed on the same plane as an existing door on any side of a structure which faces a public street, unless it provides needed access for a handicapped occupant. 
h.  No above grade exterior stairs more than five feet in height shall be constructed to accommodate either dwelling unit; however, belowgrade stairwells shall be permitted. 
i.  All minimum lot area and maximum lot coverage requirements for the district in which the principal dwelling unit is located shall be met. 
The plans for each accessory dwelling unit shall be reviewed and the site of the proposed unit shall be inspected by the city prior to approval, for compliance with city ordinances pertaining to construction, plumbing, wiring, fire safety and the like. The maximum number of persons permitted to occupy the accessory dwelling shall be determined by the building inspector, based upon the occupancy limits of applicable housing codes, and made a part of the special use permit. Prior to occupancy of the accessory dwelling unit a certificate of occupancy shall be issued, following inspection of the structure by the appropriate city agencies. The term of each special use permit shall be three years. At the end of this period the permission to use the property as an accessory dwelling unit shall cease unless a new permit is granted. A new permit for three years shall be granted by the zoning administrator following notification of adjacent property owners if, and only if, the ordinance permitting accessory dwelling units is still in effect, all its requirements are being met, all activity and use of the property is in compliance with all other applicable city ordinances, and to the knowledge of the zoning administrator, there are no material complaints about the accessory dwelling unit or possible violation of the existing special use permit. In the event there are material complaints or possible violations, the zoning administrator shall not grant a new permit but instead he shall schedule a hearing before the board of zoning appeals. The hearing and authority of the board of zoning appeals shall be the same as in the issuance of all other special use permits. Notice of the hearing shall be provided in the same manner as with all other special use permits. 
(12)  Satellite television antenna or ground-mounted conventional television or radio antenna, as permitted and regulated in article V, division 9 of this chapter. 
(13)  A bed and breakfast establishment in accordance with the following requirements and consistent with the public health, safety and welfare: 
a.  The bed and breakfast establishment shall be permitted in a single-family home that shall be located on a state-classified principal or minor arterial street, as identified in the comprehensive plan and/or a single-family home that shall be a designated structure under the historical and cultural conservation district. 
b.  The home shall be at least 2,500 square feet in size. 
c.  No more than five rented rooms shall be permitted. 
d.  No more than two adult occupants shall be permitted per room, but there are no limitations on minor children. 
e.  The habitable floor area of the bed and breakfast establishment, excluding the kitchen facilities, shall not exceed one-half the habitable floor area of the principal dwelling unit. 
f.  One off-street parking space shall be required for each bed and breakfast bedroom in addition to the parking required for the principal dwelling unit. Stacked parking spaces shall be permitted 
g.  Parking shall be screened from adjacent residential uses. 
h.  One sign, not exceeding three square feet, consistent with section 48-1264(a)(4) shall be permitted. 
i.  Breakfast shall be the only meal served. 
j.  Maximum length of stay shall be limited to 14 days in any 30-day period. 
k.  The owner/operator shall keep a guest register including the names, addresses and states of occupancy of all guests. 
l.  The home shall be occupied by an owner. In the event the occupying owner dies, the special use permit for the bed and breakfast establishment shall expire 180 days from the date of the owner's death, unless within this 180-day period the new owner also occupies the home and states in writing to the zoning administrator that he wants to continue the bed and breakfast use under the terms of the existing permit. 
m.  One employee, other than resident family members, may be permitted. 
n.  When the ownership of the property changes, the special use permit shall expire 90 days from the date on which ownership changes, unless within this 90-day period the new owner also occupies the home and states in writing to the zoning administrator that the new owner wants to continue the bed and breakfast establishment under the terms of the existing permit. 
o.  The plans for each bed and breakfast establishment shall be reviewed and the site of the proposed unit shall be inspected by the city prior to approval, for compliance with city ordinances pertaining to construction, plumbing, wiring, fire safety, solid waste, utilities, fire suppression, and the like. 
p.  The maximum number of persons permitted to occupy the bed and breakfast establishment shall be determined by the building official, based upon the occupancy limits of applicable housing codes. 
(Code 1973, § 81-32; Code 1982, § 38-16(c); Ord. No. 789; Ord. No. 908; Ord. No. 987, 11-9-1981; Ord. No. 1039, 2-28-1983; Ord. No. 1084, 10-9-1984; Ord. No. 1142, 6-23-1986; Ord. No. 1338, 12-10-1990; Ord. No. 1632, 2-8-1999; Ord. No. 1721, 6-10-2002; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 1792, § 38-16, 8-14-2006) 
State Law reference- Special use permit for certain residential uses prohibited, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2288.1, group homes, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2291; family day homes, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2292. 
Sec. 48-237. - Permitted accessory uses. 
    Permitted accessory uses in the R-1A, low density residential district are as follows: 
(1)  Private parking and parking of noncommercial private vehicles incidental to the principal use; parking of commercial vehicles, as defined in section 20-14, while actually loading or unloading and parking of commercial vehicles incidental to repairs or alterations actually in progress at the time of such parking; provided, however, nothing contained here shall prohibit the parking of one commercial vehicle in a garage; and provided further that the space in any garage of one- or two-car capacity may be rented to nonresidents of the property for garaging of noncommercial private motor vehicles, or not more than one commercial vehicle. Vehicle use areas shall comply with article V, division 2 of this chapter. 
(2)  Private swimming pools and tennis courts, when fenced or screened from adjacent properties. 
(3)  Any artificial outdoor light source and accompanying structural support. All light sources and structural supports existing, installed or maintained shall be subject to regulation by chapter 14, article IV, pertaining to outdoor lighting. 
(4)  Private gardens, decks, terraces, greenhouses, storage buildings, garages, air conditioning units, heat pumps, canopies, and similar uses and structures. 
(5)  Minor home occupations. 
(6)  Child care in the home, other than child care activities controlled by the state code or by chapter 8 of this Code. 
(7)  Electric and telecommunications equipment designed for residential service. 
(8)  Solar energy equipment designed to serve the premises only. 
(Code 1973, § 81-32; Code 1982, § 38-16(d); Ord. No. 789; Ord. No. 908; Ord. No. 987, 11-9-1981; Ord. No. 1039, 2-28-1983; Ord. No. 1084, 10-9-1984; Ord. No. 1142, 6-23-1986; Ord. No. 1338, 12-10-1990; Ord. No. 1632, 2-8-1999; Ord. No. 1721, 6-10-2002; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 1792, § 38-16, 8-14-2006) 
Sec. 48-238. - Conditions applying to permitted uses. 
    Conditions applying to permitted uses in the R-1A, low density residential district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum lot area. 
a.  For one-family dwellings: 11,250 square feet. For a pipestem lot, the minimum required lot area shall be calculated by excluding any portion of the lot between the front lot line and the building setback line which is less than 30 feet in width, the width being determined by a line which is perpendicular to any side lot line. Only two new pipestem lots shall be permitted to be subdivided from any existing lot. 
b.  For all other uses except major home occupations, 20,000 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width. 
a.  For one-family dwellings: 75 feet. Any pipestem lot used for a dwelling shall be at least 15 feet in width, between the front lot line and the building setback line; provided, however, that the 15-foot-wide area required herein may be shared equally by two adjacent pipestem lots. 
b.  For all other uses, 100 feet. 
(3)  Minimum yard requirements. 
a.  For one-family dwellings: 30 feet for front yard, 15 feet for side yard and 40 feet for rear yard, for all lots except pipestem lots. For a pipestem lot, each minimum required yard shall be equal either to the abutting minimum required yard for a one-family dwelling on the abutting property or to the minimum yard required by these regulations, whichever is greater. 
b.  For all other principal or conditional uses: 30 feet for front yard, 25 feet for side yard, and 40 feet for rear yard. 
c.  For buildings containing only accessory uses: 30 feet for front yard, three feet for side yard, and three feet for rear yard. 
d.  One-family dwellings shall be located so that the front of the dwelling is oriented toward the front setback and street; the side of the dwelling toward the side setback and the rear of the dwelling toward the rear setback. The planning commission may grant a waiver to this provision, if such a waiver is based on a finding of compatibility with surrounding properties. 
(4)  Maximum building height. 
a.  For residential use: the lesser of 35 feet or 21/2 stories. 
b.  For all other principal or conditional uses: the lesser of 45 feet or three stories. 
c.  For buildings containing only accessory uses: 12 feet, except as permitted by the HCC district subsection 48-792(6). 
(5)  Maximum lot coverage by all buildings. 
a.  For residential use: 25 percent. 
b.  For other uses: 30 percent. 
(6)  Maximum impervious lot coverage shall be 35 percent, subject to the following provisions: 
a.  Maximum impervious coverage limits in this section shall be applied and enforced by the zoning administrator only when a grading plan is required pursuant to chapter 35 of the City Code. 
b.  For purposes of calculating impervious lot coverage, uncovered driveways, walks and patios using pervious materials shall be reduced by up to 25 percent of the entire pervious surface area. 
(Code 1973, § 81-32; Code 1982, § 38-16(e)(1)-(5); Ord. No. 789; Ord. No. 908; Ord. No. 987, 11-9-1981; Ord. No. 1039, 2-28-1983; Ord. No. 1084, 10-9-1984; Ord. No. 1142, 6-23-1986; Ord. No. 1338, 12-10-1990; Ord. No. 1632, 2-8-1999; Ord. No. 1721, 6-10-2002; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 1792, § 38-16, 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 1915, 3-24-2014) 
Sec. 48-239. - Supplementary regulations. 
    Principal and conditional uses in the R-1A, low density residential district shall comply with the applicable standards contained in and article V, division 8 of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 81-32; Code 1982, § 38-16(e)(6); Ord. No. 789; Ord. No. 908; Ord. No. 987, 11-9-1981; Ord. No. 1039, 2-28-1983; Ord. No. 1084, 10-9-1984; Ord. No. 1142, 6-23-1986; Ord. No. 1338, 12-10-1990; Ord. No. 1632, 2-8-1999; Ord. No. 1721, 6-10-2002; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 1792, § 38-16, 8-14-2006) 
Sec. 48-240. - Additional requirements. 
    For additional requirements as to height, lot, yard, and related regulations in the R-1A, low density residential district, see article V, division 6 of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 81-32; Code 1982, § 38-16(e)(7); Ord. No. 789; Ord. No. 908; Ord. No. 987, 11-9-1981; Ord. No. 1039, 2-28-1983; Ord. No. 1084, 10-9-1984; Ord. No. 1142, 6-23-1986; Ord. No. 1338, 12-10-1990; Ord. No. 1632, 2-8-1999; Ord. No. 1721, 6-10-2002; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 1792, § 38-16, 8-14-2006) 
Sec. 48-241. - Special exceptions. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to help address the changing composition of households in the city and to provide more diverse housing choices for different segments of the population in the city, and to allow high quality infill development that serves these different needs, but is compatible with surrounding areas and existing neighborhoods because it is more dense but reduced in bulk. Cottage development is planned, through unified control of the entire site, to provide benefits to the residents through community amenities, and a sense of community through design of buildings and the site, including common open space, and parking areas. To achieve these purposes, the city council may, where it finds the following requirements and standards are met and that a need exists for housing for a particular population, approve a special exception to allow cottage development as described in section 48-90 of this chapter. 
    Where a cottage development is proposed, to be developed under unified control, through ownership or a condominium association, homeowners' association or similar mechanism, and meets the following requirements, it may be approved by city council. 
(1)  The site area is at least 45,000 square feet (equivalent of four R-1A lots), and any lot divisions within the site are removed by subdivision within 90 days or such other reasonable amount of time as is approved by city council. In the event the applicant fails to consolidate the lots on the site within the time required by city council, any cottage development approval shall be null and void. 
(2)  The proposed development has a density of no more than the amount of the total site size divided by 10,000 multiplied by two. Only whole units, rounded down, permitted by the calculation may be constructed. Example for a site totaling 45,000 square feet: 45,000 ÷ 10,000 = 4.5 x 2.0 = 9; however, for 48,000 square feet: 48,000 ÷ 10,000 = 4.8 x 2.0 = 9.6, which allows nine units. No more than 18 dwelling units may be constructed in a single cottage housing development. 
(3)  The site is not occupied by any structure that has been designated as an historic structure pursuant to city Code section 48-788, unless final approval for the demolition or razing of such structure has been approved pursuant to the city Code and Virginia law. 
(4)  Dwelling units shall be detached, except that two dwelling units in any proposed cottage development may be constructed as semi-detached, after city council finds that including such semi-detached units will better serve the purposes of cottage development as set forth above. Every dwelling unit shall have a maximum gross floor area of 1,000 square feet on the main level and may include one upper level of no more than 50 percent of gross floor area of main level. The square feet of required porches shall not be included in the floor area calculation. 
(5)  No building in the proposed development will exceed 11/2 stories or be more than 25 feet in height. No basement or crawl space with an average floor to ceiling height of more than 41/2 feet in height will be permitted. 
(6)  Each dwelling unit shall be equipped with sprinklers or otherwise equipped with a fire suppression system approved by the fire marshal as adequate to suppress a fire. 
(7)  Lot coverage. The cottage housing development shall have a maximum building coverage of 25 percent and a maximum impervious surface coverage of 35 percent. Up to an additional five percent of building coverage may be approved where solar or green roof components are incorporated in the development, and such roof components occupy an area that is at least equal to the area of additional building coverage. 
(8)  Low impact design. All roof gutters and parking area runoff shall discharge into rain barrels, vegetated swales, underground storage containers, rain gardens, or other preferable infiltration-based or retention-based systems, designed and sized appropriately to capture, at a minimum, the first inch of rainfall and to prevent runoff to a public street or an abutting property. Additional, low impact development techniques, including but not limited to, pervious paving in parking area and/or walkways, and green or living roofs should be used. In addition, developers are encouraged to incorporate net zero energy impact elements as much as possible. 
(9)  The proposed development will provide a variety of building designs through building elements, features and treatments. The following building design requirements must be met, at a minimum: 
a.  Each dwelling unit shall have a porch with a length that is at least 50 percent of the length of the façade along which it runs and a minimum depth out from that wall of five feet. Porches may be roofed and screened, but shall not be enclosed by walls or glass windows. 
b.  Street facing facades and those facing common or community areas shall avoid blank walls and incorporate one or more of the following: 
1.  Changes in exterior material and paint color; 
2.  Windows which may include bay windows; and/or 
3.  Building modulation with a depth measuring at least one foot. 
(10)  Units and other buildings shall be oriented toward each other or a common area as far as reasonably practicable so as to create a sense of community. 
(11)  The proposed development shall provide community amenities for use by all residents in the development, as follows: 
a.  A minimum of 400 square feet of common open space per dwelling unit is required. Parking areas, yard setbacks, spaces between buildings of 12 feet or less in width, private open space, and driveways do not qualify as common open space. 
b.  If the proposed development includes a guest house, club house or similar structure ("community building"), such community building shall be available for the common use of all residents within the development. Community buildings may include a meeting room, guest room (which shall not include the kitchen facilities) for stays of 14 days or less, or kitchen facilities to facilitate social functions of the association owners. A community building that is available to all residents shall not be counted as a dwelling unit and no guest staying there shall be a city resident by virtue of staying there. 
c.  The proposed development shall have sidewalks along all public streets adjacent to the development where sidewalks presently exist on the same side of the block or where safety considerations such as significant vehicular traffic or the need for safe pedestrian pathways to nearby public uses require them, such as schools, churches, parks, public transportation stops, and shopping; and a system of interior walkways that connects each cottage to the others and the parking area, and to the sidewalks abutting adjacent public streets, where applicable. 
(12)  The cottage housing development shall comply with zoning ordinance sections 48-1147 and 48-1149 or provide similar assurance, approved by city council, that the site and all landscape will be maintained. The development shall also comply with section 48-1180 for tree canopy coverage. 
(13)  The proposed development shall provide vehicle access and parking as follows: 
a.  Vehicle access to the site shall be by no more than two driveways, each of which has a curb cut not less than 20 feet wide. Vehicle access within the site shall be by a private driveway or street not less than 20 feet in width and constructed of materials sufficient to bear the weight of emergency vehicles. No parking or other obstructions may be allowed on such private streets, which shall meet requirements of the fire marshal for additional width and vehicle access to accommodate emergency vehicles. 
b.  Off-street parking shall be provided as follows: at least one parking space per dwelling unit plus 0.25 spaces per dwelling unit for guest use. 
c.  Vehicle parking shall be clustered in one or two locations and screened from adjacent properties and public streets as described below in minimum yard requirements. 
d.  All streets in the development shall be private and shall be maintained by the association or other owner. 
e.  All vehicle parking generated by the site shall be hosted entirely on the site. 
f.  The site shall include authority for the police department, at its option, to enforce no parking on any private street within the development. 
(14)  Minimum yard requirements. 
a.  The cottage housing development shall provide a common area landscape buffer not less than 20 feet in depth adjacent to the public street from which it is accessed, and from abutting properties by a common area landscape buffer not less than ten feet in depth, and containing such trees, shrubs, plantings and/or fences as necessary to satisfy the provisions of section 48-1183 for buffer types A or B. No drive aisles, roads, vehicle parking or buildings shall be located within the required landscape buffers. 
b.  For dwellings units and community buildings (i.e., community guest houses, club houses): 20 feet from a public right-of-way, ten feet from a side property line, 20 feet from a rear property line; provided however, that where the cottage housing development site is adjacent to a residential zoning district, side yard setbacks for dwelling units or community buildings shall be increased from ten to 15 feet to provide sufficient space for the landscape buffer. Semi-detached dwelling units shall be treated as one structure for the purpose of establishing minimum yard requirements. Distances between dwelling and structures shall meet all applicable requirements in fire and life safety codes. 
c.  Projections into yards: Bay windows, box windows, chimneys and similar architectural features, and cantilevers not more than one-third of the wall length may project not more than three feet into any required yard. Stoops, porches, decks and patios may be provided as shown, with dimensions and locations, on a site plan approved by the planning commission. 
(15)  Accessory structures. 
a.  Detached garages are not permitted except when provided in a common area other than the required perimeter landscape buffer, either as part of the approved site plan or when added later by way of a site plan amendment. 
b.  Garages shall not be converted to any use other than vehicle storage. 
(16)  Neither detached sheds, nor other accessory structures are permitted, unless used by the association. 
(17)  Interior fences shall be no taller than 36 inches. 
(b)  In order to achieve the purposes set forth above, and/or enable a proposed development to meet the criteria of this section 48-241, the city council may modify other requirements of this division 2, section 48-241 for the cottage development. 
(c)  The city council may approve a cottage development where it finds the development, based on the site and building designs, any condominium or homeowner documents or voluntary conditions agreed to by the applicant, and any other materials that are found by the city council reasonably to bind the development into the future, meets the criteria set forth in section 48-90 of this chapter. 
    Be it further ordained that the city adopt the ordinance codified in this section as a pilot program with the following restrictions: a) no more than one special exception may be approved pursuant to this section 48-241 per calendar year; b) applications will be accepted and processed in the order in which complete applications are delivered to the city; no applications will be accepted until prior applications have been withdrawn, approved, or denied; and c) within three years of enactment of the ordinance codified in this section, the city manager will bring to city council an analysis of applications, approvals and projects, with a recommendation for continuation, amendment, or repeal of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1966, 2-13-2017) 
Secs. 48-242-48-258. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - R-1B, MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 48-259. - Intent. 
    The R-1B, medium density residential district shall be comprised generally of land designated for medium density residential use on the adopted master plan. This district is created for the purpose of maintaining the residential character of the city, preserving the integrity of residential neighborhoods, and meeting the residential needs of the population. 
(Code 1973, § 81-34; Code 1982, § 38-17(a); Ord. No. 987, 11-9-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1039, 2-28-1983; Ord. No. 1261, 4-25-1989; Ord. No. 1632, 2-8-1999; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 1792, § 38-17, 8-14-2006) 
Sec. 48-260. - Principal uses permitted by right. 
    Principal uses permitted by right in the R-1B, medium density residential district are as follows: 
(1)  Any principal use permitted in the R-1A district. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings. 
(Code 1973, § 81-34; Code 1982, § 38-17(b); Ord. No. 987, 11-9-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1039, 2-28-1983; Ord. No. 1261, 4-25-1989; Ord. No. 1632, 2-8-1999; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 1792, § 38-17, 8-14-2006) 
Sec. 48-261. - Conditional uses permitted by special use permit. 
    Conditional uses permitted in the R-1B, medium density residential district are as follows: 
(1)  Any conditional use permitted in the R-1A district. 
(2)  Accessory dwelling units which are subject to the same provisions set forth in the R-1A district, and to an additional provision requiring a minimum lot area of 10,000 square feet. 
(3)  Prenatal and early infant care counseling and support facility provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  The use must be immediately across a public street from property zoned T-1. 
b.  The building shall have the appearance of a single-family, detached dwelling and be compatible with its immediate surroundings. 
c.  The use shall be at least 300 feet from any other prenatal and early infant care counseling and support use in that residential zone. 
d.  The use shall meet all conditions imposed by the board of zoning appeals, including, but not limited to: 
1.  Parking; its location, which could be off site; and amount of spaces; 
2.  Hours of operation; 
3.  Unusual landscaping requirements for buffering purposes. 
e.  The facility shall be operated by a tax exempt organization as defined in Code of Virginia, § 58.1-3650 et seq., which makes extensive use of volunteers in carrying out its program. 
(Code 1973, § 81-34; Code 1982, § 38-17(c); Ord. No. 987, 11-9-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1039, 2-28-1983; Ord. No. 1261, 4-25-1989; Ord. No. 1632, 2-8-1999; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 1792, § 38-17, 8-14-2006) 
Sec. 48-262. - Permitted accessory uses. 
    Permitted accessory uses in the R-1B, medium density residential district shall be any accessory use permitted in the R-1A district. 
(Code 1973, § 81-34; Code 1982, § 38-17(d); Ord. No. 987, 11-9-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1039, 2-28-1983; Ord. No. 1261, 4-25-1989; Ord. No. 1632, 2-8-1999; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 1792, § 38-17, 8-14-2006) 
Sec. 48-263. - Conditions applying to permitted uses. 
    Conditions applying to permitted uses in the R-1B, medium density residential district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum lot area. 
a.  For one-family dwellings: 7,500 square feet. For a pipestem lot, the minimum required lot area shall be calculated by excluding any portion of the lot between the front lot line and the building setback line which is less than 30 feet in width, the width being determined by a line which is perpendicular to any side lot line. Only two new pipestem lots shall be permitted to be subdivided from any existing lot. 
b.  For two-family dwellings: 12,000 square feet, or a minimum of 6,000 square feet for each dwelling unit. 
c.  For all other uses: 20,000 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width. 
a.  For one-family dwellings: 60 feet. Any pipestem lot used for a dwelling shall be at least 15 feet in width, between the front lot line and the building setback line; provided, however, that the 15-foot-wide area required herein may be shared equally by two adjacent pipestem lots. 
b.  For two-family dwellings: 100 feet. 
c.  For all other uses: 100 feet. 
(3)  Minimum yard requirements. 
a.  For one-family dwellings: 25 feet for front yards, ten feet for side yards and 30 feet for rear yards, for all lots except pipestem lots. For a pipestem lot, each minimum required yard shall be equal either to the abutting property or to the minimum yard required by these regulations, whichever is greater. 
b.  For two-family dwellings: 25 feet for front yards, ten feet for side yards and 30 feet for rear yards, except that a two-family dwelling may be placed on two contiguous lots with the party wall over the common boundary; in this case, the minimum yard requirements shall apply to all yards, except the yards adjacent to the common boundary. 
c.  For all other principal or conditional uses: 25 feet for front yards, 20 feet for side yards and 40 feet for rear yards. 
d.  One-family dwellings shall be located so the front of the dwelling is oriented toward the front setback and street; the side of the dwelling toward the side setback and the rear of the dwelling toward the rear setback. The planning commission may grant a waiver to this provision, if such a waiver is based on a finding of compatibility with surrounding properties. 
(4)  Maximum building height. 
a.  For residential use: the lesser of 35 feet or 21/2 stories. 
b.  For all other principal or conditional uses: the lesser of 45 feet or three stories. 
c.  For buildings containing only accessory uses: 12 feet, except as permitted by the HCC district,. 
(5)  Maximum lot coverage by all buildings. 
a.  For residential use: 25 percent. 
b.  For other uses: 30 percent. 
(6)  Maximum impervious lot coverage shall be 35 percent, subject to the following provisions: 
a.  Maximum impervious coverage limits in this section shall be applied and enforced by the zoning administrator only when a grading plan is required pursuant to chapter 35 of the City Code. 
b.  For purposes of calculating impervious lot coverage, uncovered driveways walks and patios using pervious materials shall be reduced by up to 25 percent of the entire pervious surface area. 
(Code 1973, § 81-34; Code 1982, § 38-17(e)(1)-(5); Ord. No. 987, 11-9-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1039, 2-28-1983; Ord. No. 1261, 4-25-1989; Ord. No. 1632, 2-8-1999; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 1792, § 38-17, 8-14-2006; Ord. No. 1915, 3-24-2014) 
Sec. 48-264. - Supplementary regulations. 
    Principal and conditional uses in the R-1B, medium density residential district shall also comply with the applicable standards contained in section 48-867. 
(Code 1973, § 81-34; Code 1982, § 38-17(e)(6); Ord. No. 987, 11-9-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1039, 2-28-1983; Ord. No. 1261, 4-25-1989; Ord. No. 1632, 2-8-1999; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 1792, § 38-17, 8-14-2006) 
Sec. 48-265. - Additional requirements. 
    For additional requirements as to height, lot, yard, and related regulations in the R-1B, medium density residential district, see article V, division 8 of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 81-34; Code 1982, § 38-17(e)(7); Ord. No. 987, 11-9-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1039, 2-28-1983; Ord. No. 1261, 4-25-1989; Ord. No. 1632, 2-8-1999; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 1792, § 38-17, 8-14-2006) 
Secs. 48-266-48-293. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - R-C, CLUSTER RESIDENCE DISTRICT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Permitted provisions in zoning ordinance, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2286, provisions for cluster housing, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2286.1; special use permit for certain residential uses prohibited, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2288.1. 

Sec. 48-294. - Intent. 
    The R-C, cluster residence district shall be comprised generally of and designated for residence-cluster use on the adopted master plan. This district is created for the purposes of stabilizing and improving the residential character of the city and meeting the residential needs of the population. The cluster residence district is intended to provide for creativity in residential design in a manner that will be compatible with adjacent uses such as detached housing, apartments or commercial developments. The cluster residence district may serve as a transition between commercial and low density residential areas as well as serve as a housing alternative in its own right. Cluster residence developments shall be designed to maximize use of existing trees and to provide convenient parking and common open space for the use of the residents. 
(Code 1973, § 81-35; Code 1982, § 38-18(a); Ord. No. 586; Ord. No. 610; Ord. No. 866; Ord. No. 987, 11-9-1981; Ord. No. 1142, 6-23-1986; Ord. No. 1277, § 2, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004) 
Sec. 48-295. - Principal uses permitted by right. 
    Principle uses permitted by right in the R-C, cluster residence district are as follows: 
(1)  Any principal use permitted and as regulated in the R-1A district. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings, as regulated in this division. 
(3)  Townhouses, as regulated in this division. 
(Code 1973, § 81-35; Code 1982, § 38-18(b); Ord. No. 586; Ord. No. 610; Ord. No. 866; Ord. No. 987, 11-9-1981; Ord. No. 1142, 6-23-1986; Ord. No. 1277, § 2, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004) 
Sec. 48-296. - Conditional uses permitted by special use permit. 
    Conditional uses permitted in the R-C, cluster residence district are as follows: satellite television antenna or ground-mounted conventional television or radio antenna, as permitted and regulated in article V, division 9 of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 81-35; Code 1982, § 38-18(c); Ord. No. 586; Ord. No. 610; Ord. No. 866; Ord. No. 987, 11-9-1981; Ord. No. 1142, 6-23-1986; Ord. No. 1277, § 2, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004) 
Sec. 48-297. - Permitted accessory uses. 
    Permitted accessory uses in the R-C, cluster residence district are the same as any accessory use permitted in the R-1A district. 
(Code 1973, § 81-35; Code 1982, § 38-18(d); Ord. No. 586; Ord. No. 610; Ord. No. 866; Ord. No. 987, 11-9-1981; Ord. No. 1142, 6-23-1986; Ord. No. 1277, § 2, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004) 
Sec. 48-298. - Conditions applying to permitted uses. 
(a)  The minimum gross site area for an R-C, cluster residence district shall be three acres (130,680 square feet) prior to any dedications of property for public use and must have at least one side contiguous to land zoned other than R-1A, R-1B or O-D. An additional area of at least three acres may be added to an existing R-C district, provided such an area is shown for such use on the adopted master plan, and provided it is contiguous to the existing R-C district. The development of the added area shall be compatible with the existing district in terms of architecture, landscape design, and site layout; and shall be compatible in terms of setbacks, landscaping, building heights, and massing of buildings with any adjacent development within an R-1A and R-1B districts. 
(b)  An R-C district shall have at least 50 feet of continuous frontage on a single public street. 
(c)  Development may take place on single lots with one dwelling on each, or as a single parcel, or as a combination of the above, pertaining to owners associations, shall apply to any development involving condominiums, cooperatives, homeowners' associations or other similar forms of common ownership of real property. 
(d)  A maximum density of eight dwellings per acre shall be permitted, based upon the gross site area. 
(e)  Coverage shall include the dwellings and accessory structures and shall not exceed 20 percent of the gross site area, and together with all vehicular parking areas and travelways shall not cover in the aggregate more than 50 percent of the gross site area. 
(f)  All structures shall be sited behind a setback line 25 feet from any public street right-of-way. 
(g)  Side and rear building setbacks on the perimeter of the development shall be at least 20 feet. 
(h)  Dwellings shall have a maximum height of 35 feet and no more than three stories. 
(i)  No individual dwelling shall have a driveway opening directly onto a public street except where such street is a local street, as defined by the major thoroughfare plan, and where such driveway would not be hazardous. 
(j)  Streets within the development shall be public and shall be planned and constructed to meet the minimum public street standards of the city for streets within R-C developments as adopted by the planning commission, unless such requirement is waived by the planning commission. 
(k)  A landscaped strip of at least ten feet in width shall be provided along the side and rear boundaries of the development in accordance with the requirements of article V, division 8. Trees, shrubs, ground cover, a hedge and/or a wall may be required by the planning commission with the advice of the architectural advisory board and the city arborist. The objectives of the landscaping requirement in the R-C district shall be to provide an aesthetically pleasing visual transition from one residential property to another, buffering of lower density districts, buffering and screening of commercial uses, preservation of trees and addition of appropriate shade trees along the street right-of-way. A fenced or walled privacy yard shall not extend into a required landscaped strip. 
(l)  Parking lots shall be screened from public streets and adjacent property in accordance with article V, division 8. 
(Code 1973, § 81-35; Code 1982, § 38-18(e); Ord. No. 586; Ord. No. 610; Ord. No. 866; Ord. No. 987, 11-9-1981; Ord. No. 1142, 6-23-1986; Ord. No. 1277, § 2, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004) 
Secs. 48-299-48-329. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - R-TH, TOWNHOUSE RESIDENCE DISTRICT 

Sec. 48-330. - Intent. 
    The R-TH, townhouse residence district shall be designated exclusively for townhouse dwellings. It is intended to provide an alternative housing style with architectural controls, limited flexibility in site design, and higher densities than permitted in single-family districts. An R-TH district shall be established only on property that has at least one side contiguous to land zoned other than R-1A, R-1B or O-D. 
(Code 1982, § 38-19(a); Ord. No. 1166, 11-24-1986; Ord. No. 1277, § 3, 10-10-1989) 
Sec. 48-331. - Principal uses permitted by right. 
    Townhouse dwellings in the R-TH, townhouse residence district shall be subject to the following criteria: 
(1)  Every townhouse dwelling shall have a minimum lot area of 2,640 square feet. 
(2)  Every lot shall have a minimum width of 24 feet for interior lots and 44 feet for corner lots, and 34 feet for end lots within the interior of a block. 
(3)  The front yard setback shall be no less than 25 feet. 
(4)  The side yard setback for corner lots shall be a minimum of 20 feet. The side yard setback for end lots within the interior of a block shall be a minimum of ten feet. 
(5)  The rear yard shall be no less than 40 feet. 
(6)  All townhouse dwellings, except end dwellings and those on corner lots, shall occupy the full width of the lot. 
(7)  The minimum gross site area shall be three acres (130,680 square feet), prior to any dedications of property for public use. An additional area of at least three acres may be added to an existing R-TH district; provided such an area is shown for such use on the adopted master plan; and provided it is contiguous to the existing R-TH district. The development of the added area shall be compatible with the existing district in terms of architecture, landscape design, and site layout; and shall be compatible in terms of setbacks, landscaping, building heights, and massing of buildings with any adjacent development within an R-1A and R-1B districts. 
(8)  In no case shall the lot coverage, including dwelling and accessory structures exceed 40 percent of the building lot. 
(9)  A common green area may be provided in lieu of a part of the minimum lot area, subject to the following provisions: 
a.  When a common green area is provided, the minimum lot area may be reduced below 2,640 square feet. The reduction in the minimum lot area shall be equal to the total number of square feet in the common green area divided by the number of lots in the project, but in no event may the minimum lot area be reduced below 2,400 square feet. 
b.  Where a common green area is provided, the lot coverage specified in subsection (9) of this section may be increased in proportion to the reduction in the minimum lot area, but in no event may the lot coverage including dwelling and accessory structures exceed 44 percent of the building lot. 
c.  A common green area may be utilized only for lawns, trees, planting areas, ornamental pools, similar landscaping uses and swimming pools. No part of the common green area may be utilized for automobile driveways or parking areas, for sidewalks, for paved play areas, for other similar paved areas, or for buildings of any type. 
d.  Adequate measures, as certified in form and content by the city attorney, must be provided, through deed restrictions or other legally binding arrangements, that ownership of the common green area shall be vested in an association of all of the owners of the townhouses; that it shall remain as a common green area in perpetuity, with suitable restrictions upon its use; and that the necessary funds shall continue to be provided by the owners in perpetuity to cover suitable maintenance of the lawns, trees, shrubs, pools, etc. 
e.  It is the intention of the developers of the project to sell the townhouses individually. 
(10)  Every townhouse dwelling shall have a minimum gross floor area of 1,500 square feet with a minimum of 750 square feet per floor, exclusive of attic and garage, and exclusive of basements which are more than 50 percent underground. 
(11)  Parking spaces for each dwelling may be provided: 
a.  Within the lot with entrance from the front and with at least one of the spaces completely enclosed; 
b.  On a private access road which is not counted as part of the required minimum 2,640 square feet of lot area; or 
c.  Within the lot, with entrance from the rear; provided that an alley used for ingress and egress is not counted as part of the required minimum 2,640 square feet of lot area. 
(12)  Townhouse dwellings abutting each other shall have complementary but not identical facade or treatment of materials, predominantly of brick, natural stone or other approved masonry construction. 
(13)  There shall be at least four but no more than eight townhouse dwellings continuously connected. There shall be an open space of at least 20 feet between any two such groups of continuously connected buildings. 
(14)  No more than two abutting townhouse dwellings shall have the same front yard setbacks. Building setback variations as required shall be at least three feet. Abutting townhouses shall not have a common roofline. 
(15)  Soundproof and fireproof walls shall be provided between adjoining dwellings at least up to and including the underside of the roof, as directed by the division of inspections. 
(16)  Service areas, such as rear yards, visible from a street, must be screened by not less than a five-foot-high wall of material similar to the adjoining dwelling. 
(17)  Each dwelling shall be self-contained as to heating, air conditioning, and utilities. 
(18)  Front yard areas shall be provided with lawn and appropriate shrubbery planting, except on areas designated for walks and driveways. 
(19)  In addition to compliance with the above criteria, townhouse site plans shall be submitted to the planning commission for approval in accordance with article V, division 7 of this chapter. The site plan shall include a landscaping development plan, which, to the greatest extent possible, shall preserve the natural character of the site and preserve as much mature vegetation as possible. 
(20)  The scheme of general development detailed on the approved site plan shall be protected by covenants running with the land as certified in form and content by the city attorney. Such covenants shall vest in the first grantee and inure to the benefit of his heirs, successors or assigns; each of whom shall be specifically eligible to membership in an association of all the owners of townhouses. Such association should address and control matters of common interest including aesthetics and integrity of the common scheme. 
a.  It is not intended, however, that the creation of such association shall provide a means of overriding the desire of any townhouse owner to insist upon perpetuation of the scheme of general development. 
b.  Such scheme of general development may be modified by a decree of a court where such modification is consonant with modifications in the provisions of this division. 
c.  It is specifically intended that such covenants are for the benefit not only of owners of townhouses, but for the city as well, and the city may bring suit to enforce such covenants to maintain and perpetuate the common scheme as depicted on the approved site plan. 
(21)  Townhouse dwellings shall not exceed the lesser of three stories or 35 feet in height. 
(22)  Streets within the development shall be public and shall be planned and constructed to meet the minimum public street standards of the city for streets within R-C developments, as adopted by the planning commission, unless such requirement is waived by the planning commission. 
(23)  A maximum density of ten dwellings per acre shall be permitted, based upon the gross site area. 
(Code 1982, § 38-19(b); Ord. No. 1166, 11-24-1986; Ord. No. 1277, § 3, 10-10-1989) 
Sec. 48-332. - Conditional uses permitted by special use permit. 
    There are no conditional uses permitted by special use permit in the R-TH, townhouse residence district. 
(Code 1982, § 38-19(c); Ord. No. 1166, 11-24-1986; Ord. No. 1277, § 3, 10-10-1989) 
Sec. 48-333. - Conditions applying to permitted uses. 
    There are no conditions applicable to permitted uses in the R-TH, townhouse residence district. 
(Code 1982, § 38-19(d); Ord. No. 1166, 11-24-1986; Ord. No. 1277, § 3, 10-10-1989) 
Sec. 48-334. - Accessory uses permitted. 
    Accessory uses permitted in the R-TH, townhouse residence district are as follows: 
(1)  Gardens (private). 
(2)  Lighting (artificial, outdoor). 
(3)  Parking (off-street, private). 
(4)  Playgrounds (private). 
(5)  Swimming pools (private). 
(Code 1982, § 38-19(e); Ord. No. 1166, 11-24-1986; Ord. No. 1277, § 3, 10-10-1989) 
Sec. 48-335. - Additional requirements. 
    There are no additional requirements applicable to the R-TH, townhouse residence district. 
(Code 1982, § 38-19(f); Ord. No. 1166, 11-24-1986; Ord. No. 1277, § 3, 10-10-1989) 
Sec. 48-336. - Conflicting provisions. 
    The provisions of this division shall not repeal any other section of this chapter; except, in any conflict between any other provision of this chapter and this division, the provisions of this division shall, as applicable to townhouses, govern. 
(Code 1982, § 38-19(g); Ord. No. 1166, 11-24-1986; Ord. No. 1277, § 3, 10-10-1989) 
Secs. 48-337-48-360. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - R-M, MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 48-361. - Intent. 
    This R-M, multifamily residential district shall be comprised generally of land designated for general residential use on the adopted master plan. This district is created for the purposes of maintaining the residential character of the city and meeting the residential needs of the population by providing apartment homes in a variety of sizes, styles, densities and forms of ownership. The multifamily district is intended to provide creativity in residential design, in locations that are near major transportation services, stores, offices and community facilities. 
(Code 1973, § 81-38; Code 1982, § 38-20(a); Ord. No. 987, 11-9-1981; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999) 
Sec. 48-362. - Principal uses permitted by right. 
    Principal uses permitted by right in the R-M, multifamily residential district are as follows: 
(1)  Any principal use permitted and as regulated in the R-1B district. 
(2)  Multifamily dwellings not exceeding three stories in height, as regulated in this section, and provided that the lawn and planting areas shall be designed by a landscape architect registered in the state. 
(3)  Boardinghouses, lodginghouses or roominghouses, as regulated in this division. 
(4)  Mixed-use redevelopment, as permitted and regulated in article V, division 5 of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 81-38; Code 1982, § 38-20(b); Ord. No. 987, 11-9-1981; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999) 
Sec. 48-363. - Conditional uses permitted by special use permit. 
    Conditional uses permitted by right in the R-M, multifamily residential district are as follows: 
(1)  Any conditional use permitted and as regulated in the R-1A district. 
(2)  Multifamily dwellings over three stories in height, but not exceeding six stories or 75 feet, whichever is the lesser; provided, however, that the requirements of section 48-867, supplementary regulations for four- to six-story apartments, in addition to any other requirements which may be stipulated in the special use permit, shall be met. 
(3)  Principal uses permitted in the B-1, limited business district, when conducted only on the basement and/or first floor level of a multifamily dwelling over three stories high, and only when working, access, security, health, and safety requirements can be satisfied. 
(Code 1973, § 81-38; Code 1982, § 38-20(c); Ord. No. 987, 11-9-1981; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999) 
Sec. 48-364. - Permitted accessory uses. 
    Accessory uses in the R-M, multifamily residential district are the same as permitted and regulated in the R-1A district. 
(Code 1973, § 81-38; Code 1982, § 38-20(d); Ord. No. 987, 11-9-1981; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999) 
Sec. 48-365. - Conditions applying to permitted principal uses. 
    Conditions applying to permitted principal uses in the R-M, multifamily residential district are as follows: 
(1)  Minimum lot area. 
a.  For multifamily dwellings: 43,560 square feet. 
b.  For boardinghouses, lodginghouses or roominghouses: 7,500 square feet. 
c.  For all other uses: 20,000 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width. 
a.  For multifamily dwellings: 100 feet. 
b.  For boardinghouses, lodginghouses or roominghouses: 60 feet. 
c.  For all other uses: 100 feet. 
(3)  Minimum yard requirements. 
a.  For multifamily dwellings: 25 feet for front yard, 15 feet for side yard and 40 feet for rear yard. 
b.  For boardinghouses, lodginghouses or roominghouses: 25 feet for front yard, 18 feet for side yard and 30 feet for rear yard. 
c.  For all other uses: 25 feet for front yard, 15 feet for side yard, and 40 feet for rear yard. 
(4)  Maximum building height. 
a.  For multifamily dwelling: the lesser of 35 feet or three stories. 
b.  For boardinghouses, lodginghouses or roominghouses: 35 feet or 21/2 stories. 
c.  For all other uses: 45 feet or three stories. 
(5)  Maximum lot coverage. 
a.  For multifamily dwelling: All buildings, including accessory structures, shall not cover in the aggregate more than 25 percent of the lot area and, together with all vehicular parking areas, loading areas and driveways, shall not cover in the aggregate more than 50 percent of the lot area. 
b.  For boardinghouses, lodginghouses or roominghouses: All buildings including accessory structures, shall not cover in the aggregate more than 25 percent of the lot area. 
c.  For all other uses: All buildings including accessory structures, shall not cover in the aggregate more than 30 percent of the lot area. 
(6)  Maximum density. Minimum lot area per dwelling 1,400 sq. ft.
For multifamily dwellings, maximum density shall vary according to the size of the unit, and shall be calculated based on a minimum lot area per dwelling, as follows: 
Type Unit Lot Area (square feet) Efficiency 1,400 One bedroom 1,800 Two bedroom 2,200 Three bedroom or larger 2,600  
(Code 1973, § 81-38; Code 1982, § 38-20(e); Ord. No. 987, 11-9-1981; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999) 
Sec. 48-366. - Additional requirements. 
    For additional requirements as to height, lot and yard regulations in the R-M, multifamily residential district, see article V, division 6 of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 81-38; Code 1982, § 38-20(7); Ord. No. 987, 11-9-1981; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999) 
Sec. 48-367. - Conflicting provisions. 
    In any conflict between this division and as applies to mixed-use redevelopments, the provisions of article V, division 5 of this chapter shall govern. 
(Code 1973, § 81-38; Code 1982, § 38-20(f); Ord. No. 987, 11-9-1981; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999) 
Secs. 48-368-48-392. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - T-1, TRANSITIONAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 48-393. - Principal uses permitted by right. 
    Principal uses permitted by right in the T-1, transitional district are as follows: 
(1)  One-family dwellings as regulated in the R-1B district. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings as regulated in the R-1B district. 
(3)  Townhouses, as regulated in the R-TH district. 
(4)  Public buildings and facilities. 
(5)  Churches, parish houses, and similar religious facilities. 
(6)  Schools or day care facilities complying with the provisions of the state code. 
(7)  Private, noncommercial clubs, lodges, and recreational or community facilities. 
(8)  Residential institutions. 
(9)  Group homes for no more than eight individuals as defined in section 48-2. 
(10)  Professional offices, including medical and dental. 
(11)  Boardinghouses, lodginghouses, or roominghouses. 
(12)  Inns, bed and breakfasts. 
(13)  Parking lots, subject to site plan review by the planning commission. In transitional districts, parking lots should be designed, landscaped and/or screened in such a way as to minimize excessive traffic in residential areas, glare from headlights, excessive noise, and other concerns as identified by the planning commission. 
(14)  Mixed-use redevelopments, as permitted and regulated in article V, division 5 of this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 38-21(a); Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1559, 11-25-1996; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1991, 12-18-2018) 
Sec. 48-394. - Conditional uses permitted by special use permit. 
    Conditional uses permitted by special permit in the T-1, transitional district are as follows: 
(1)  Group homes, not otherwise permitted by right. 
(2)  Satellite television antenna or ground-mounted conventional television or radio antenna, as permitted and regulated in article V, division 9 of this chapter. 
(3)  Drive aisles and standing spaces associated with drive-through facilities on adjacent parcels. 
(4)  The preparation, processing, assembling, or repair of electronic devices and equipment, including computer systems, communication systems, security systems, fire protection systems, control systems and the like, subject to the requirements established in section 48-487(9); provided that no walk-in retail sales shall be permitted on site. 
(Code 1982, § 38-21(b); Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1559, 11-25-1996; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999) 
Sec. 48-395. - Conditions applying to permitted uses. 
    There are no conditions applicable to permitted uses in the T-1, transitional district. 
(Code 1982, § 38-21(c); Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1559, 11-25-1996; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999) 
Sec. 48-396. - Accessory uses permitted. 
    Accessory uses permitted in the T-1, transitional district are as follows: uses which are customarily accessory and incidental to any permitted principal use, including accessory signs subject to the restrictions in article VI of this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 38-21(d); Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1559, 11-25-1996; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999) 
Sec. 48-397. - Conflicting provisions. 
    In any conflict between this division and article V, division 5 of this chapter, as applies to mixed-use redevelopments, the provisions of article V, division 5 of this chapter shall govern. 
(Code 1982, § 38-21(e); Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1559, 11-25-1996; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999) 
Secs. 48-398-48-422. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - T-2, TRANSITIONAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 48-423. - Principal uses permitted by right. 
    Principal uses permitted by right in the T-2, transitional district are as follows: 
(1)  Public buildings and facilities. 
(2)  Schools or day care facilities complying with the provisions of the state code. 
(3)  Clinics for human care. 
(4)  Churches, parish houses, and similar religious facilities. 
(5)  Professional offices, including medical and dental. 
(6)  Private, noncommercial clubs, lodges, and recreational or community centers. 
(7)  Residential institutions. 
(8)  Group homes for no more than eight individuals as defined in section 48-2. 
(9)  Boardinghouses, lodginghouses, or roominghouses. 
(10)  Inns, bed and breakfasts. 
(11)  Parking lots, subject to site plan review by the planning commission. In transitional districts, parking lots should be designed, landscaped and/or screened in such a way as to minimize excessive traffic in residential areas, glare from headlights, excessive noise, and other concerns as identified by the planning commission. 
(12)  Mixed-use redevelopments, as permitted and regulated in article V, division 5 of this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 38-22(a); Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1559, 11-25-1996; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1991, 12-18-2018) 
Sec. 48-424. - Conditional uses permitted by special use permit. 
    Conditional uses permitted by special use permit in the T-2, transitional district are as follows: 
(1)  Group homes not otherwise permitted by right. 
(2)  Satellite television antenna or ground-mounted conventional television or radio antenna, as permitted and regulated in article V, division 9 of this chapter. 
(3)  Drive aisles and standing spaces associated with drive-through facilities on adjacent parcels. 
(4)  The preparation, processing, assembling, or repair of electronic devices and equipment, including computer systems, communication systems, security systems, fire protection systems, control systems and the like, subject to the requirements established in section 48-487(9); provided that no walk-in retail sales shall be permitted on site. 
(Code 1982, § 38-22(b); Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1559, 11-25-1996; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999) 
Sec. 48-425. - Conditions applying to permitted uses. 
    There are no conditions applying to permitted uses in the T-2, transitional district. 
(Code 1982, § 38-22(c); Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1559, 11-25-1996; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999) 
Sec. 48-426. - Accessory uses permitted. 
    Accessory uses permitted in the T-2, transitional district are as follows: uses which are customarily accessory and incidental to any permitted principal uses, including accessory signs subject to the restrictions in article VI of this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 38-22(d); Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1559, 11-25-1996; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999) 
Sec. 48-427. - Conflicting provisions. 
    In any conflict between this division and article V, division 5 of this chapter as applies to mixed-use redevelopments, the provisions of article V, division 5 shall govern. 
(Code 1982, § 38-22(e); Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1559, 11-25-1996; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999) 
Secs. 48-428-48-452. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - B-1, LIMITED BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 48-453. - Principal uses permitted by right. 
    Principal uses permitted by right in the B-1, limited business district are as follows: 
(1)  Public buildings and facilities. 
(2)  Institutions for human care. 
(3)  Clinics. 
(4)  Hotels, motels. 
(5)  Business and professional offices, including medical and dental. 
(6)  Offices for medical, dental and optical laboratories and offices for operations devoted exclusively to scientific research. 
(7)  Churches, parish houses, and similar religious facilities. 
(8)  Restaurants. 
(9)  Inns, bed and breakfasts. 
(10)  Private, noncommercial clubs, lodges, and recreational or community facilities. 
(11)  Museums. 
(12)  Group homes for no more than eight individuals as defined in section 48-2. 
(13)  Parking lots, subject to site plan review by the planning commission. 
(14)  Schools and day care facilities complying with the provisions of the state code. 
(15)  The following retail business and service establishments, provided that all business, service, fabrication, preparation or processing shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building, and that all goods shall be only for retail sale on the premises: Food stores, beverage stores, drugstores, bakeries, confectioneries, self-service laundries, laundry or cleaning depots, shoe repair shops, barbershops or beauty salons, clothing stores, variety stores, gift shops, studios, banks, antique shops, jewelry stores, florists, photo shop, music stores, bookstores or stationery stores, appliance stores, office equipment stores, furniture stores, hardware stores, garden supply stores, mortuaries, department stores, theaters and any other retail and service uses determined by the zoning administrator to be consistent with uses permitted in this subsection. 
(16)  Mixed-use redevelopments, as permitted and regulated in article V, division 5 of this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 38-23(a); Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1427, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 1439, 5-24-1993; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1531, 12-11-1995; Ord. No. 1536, 2-26-1996; Ord. No. 1541, 3-25-1996; Ord. No. 1557, 10-15-1996; Ord. No. 1561, 12-9-1996; Ord. No. 1583, 7-14-1997; Ord. No. 1627, 9-28-1998; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1695, 3-26-2001; Ord. No. 1734, 5-12-2003; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 1908, 10-28-2013; Ord. No. 1991, 12-18-2018) 
Sec. 48-454. - Conditional uses permitted by special use permit. 
    Conditional uses permitted by special use permit in the B-1, limited business district are as follows: 
(1)  Outdoor display, when incidental to a permitted principal use, subject to the following conditions and any other applicable condition within section 48-172: The purpose of this subsection is to promote pedestrian activity and otherwise enliven the city's commercial districts by permitting outdoor display areas that are accessory to a store's indoor business and that are attractively arranged so as to be appealing to casual shoppers, subject to the following: 
a.  If a site plan is on file for this property, the area permitted for the outdoor use shall be shown on a revised plan; or, alternatively, where there is no site plan on file, a plot plan may be substituted which addresses the information required in sections 48-1136 and 48-1137. 
b.  The appropriateness of the outdoor use shall be determined by such factors as: 
1.  Area and extent of the use compared to the extent of the interior use. 
2.  Type and appearance of structures, if any, to be constructed to shelter the outdoor use. 
3.  Hours of operation of the outdoor use. 
4.  Lighting, noise and other factors affecting adjacent properties. 
(2)  Group homes not otherwise permitted by right. 
(3)  Adult uses, subject to chapter 48, article V, division 10 and chapter 8, article VII. 
(4)  Drug paraphernalia establishments, subject to the following conditions, with it duly noted that nothing contained herein shall be construed in any way to limit the application of any state statute relating to these matters: 
a.  Shall be located 1,000 feet or more from residentially zoned or residentially used property. 
b.  Shall be located 1,000 feet or more from the lot line of any school, church, park or other property used for recreational, public or eleemosynary purposes. 
c.  No two or more locations of these activities shall be closer than 1,000 feet from each other. 
(5)  Amusement arcade, as a principal or accessory use, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  There shall be at least 1,000 feet between the boundaries of such uses. 
b.  Such use shall not be located closer than 1,000 feet to any church or to any school, public or private, that provides education to children under the age of 18, measured from the boundaries of each use. 
c.  Such use shall not be located closer than 100 feet to any R district boundary, unless the entrances and parking area for such use are located on the far side of a building from an R district, such that the building completely blocks the line of sight from the R district to the entrances and parking area for such use. 
d.  Such use shall be operated in accordance with an operations plan approved by the board of zoning appeals which specifies: 
1.  Procedures to preclude gambling, littering and loitering; 
2.  The hours of operations; 
3.  Number of amusement machines; 
4.  Presence of other uses, if any; and 
5.  The number of adult attendants on the site during hours of operation. 
e.  The size of the arcade, the number of amusement machines, presence of accessory uses or activities, if any, and the hours of operation shall be compatible with and shall not adversely affect the adjacent area, the general safety or the public welfare. 
f.  The proposed exterior appearance of the building within which such use is to be located shall be subject to review and recommendation by the architectural advisory board. 
g.  Off-street parking for such use shall be provided in the amount of one space per two amusement machines available for use by patrons. In addition, a secure and convenient bicycle rack shall be provided on the site, unless the amusement machines are not available to persons under the age of 18 years. 
(6)  Dry cleaning or laundry establishment, other than a depot or self-service laundry; provided that: 
a.  The operation of such establishment shall not release hazardous amounts of chemicals into the environment. 
b.  Such establishment shall, in terms of its size and the nature of its operations, be compatible with the uses permitted by right in the district in which it is located. 
(7)  Satellite television antenna or ground-mounted conventional television or radio antenna, as permitted and regulated in article V, division 9 of this chapter. 
(8)  The assembling by solder process of miniaturized computer and communications equipment. 
(9)  Temporary uses, in anticipation of development or redevelopment of permanent improvements in accordance with the adopted master plan, subject to the following conditions, in addition to any other conditions that may be applicable by virtue of article V, division 7 of this chapter: 
a.  The owner or contract-owner (applicant) shall provide with his application, information in writing setting forth the applicant's plans for permanent development. The written statement must also set forth why the proposed temporary use will not impair, impede or delay the plans for permanent development or redevelopment. 
b.  Such temporarily use may include one or more of the following activities, conducted indoors or outdoors: 
1.  Parking lot. 
2.  New vehicle storage lot. 
3.  Nursery. 
4.  Sale of garden and landscape materials. 
5.  Sale of produce and seasonal items, and other similar uses. 
c.  A site plan for the temporary use shall be submitted with the application for special use permit. The planning commission may waive or reduce any of the site improvement requirements set forth in article V, divisions 2 and 7 of this chapter, when such waiver or reduction is deemed necessary. Such waiver or reduction shall be clearly related to the temporary nature of the use and shall not adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare. 
d.  A special use permit for a temporary use as set forth in this subsection may be granted for up to five years. Approval exceeding an 18-month period shall be based on specific site considerations, including the improvements and/or expenditures necessary for the temporary use. Renewals, in increments of up to five years, may be granted by the board of zoning appeals following recommendation by the planning commission. 
(10)  Drive-thru or drive-through facility. For additional supplementary regulations, see section 48-867. 
(11)  Temporary shelters, with the following restrictions: 
a.  Shelters may operate only on nights between November 1 and March 31. 
b.  All persons admitted to shelters must be referred by the intake staff of a licensed county shelter. 
c.  No persons can be admitted to shelters after 9:00 p.m., unless accompanied by a member of the staff of a county shelter or a public human services agency or by a local law enforcement officer; every person in a shelter must leave by 8:00 a.m. 
d.  Transportation by van or other similar means that is sufficient for all persons admitted must be provided both to and from the shelters. 
e.  A total of no more than 30 homeless persons may be served by all shelters in the city on any single night. 
f.  No persons who are under the influence of alcohol or drugs can be allowed in the shelters. 
g.  All health, safety and fire codes must be met. 
h.  Any standards applicable to county shelters with regard to staff/client ratio, level of staff training, procedures for monitoring clients while at the shelter, and resources available for cases of emergency shall also apply as a minimum standard to every shelter in the city. 
(12)  Assisted living facilities. For additional supplementary regulations, see section 48-867. 
(Code 1982, § 38-23(b); Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1427, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 1439, 5-24-1993; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1531, 12-11-1995; Ord. No. 1536, 2-26-1996; Ord. No. 1541, 3-25-1996; Ord. No. 1557, 10-15-1996; Ord. No. 1561, 12-9-1996; Ord. No. 1583, 7-14-1997; Ord. No. 1627, 9-28-1998; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1695, 3-26-2001; Ord. No. 1734, 5-12-2003; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 1846, 6-28-2010; Ord. No. 1908, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 48-455. - Special exceptions. 
    City council may, by special exception, modify the requirements of this division, for the B-1, limited business district to allow: 
(1)  Residential development within mixed-use development projects. The following shall also apply to the residential special exception: 
a.  A height bonus of up to 30 feet may be granted by the city council, if the city council determines that the project is exemplary in terms of conformance with the criteria in subsections 48-90(d)(1) and (2); and the bonus shall significantly assist in conformance with subsections 48-90(d)(2) and (3). Maximum height shall not exceed 85 feet. The height of all structures that abut an R district must be tapered to be compatible with the maximum heights permitted in the abutting R district, taking into consideration the height of existing buildings in that area. The upper stories of structures should be stepped back to be compatible with the maximum by-right height permitted within the B district in which the structure will reside. 
b.  A height bonus of up to 30 feet may be granted by the city council for certain preferred uses. These uses must be located on the primary street frontage portion of structures. These uses may include, but are not limited to entertainment uses, health clubs open to the public, theaters, art galleries, antique stores, clothing stores, and restaurants with outdoor dining facilities, and will be incorporated into the special exception conditions. Maximum height shall not exceed 85 feet. The height of all structures within a special exception project that abut an R district must be tapered to be compatible with the maximum heights permitted in the abutting R district, taking into consideration the height of existing buildings in that area. The upper stories of structures should be stepped back to be compatible with the maximum by-right height permitted within the B district in which the structure will reside. 
c.  The city council may identify certain uses that will not be encouraged in the primary street frontage portion of the first floor of the required commercial component for each application. These uses may include, but are not limited to travel agencies, insurance agencies, nail salons, laundromats, mortuaries, and offices for financial advisers, consultants, dentists, doctors and realtors. 
d.  The retail component of projects, shall be located adjacent to major thoroughfares or designated shopping streets, on the first or second floor of structures, but may extend to upper floors. 
e.  All structures containing residential uses shall be a minimum of three stories in height. 
(2)  A height bonus of up to 30 feet may be granted by the city council for projects composed solely of commercial uses. Maximum height shall not exceed 85 feet. The height of all structures within a special exception project that abuts an R district must be tapered to be compatible with the maximum heights permitted in the abutting R district, taking into consideration the height of existing buildings in that area. The upper stories of structures should be stepped back to be compatible with the maximum by-right height permitted within the B district in which the structure will reside. 
(Code 1982, § 38-23(c); Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1427, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 1439, 5-24-1993; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1531, 12-11-1995; Ord. No. 1536, 2-26-1996; Ord. No. 1541, 3-25-1996; Ord. No. 1557, 10-15-1996; Ord. No. 1561, 12-9-1996; Ord. No. 1583, 7-14-1997; Ord. No. 1627, 9-28-1998; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1695, 3-26-2001; Ord. No. 1734, 5-12-2003; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004) 
Sec. 48-456. - Conditions applying to permitted uses. 
    Along any side or rear lot line of a B-1, limited business district adjoining an R district there shall be provided a buffer in accordance with the provisions of article V, division 8 of this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 38-23(d); Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1427, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 1439, 5-24-1993; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1531, 12-11-1995; Ord. No. 1536, 2-26-1996; Ord. No. 1541, 3-25-1996; Ord. No. 1557, 10-15-1996; Ord. No. 1561, 12-9-1996; Ord. No. 1583, 7-14-1997; Ord. No. 1627, 9-28-1998; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1695, 3-26-2001; Ord. No. 1734, 5-12-2003; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004) 
Sec. 48-457. - Accessory uses permitted. 
    Accessory uses permitted in the B-1, limited business district are as follows: 
(1)  Uses which are customarily accessory and incidental to any permitted principal use, including accessory signs subject to the restrictions in article VI of this chapter. 
(2)  Outdoor dining when extending a permitted principal indoor food sales or food service use, provided that the zoning administrator approves the location and number of seats and the manner of access. 
(Code 1982, § 38-23(e); Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1427, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 1439, 5-24-1993; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1531, 12-11-1995; Ord. No. 1536, 2-26-1996; Ord. No. 1541, 3-25-1996; Ord. No. 1557, 10-15-1996; Ord. No. 1561, 12-9-1996; Ord. No. 1583, 7-14-1997; Ord. No. 1627, 9-28-1998; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1695, 3-26-2001; Ord. No. 1734, 5-12-2003; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004) 
Sec. 48-458. - Conflicting provisions. 
    In any conflict between this division and article V, division 5 of this chapter, as applies to mixed-use redevelopments, the provisions of article V, division 5 of this chapter shall govern. 
(Code 1982, § 38-23(f); Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1427, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 1439, 5-24-1993; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1531, 12-11-1995; Ord. No. 1536, 2-26-1996; Ord. No. 1541, 3-25-1996; Ord. No. 1557, 10-15-1996; Ord. No. 1561, 12-9-1996; Ord. No. 1583, 7-14-1997; Ord. No. 1627, 9-28-1998; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1695, 3-26-2001; Ord. No. 1734, 5-12-2003; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004) 
Secs. 48-459-48-484. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - B-2, CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 48-485. - Intent. 
    The intent of the B-2, central business district is as follows: 
(1)  To create a downtown business area which will provide a range of commercial activities at a level of development more concentrated than other commercial areas. 
(2)  To ensure that development is responsive to spatial, visual and pedestrian considerations. 
(3)  To promote an environment to attract new businesses and retain existing businesses. 
(4)  To provide the community with a variety of retail and service-oriented businesses that will respond to various community and consumer needs. 
(Code 1982, § 38-24(a); Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1439, 5-24-1993; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1531, 12-11-1995; Ord. No. 1536, 2-26-1996; Ord. No. 1541, 3-25-1996; Ord. No. 1557, 10-15-1996; Ord. No. 1561, 12-9-1996; Ord. No. 1583, 7-14-1997; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1695, 3-26-2001; Ord. No. 1734, 5-12-2003; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004) 
Sec. 48-486. - Principal uses permitted by right. 
(a)  Principal uses permitted by right in the B-2, central business district are as follows: 
(1)  Public buildings and facilities. 
(2)  Hotels, motels. 
(3)  Business and professional offices, including medical and dental. 
(4)  Clinics. 
(5)  Offices for medical, dental and optical laboratories and offices for operations devoted exclusively to scientific research. 
(6)  Restaurants. 
(7)  Inns, bed and breakfasts. 
(8)  Private, noncommercial clubs, lodges, and recreational or community facilities. 
(9)  Museums. 
(10)  Group homes for no more than eight individuals as defined in section 48-2. 
(11)  Parking lots, subject to site plan review by the planning commission. 
(12)  The following retail business and service establishments, provided, that all business, service, fabrication, preparation or processing shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building, and that all goods shall be only for retail sale on the premises: Food stores and beverage stores, drugstores, bakeries, confectioneries, self-service laundries, laundry or cleaning depots, shoe repair shops, barbershops or beauty salons, clothing stores, variety stores, gift shops, studios, banks, antique shops, jewelry stores, florists, photo shops, music stores, bookstores or stationery stores, appliance store, office equipment store, furniture store, hardware store, garden supply stores, mortuaries, department stores, theaters and any other retail and service uses determined by the zoning administrator to be consistent with uses permitted in this subsection. 
(13)  Mixed-use redevelopments, as permitted and regulated in article V, division 5 of this chapter. 
(b)  In addition to uses permitted by subsection 48-486(a) above, the following uses are permitted by-right on sites that are located in the B-2, central business district and in areas designated "special revitalization district for education and economic development" on the future land use plan map: 
(1)  Elementary and secondary schools, up to seven stories in height, parks and playgrounds. 
(c)  When an applicant who is either the owner, or has the written consent of the owner, of a property, has applied for and obtained city council approval for a special exception entitlement (SEE) as permitted by subsection 48-488(b) below, then all uses on the site, including by-right uses, will be controlled by and as specified in that special exception entitlement. By-right uses not specified in the SEE shall not be permitted after such approval. 
(Code 1982, § 38-24(b); Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1439, 5-24-1993; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1531, 12-11-1995; Ord. No. 1536, 2-26-1996; Ord. No. 1541, 3-25-1996; Ord. No. 1557, 10-15-1996; Ord. No. 1561, 12-9-1996; Ord. No. 1583, 7-14-1997; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1695, 3-26-2001; Ord. No. 1734, 5-12-2003; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 1989, 8-13-2018; Ord. No. 1991, 12-18-2018) 
Sec. 48-487. - Conditional uses permitted by special use permit. 
    Conditional uses permitted by special permit in the B-2, central business district are as follows: 
(1)  Group homes not otherwise permitted by right. 
(2)  Adult uses, subject to chapter 48, article V, division 10 and chapter 8, article VII. 
(3)  Any drug paraphernalia establishment, subject to the same conditions imposed under subsection 48-454(4). 
(4)  Amusement arcade, as a principal or accessory use subject to the same conditions imposed under subsection 48-454(5). 
(5)  Outdoor uses, as permitted and regulated in subsection 48-454(1). 
(6)  Laundry or dry cleaning establishments, other than a depot or self-service laundry, subject to the same conditions imposed under subsection 48-454(6). 
(7)  Satellite television antenna or ground-mounted conventional television or radio antenna, as permitted and regulated in article V, division 9 of this chapter. 
(8)  Temporary uses, in anticipation of development or redevelopment of permanent improvements in accordance with the adopted master plan, pursuant to same conditions established in subsection 48-454(9). 
(9)  The preparation, processing, assembling, repair or sale of electronic devices and equipment, including computer systems, communication systems, security systems, fire protection systems, control systems and the like, subject to the following: 
a.  There shall be no use, storage or disposal of combustible or toxic materials or chemicals, or chemicals, except as approved as part of the special use permit and restricted to areas shown on an approved floor plan. 
b.  The level of noise within the building generated by this activity shall be within the range established by chapter 14, pertaining to noise. 
c.  There shall be no noxious or odor-producing fumes generated by this activity. 
d.  There shall be no unique or special fire safety needs beyond those ordinarily required for general office and retail uses. 
e.  There shall be no pick-up or delivery operation involving large trucks during the period from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
(10)  Drive-thru or drive-through facility. For additional supplementary regulations, see section 48-867. 
(11)  Temporary shelters, with the following restrictions: 
a.  Shelters may operate only on nights between November 1 and March 31. 
b.  All persons admitted to shelters must be referred by the intake staff of a licensed county shelter. 
c.  No persons can be admitted to shelters after 9:00 p.m., unless accompanied by a member of the staff of a county shelter or a public human services agency or by a local law enforcement officer; every person in a shelter must leave by 8:00 a.m. 
d.  Transportation by van or other similar means that is sufficient for all persons admitted must be provided both to and from the shelters. 
e.  A total of no more than 30 homeless persons may be served by all shelters in the city on any single night. 
f.  No persons who are under the influence of alcohol or drugs can be allowed in the shelters. 
g.  All health, safety and fire codes must be complied with. 
h.  Any standards applicable to county shelters with regard to staff/client ratio, level of staff training, procedures for monitoring clients while at the shelter, and resources available for cases of emergency shall also apply as a minimum standard to every shelter in the city. 
(Code 1982, § 38-24(c); Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1439, 5-24-1993; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1531, 12-11-1995; Ord. No. 1536, 2-26-1996; Ord. No. 1541, 3-25-1996; Ord. No. 1557, 10-15-1996; Ord. No. 1561, 12-9-1996; Ord. No. 1583, 7-14-1997; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1695, 3-26-2001; Ord. No. 1734, 5-12-2003; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 1846, 6-28-2010) 
Sec. 48-488. - Special exceptions. 
(a)  Generally. The city council may, by special exception, modify the requirements of this division, for the B-2, central business district, to allow: 
(1)  Single-story commercial development. Single-story commercial development or a 500 square foot or greater expansion of an existing single-story commercial use; or 
(2)  Residential development within mixed-use development projects. The following shall also apply to the residential special exception: 
a.  A height bonus of up to 40 feet may be granted by the city council, if the city council determines that the project is exemplary in terms of conformance with the criteria in subsections 48-90(d)(1) and (2), and the bonus shall significantly assist in conformance with subsections 48-90(d)(2) and (3). Maximum height shall not exceed 115 feet. The height of all structures within a special exception project that abut an R district must be tapered to be compatible with the maximum heights permitted in the abutting R district, taking into consideration the height of existing buildings in that area. The upper stories of structures should be stepped back to be compatible with the maximum by-right height permitted within the B district in which the structure will reside. 
b.  A height bonus of up to 40 feet may be granted by the city council for certain preferred uses. Maximum height shall not exceed 115 feet. These uses must be located on the primary street frontage portion of structures. These uses may include, but are not limited to, entertainment uses, health clubs open to the public, theaters, art galleries, antique stores, clothing stores, and restaurants with outdoor dining facilities, and will be incorporated into the special exception conditions. The height of all structures within a special exception project that abut an R district must be tapered to be compatible with the maximum heights permitted in the abutting R district, taking into consideration the height of existing buildings in that area. The upper stories of structures should be stepped back to be compatible with the maximum by-right height permitted within the B district in which the structure will reside. 
c.  The city council may identify certain uses that will not be encouraged in the primary street frontage portion of the first floor of the required commercial component for each application. These uses may include, but are not limited to, travel agencies, insurance agencies, nail salons, laundromats, mortuaries, and offices for financial advisers, consultants, dentists, doctors and realtors. 
d.  The retail component of projects, if any, shall be located adjacent to major thoroughfares or designated shopping streets on the first or second floor of structures, but may extend to upper floors. 
e.  All structures containing residential uses shall be a minimum of four stories in height. 
(3)  A height bonus of up to 40 feet may be granted by the city council for projects composed solely of commercial uses. Maximum height shall not exceed 115 feet. The height of all structures within a special exception project that abut an R district must be tapered to be compatible with the maximum heights permitted in the abutting R district, taking into consideration the height of existing buildings in that area. The upper stories of structures should be stepped back to be compatible with the maximum by-right height permitted within the B district in which the structure will reside. 
Additional criteria and requirements applying to special exceptions shall be as set forth in subsection 48-90(f). 
(b)  Special revitalization district for education and economic development. Properties in areas designated "special revitalization district for education and economic development" and designated for mixed-use development on the future land use plan map may be the subject of a two-step process, as set forth below: (1) a special exception entitlement to determine the layout, heights and general uses; and (2) a special exception site plan which shall function as any other special exception and site plan approved under the zoning ordinance and which will establish final design. When a special exception entitlement has been approved for a property, development on that property can proceed only after a special exception site plan has been approved. 
(1)  Special exception entitlement elements: A special exception entitlement may be sought and approved for a site of five acres or more and shall define land uses, height, transportation, public facilities, utilities and infrastructure for the project and shall govern future special exception site plan approval(s) for the site. All special exception entitlements shall include the following elements: 
a.  Density. Density in the "special revitalization district for education and economic development" will not be limited, per se, but approved densities will be consistent with guidance in the city's comprehensive plan. 
b.  Use. Office, hotel, retail, and multifamily residential uses may be permitted where the city council finds that significant commercial (retail, office or hotel) uses are included in the project and where the residential uses contribute significant positive net revenue benefits, build community, and help achieve the goals and strategies of the "special revitalization district for education and economic development" and related plans and policies. 
c.  Building height. Building heights and massing should vary over the site, be compatible with adjacent schools or other uses and allow for higher building heights adjacent to arterial roads and nearby commercial development, up to a maximum height of 15 stories, not including mechanical penthouses. Penthouses may exceed the height limits provided they are set back from the building edge a distance equal to their height. 
d.  Parking. As part of special exception entitlement approval, minimum parking requirements may be reduced or modified (§ 48-970), provide for shared parking arrangements (§ 48-971) and off-site parking agreements (§ 48-972). Additional reductions may be approved for provision of exemplary non-motorized vehicular options or other transportation demand management elements. Above ground structured parking must be wrapped or otherwise screened from view. 
(2)  Special exception entitlement applications: The following information shall be provided as part of the SEE application: 
a.  Statement of justification including how the project will further the goals of the "special revitalization district for education and economic development" and be consistent with the comprehensive plan, future land use plan map, and any site-specific studies. 
b.  Current aerial photograph of the site with surrounding uses within a distance of 400 feet of the site boundary to show context. 
c.  Plot and location plan(s) at one inch = 20 feet scale (unless an alternate scale is approved by the city) showing: 
1.  Dimensions and site area; 
2.  Topography at two-foot contour intervals; 
3.  Utilities and infrastructure: Locations and descriptions of all existing underground and aerial utilities within or on the periphery of the site and streets serving the site and all proposed infrastructure that will be necessary to serve the proposed uses and the site; 
4.  Proposed structures: Locations, gross floor area and heights (stories and feet) of all proposed structures, and all uses to be contained therein including the type of commercial and gross floor area, the number of residential units and the number of hotel rooms and parking locations and extent; 
5.  Interim uses: If the applicant desires to make interim uses of any portion of the site prior to final SESP approval, the extent and nature of such uses shall be included in the plot and location plan(s) and other submission; 
6.  Transportation and street plan: Proposed street layout including general location and dimensions, connections to existing streets or to those existing or proposed on adjacent properties, ownership of existing and proposed streets, sidewalks, curb cuts, and bus and transit facilities; 
7.  Open space and recreation: General location and dimensions of proposed open space including but not limited to, parks, plazas and common open space, and any proposed recreational facilities (type, number square feet); 
8.  Adjacent roadway median strips and existing and proposed median openings for vehicular access; 
9.  Adjacent sites: Outline of block faces and structures on adjacent contiguous sites and across adjacent streets, with curb cuts for garage entrances and loading docks shown. 
d.  Conceptual landscape master plan providing a general description and location of landscape elements, including streetscape elements, plazas, parks, and common open space. 
e.  Phasing plan: If the project is expected to be developed in phases, or to be divided in parcels that can be individually built, then the applicant shall provide the following information: 
1.  Proposed timing of construction (as related to construction of phases or parcels) for each element that ensures that commercial uses will be constructed. 
(i)  Proposed gross floor area, number of dwelling units or number of hotel rooms to be included in any phase or parcel for each use; 
(ii)  Proposed parking to be included in any phase or parcel for each use and phasing plan for construction of parking; 
(iii)  Parking shall be provided for each use at or prior to occupancy of each building. 
f.  A statement of any proposed variances, waivers and modifications to zoning regulations or adopted city plans and policies. 
g.  Special exception entitlement review: The special exception entitlement review process will include review by staff and, concurrently, circulation to the planning commission and any other relevant boards or commissions, who will provide recommendations to the city council for its consideration. Review of the special exception entitlement shall consist of: 1) referral of the application by city council to boards and commissions; 2) staff review and review by the planning commission and any other boards and commissions to whom the city council refers the application; and 3) approval by council. 
h.  Special exception entitlement approval: The city council shall approve a special exception entitlement and may modify the requirements of this division to allow height above the limits set forth in section 48-1101 and residential uses within a mixed-use development project. The approval and any modifications to zoning ordinance requirements shall be based on a finding that the project substantially achieves the goals of the "special revitalization district for education and economic development" and is consistent with the comprehensive plan and with the recommendations of any site-specific studies. The city council may adopt conditions as part of its approval to ensure that the project will meet these standards. 
i.  Effect of special exception entitlement approval: Once approved by city council, the special exception entitlement will govern all uses on the site, and the height, location, uses, transportation, utilities and infrastructure to be allowed under special exception site plans approved for the property. No other use shall be permitted on the site after such approval, including uses permitted by-right in the B-2 zoning district, except those expressly permitted by the special exception entitlement. Amendments to an approved SEE shall be treated, procedurally, the same as a new application, should rely on prior approvals and meet the standards of the zoning ordinance. Once a special exception entitlement has been approved, application may be made for a special exception site plan (SESP) that is consistent with the special exception entitlement, including any amendments that are approved by the city council. 
(3)  Special exception site plan requirements: The special exception site plan process is intended to result in approval that is equivalent to a site plan as called for in section 48-1134. 
a.  Special exception site plan elements: The elements of the special exception site plan shall comply in all respects with the special exception entitlement, as approved, except to the extent the applicant seeks an amendment to that special exception entitlement. A special exception site plan may be sought and approved for all or any phase identified in the approved special exception entitlement. 
b.  Special exception site plan application: An application for a special exception site plan shall include: 
1.  Relevant parts of the approved special exception entitlement. 
2.  All materials listed in section 48-1137 of this appendix, provided that any waiver pursuant to section 48-1138 may be approved by the city manager, after making the finding required by that section. 
3.  A preliminary survey as called for by section 48-1135. 
c.  Special exception site plan review: Review of the special exception site plan shall consist of: 1) referral of the application by city council to boards and commissions; 2) staff review and review by the planning commission and any other boards and commissions to whom the city council refers the application; and 3) approval by council. The elements approved through the special exception entitlement are not subject to reversal or modification through the SESP process, except upon application by the applicant and approval by city council. 
d.  Special exception site plan approval: 
1.  The special exception site plan will be approved or denied by the city council based on the recommendations from the staff and boards and commissions and the considerations set forth in section 48-1141 for approval of site plans as well as the criteria in section 48-90. Denial shall not be based on elements previously approved in the special exception entitlement. The approved project shall meet all requirements of the zoning ordinance unless specific waivers or modifications are enacted. Any waivers or modifications (but not variances) to particular requirements that are permitted under the zoning ordinance to be made by any entity may be made by the city council. Amendments to an approved SESP shall be treated, procedurally, the same as a new application, should rely on prior approvals and meet the standards of the zoning ordinance. 
2.  The city council may impose other requirements as set forth in section 48-1140 and may modify zoning ordinance requirements where it finds that doing so will better achieve the goals and objectives of the "special revitalization district for education and economic development". The city council may adopt conditions as part of its approval to ensure that the project will meet standards for SESP approval. Any utilities or other infrastructure for a site or parcel that is either needed for a building(s) or other improvements to be constructed, or that must be constructed before those improvements so that other, later buildings can be served, shall be included in and built as part of the special exception site plan. 
e.  Effect of special exception site plan approval: Once approved, an SESP shall function as any other: 1) special exception; and 2) site plan, approved under the zoning ordinance, and shall be subject to all requirements set forth therein unless modified or waived as part of the SESP approval. 
(4)  Maps: The area designated "special revitalization district for education and economic development" is shown on the future land use plan map. 
(Code 1982, § 38-24(d); Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1439, 5-24-1993; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1531, 12-11-1995; Ord. No. 1536, 2-26-1996; Ord. No. 1541, 3-25-1996; Ord. No. 1557, 10-15-1996; Ord. No. 1561, 12-9-1996; Ord. No. 1583, 7-14-1997; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1695, 3-26-2001; Ord. No. 1734, 5-12-2003; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 1989, 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 48-489. - Conditions applying to permitted uses. 
    Any building or above-grade-level accessory parking structure on any lot of a B-2, central business district abutting an R district shall be set back from the lot lines which adjoin the R district by a buffer in accordance with the provisions of article V, division 8 of this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 38-24(e); Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1439, 5-24-1993; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1531, 12-11-1995; Ord. No. 1536, 2-26-1996; Ord. No. 1541, 3-25-1996; Ord. No. 1557, 10-15-1996; Ord. No. 1561, 12-9-1996; Ord. No. 1583, 7-14-1997; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1695, 3-26-2001; Ord. No. 1734, 5-12-2003; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004) 
Sec. 48-490. - Accessory uses permitted. 
    Accessory uses permitted in the B-2, central business district are as follows: 
(1)  Uses which are customarily accessory and incidental to any permitted principal or conditional use, including accessory signs subject to the restrictions in article V of this chapter. 
(2)  Outdoor dining when extending a permitted principal indoor food sales or food service use, provided that the zoning administrator approves the location and number of seats and the manner of access. 
(Code 1982, § 38-24(f); Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1439, 5-24-1993; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1531, 12-11-1995; Ord. No. 1536, 2-26-1996; Ord. No. 1541, 3-25-1996; Ord. No. 1557, 10-15-1996; Ord. No. 1561, 12-9-1996; Ord. No. 1583, 7-14-1997; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1695, 3-26-2001; Ord. No. 1734, 5-12-2003; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004) 
Sec. 48-491. - Conflicting provisions. 
    In any conflict between this division and article V, division 5 of this chapter, as applies to mixed-use redevelopment, the provisions of article V, division 5 of this chapter shall govern. 
(Code 1982, § 38-24(g); Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1439, 5-24-1993; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1531, 12-11-1995; Ord. No. 1536, 2-26-1996; Ord. No. 1541, 3-25-1996; Ord. No. 1557, 10-15-1996; Ord. No. 1561, 12-9-1996; Ord. No. 1583, 7-14-1997; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1695, 3-26-2001; Ord. No. 1734, 5-12-2003; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004) 
Secs. 48-492-48-520. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - B-3, GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 48-521. - Principal uses permitted by right. 
    Principal uses permitted by right in the B-3, general business district are as follows: 
(1)  Public buildings and facilities. 
(2)  Institutions for human care. 
(3)  Clinics. 
(4)  Hotels, motels. 
(5)  Business and professional offices, including medical and dental. 
(6)  Offices for medical, dental and optical laboratories, and offices for operations devoted exclusively to scientific research. 
(7)  Churches, parish houses and similar religious facilities. 
(8)  Restaurants. 
(9)  Inns, bed and breakfasts. 
(10)  Private, noncommercial clubs, lodges, and recreational or community facilities. 
(11)  Museums. 
(12)  Group homes for no more than eight individuals as defined in section 48-2. 
(13)  Parking lots, subject to site plan review by the planning commission. 
(14)  Schools or day care facilities complying with the provisions of the state code. 
(15)  The following retail business and service establishments, provided, that all business, service, fabrication, preparation or processing shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building, and that all goods shall be only for retail sale on the premises: Food stores, beverage stores, drugstores, bakery, confectionery, self-service laundry, laundry or cleaning depot, shoe repair, barber shop or beauty salon, clothing store, variety store, gift shop, studio, bank, antique shop, jewelry store, florist, photo shop, music store, book or stationery store, appliance store, office equipment store, furniture store, hardware store, garden supply store, mortuary, department store, theaters, radio stations bowling establishments. And in addition, motor vehicle repair or filling station (see article V, division 4 of this chapter), nursery, green house, carpenter or upholstery shop, sign shop, indoor storage and sales of building materials, including contractor supplies and hardware, and any other retail and service uses determined by the zoning administrator to be consistent with uses permitted this subsection. Further, motor vehicle sales (new or used) and rental that possessed lawful certificates of occupancy at the time of the adoption of this section are considered by right uses and those uses may be continued on the site for which the permit was issued. All other requirements of this Code including the requirements for buffering the site shall continue to apply. In the event such use is discontinued on the site for a period of one year or more, new applications for motor vehicle sales or rental occupancies shall comply with all applicable sections of the Code. After the date of adoption of this section, new occupancies for motor vehicle sales or rental located on a site that is 10,000 square feet or smaller shall not be permitted. Exception: Motor vehicle rentals without on-site vehicle inventory are hereby deemed to be an office use and shall be subject to the provisions for office uses specified elsewhere in this chapter. 
(16)  Mixed-use redevelopments, as permitted and regulated in article V, division 5 of this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 38-25(a); Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1439, 5-24-1993; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1531, 12-11-1995; Ord. No. 1536, 2-26-1996; Ord. No. 1541, 3-25-1996; Ord. No. 1557, 10-15-1996; Ord. No. 1561, 12-9-1996; Ord. No. 1583, 7-14-1997; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1695, 3-26-2001; Ord. No. 1734, 5-12-2003; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 1826, § 38-2, 11-10-2008; Ord. No. 1991, 12-18-2018) 
Sec. 48-522. - Conditional uses permitted by special use permit. 
    Conditional uses permitted by special use permit in the B-3, general business district are as follows: 
(1)  Group homes not otherwise permitted by right. 
(2)  Adult uses, subject to chapter 48, article V, division 10 and chapter 8, article VII. 
(3)  Any drug paraphernalia establishment, subject to the same conditions imposed under subsection 48-454(4). 
(4)  Amusement arcade, as a principal or accessory use subject to the same conditions imposed under subsection 48-454(5). 
(5)  Outdoor uses, as permitted and regulated in subsection 48-454(1). 
(6)  Laundry or dry cleaning establishments, other than a depot or self-service laundry, subject to the same conditions imposed under subsection 48-454(6). 
(7)  Satellite television antenna or ground-mounted conventional television or radio antenna, as permitted and regulated in article V, division 9 of this chapter. 
(8)  Temporary uses, in anticipation of development or redevelopment of permanent improvements in accordance with the adopted master plan, as permitted and regulated in subsection 48-454(9). 
(9)  The preparation, processing, assembling, repair or sale of electronic devices and equipment, including computer systems, communication systems, security systems, fire protection systems, control systems and the like, subject to the requirements established in subsection 48-487(9). 
(10)  Drive-thru or drive-through facility. For additional supplementary regulations, see subsection 48-867(5). 
(11)  Temporary shelters, with the following restrictions: 
a.  Shelters may operate only on nights between November 1 and March 31. 
b.  All persons admitted to shelters must be referred by the intake staff of a licensed county shelter. 
c.  No persons can be admitted to shelters after 9:00 p.m., unless accompanied by a member of the staff of a county shelter or a public human services agency or by a local law enforcement officer; every person in a shelter must leave by 8:00 a.m. 
d.  Transportation by van or other similar means that is sufficient for all persons admitted must be provided both to and from the shelters. 
e.  A total of no more than 30 homeless persons may be served by all shelters in the city on any single night. 
f.  No persons who are under the influence of alcohol or drugs can be allowed in the shelters. 
g.  All health, safety and fire codes must be complied with. 
h.  Any standards applicable to county shelters with regard to staff/client ration, level of staff training, procedures for monitoring clients while at the shelter, and resources available for cases of emergency shall also apply as a minimum standard to every shelter in the city. 
(12)  Motor vehicle sales (new or used) or rental with on-site vehicle inventory located on a site that is 10,001 square feet or larger. Exception: Motor vehicle sales (new or used) or rental that possessed a lawful certificate of occupancy at the time of the adoption of this section, see subsection 48-521(15). Conditions applying to special use permit: 
a.  A site plan submission is required as provided for in article V, division 7 of this chapter. 
b.  The provisions of article V, division 8 of this chapter pertaining to landscaping shall apply and shall not be waived or modified unless the requirements of subsection 48-1184(l), pertaining to exceptions, are met. 
c.  No portion of the property on which the use is located shall be within 300 feet of an R district in the city. 
d.  Delivery of motor vehicle inventory shall be limited to the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on Saturday. 
e.  No vehicle loading or unloading onto or from a vehicle transport or towing vehicle shall be allowed on any public right-of-way without the prior consent of the city council. 
f.  All repair services shall occur within a service bay facility. 
g.  No vehicle parts or repair tools shall be stored or displayed outside a building. 
h.  Vehicles that are on site as part of a sales or rental inventory or vehicles that are on-site for repair shall be kept on the premises in compliance with a parking plan that conforms to the dimension requirements for lot aisles and parking spaces as provided for in article V, division 2 of this chapter. No stacking of motor vehicles shall be allowed. 
i.  Lot aisle width shall be sufficient for emergency vehicle access to all buildings on the premises, and lot aisles shall be kept clear of vehicles at all times. 
j.  Lighting on the property will meet or provide lower light levels and uniformities than the IESNA Recommended Practice; Lighting for Exterior Environments (RP-33-99); skyglow will be reduced by requiring luminaires with a lumen output greater than 3,500 to be full cutoff; and light trespass will be optimized by requiring luminaires within 21/2 times their mounting height from the property line not to produce light across that property line". 
k.  In addition to other applicable Code sections, parking areas shall be arranged and used so that vehicles which are parked, displayed and/or stored on the property do not overhang or protrude into a required setback, public right-of-way, landscape buffer or landscape screen. 
l.  Conflict with other regulations. In any case where the requirements of this section conflict with any other provision of the Code of the city or existing state or federal regulations, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall apply. 
(Code 1982, § 38-25(b); Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1439, 5-24-1993; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1531, 12-11-1995; Ord. No. 1536, 2-26-1996; Ord. No. 1541, 3-25-1996; Ord. No. 1557, 10-15-1996; Ord. No. 1561, 12-9-1996; Ord. No. 1583, 7-14-1997; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1695, 3-26-2001; Ord. No. 1734, 5-12-2003; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 1826, § 38-25, 11-10-2008; Ord. No. 1846, 6-28-2010) 
Sec. 48-523. - Special exceptions. 
    The city council may, by special exception, modify the requirements of this division, for the B-3, general business district to allow: 
(1)  Residential development within mixed-use development projects. The following shall also apply to the residential special exception: 
a.  A height bonus of up to 30 feet may be granted by the city council, if the city council determines that the project is exemplary in terms of conformance with the criteria in subsections 48-90(d)(1) and (2), and the bonus shall significantly assist in conformance with subsections 48-90(d)(2) and (3). The maximum height shall not exceed 85 feet. The height of all structures within a special exception project that abut an R district must be tapered to be compatible with the maximum heights permitted in the abutting R district, taking into consideration the height of existing buildings in that area. The upper stories of structures should be stepped back to be compatible with the maximum by right height permitted within the B district in which the structure will reside. 
b.  A height bonus of up to 30 feet may be granted by the city council for certain preferred uses. These uses must be located on the primary street frontage portion of structures. These uses may include, but are not limited to, entertainment uses, health clubs open to the public, theaters, art galleries, antique stores, clothing stores, and restaurants with outdoor dining facilities, and will be incorporated into the special exception conditions. The maximum height shall not exceed 85 feet. The height of all structures within a special exception project that abut an R district must be tapered to be compatible with the maximum heights permitted in the abutting R district, taking into consideration the height of existing buildings in that area. The upper stories of structures should be stepped back to be compatible with the maximum by right height permitted within the B district in which the structure will reside. 
c.  The city council may identify certain uses that will not be encouraged in the primary street frontage portion of the first floor of the required commercial component for each application. These uses may include, but are not limited to, travel agencies, insurance agencies, nail salons, laundromats, mortuaries, and offices for financial advisers, consultants, dentists, doctors and realtors. 
d.  The retail component of projects shall be located adjacent to major thoroughfares or designated shopping streets on the first or second floor of structures, but may extend to upper floors. 
e.  All structures containing residential uses shall be a minimum of three stories in height. 
(2)  A height bonus of up to 30 feet may be granted by the city council for projects composed solely of commercial uses. The maximum height shall not exceed 85 feet. The height of all structures within a special exception project that abut an R district must be tapered to be compatible with the maximum heights permitted in the abutting R district, taking into consideration the height of existing buildings in that area. The upper stories of structures should be stepped back to be compatible with the maximum by-right height permitted within the B district in which the structure will reside. 
Additional criteria and requirements applying to special exceptions shall be as set forth in subsection 48-90(f). 
(Code 1982, § 38-25(c); Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1439, 5-24-1993; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1531, 12-11-1995; Ord. No. 1536, 2-26-1996; Ord. No. 1541, 3-25-1996; Ord. No. 1557, 10-15-1996; Ord. No. 1561, 12-9-1996; Ord. No. 1583, 7-14-1997; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1695, 3-26-2001; Ord. No. 1734, 5-12-2003; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004) 
Sec. 48-524. - Conditions applying to permitted uses. 
    Along any side or rear lot line of a B-3, general business district adjoining an R district, there shall be provided a buffer in accordance with the provisions of article V, division 8 of this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 38-25(d); Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1439, 5-24-1993; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1531, 12-11-1995; Ord. No. 1536, 2-26-1996; Ord. No. 1541, 3-25-1996; Ord. No. 1557, 10-15-1996; Ord. No. 1561, 12-9-1996; Ord. No. 1583, 7-14-1997; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1695, 3-26-2001; Ord. No. 1734, 5-12-2003; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004) 
Sec. 48-525. - Accessory uses permitted. 
    Accessory uses permitted in the B-3, general business district are as follows: 
(1)  Uses which are customarily accessory and incidental to any permitted principal or conditional uses. 
(2)  Outdoor dining when extending a permitted principal indoor food sales or food service use, provided that the zoning administrator approves the location and number of seats and the manner of access. 
(Code 1982, § 38-25(e); Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1439, 5-24-1993; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1531, 12-11-1995; Ord. No. 1536, 2-26-1996; Ord. No. 1541, 3-25-1996; Ord. No. 1557, 10-15-1996; Ord. No. 1561, 12-9-1996; Ord. No. 1583, 7-14-1997; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1695, 3-26-2001; Ord. No. 1734, 5-12-2003; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004) 
Sec. 48-526. - Conflicting provisions. 
    In any conflict between this section and article V, division 5 of this chapter, as applies to mixed-use redevelopment, the provisions of article V, division 5 of this chapter shall govern. 
(Code 1982, § 38-25(f); Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1439, 5-24-1993; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1531, 12-11-1995; Ord. No. 1536, 2-26-1996; Ord. No. 1541, 3-25-1996; Ord. No. 1557, 10-15-1996; Ord. No. 1561, 12-9-1996; Ord. No. 1583, 7-14-1997; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1695, 3-26-2001; Ord. No. 1734, 5-12-2003; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004) 
Secs. 48-527-48-545. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - M-1, LIGHT INDUSTRY DISTRICT 

Sec. 48-546. - Principal uses permitted by right. 
    Principal uses permitted by right in the M-1, light industry district are as follows: 
(1)  Any principal use permitted in the B-3 district, except dwellings, schools, hospitals and other institutions for human care, other than a penal institution. 
(2)  Railroads. 
(3)  Industrial research and development organizations and laboratories. 
(4)  Offices and laboratories engaged in research in the physical and life sciences. 
(5)  Except as otherwise provided herein, the manufacturing, assembling, compounding, processing, packaging, treatment, storage or distribution of products from materials that are not likely to be dangerous or offensive to the district or to any contiguous district, because of odor, dust, fire, explosion, or other reasons, with equipment and processes that are not likely to produce objectionable noise, vibration, smoke, or other effect in such districts. 
(6)  The following uses when located at least 200 feet from any R district, except where the use is separated from the R district by a railroad, such distance requirement shall be reduced to 50 feet. 
a.  Major automobile repair shop. 
b.  Blacksmith, welding or other heavy metal shop, excluding punch presses over ten tons rated capacity, drop hammers and the like. 
c.  Creamery, bottling, ice or cold storage plant. 
d.  Foundry, casting lightweight nonferrous metals, or electric foundry not causing noxious fumes or odors. 
e.  Bag, carpet, and rug cleaning; provided necessary equipment is installed and operated to effectively precipitate and recover dust. 
f.  Commercial kennels and animal hospitals. 
(7)  The following uses when located at least 300 feet from any R district; except where the use is separated from the R district by a railroad, such distance requirement shall be reduced to 50 feet: Building materials storage yards (except concrete or asphalt batching or mixing); warehouses; self storage warehouses; lumberyards; contractor's equipment storage yard or plant; yards for the distribution of brick and tile; freight depot; trucking yard; feed mill or fuel yard, including yards for the storage of coal and oil, provided fuel oil storage is underground, and provided dust is effectively controlled; public utility yard for construction, maintenance or storage. 
(8)  Mixed-use redevelopment, as permitted and regulated in article V, division 5 of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 81-50; Code 1982, § 38-26(a); Ord. No. 1127, 12-9-1985; Ord. No. 1130, 1-27-1986; Ord. No. 1139, 5-27-1986; Ord. No. 1142, 6-23-1986; Ord. No. 1170, 1-12-1987; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1557, 10-15-1996; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004) 
Sec. 48-547. - Conditional uses permitted by special use permit. 
    Conditional uses permitted by special permit in the M-1, light industry district are as follows: 
(1)  Outdoor uses, as permitted and regulated in section 48-454(1). 
(2)  Laundry or dry cleaning establishment, other than a depot or self-service laundry, subject to the same conditions imposed under section 48-454(6). 
(3)  Satellite television antenna or ground-mounted conventional television or radio antenna, as permitted and regulated in article V, division 9 of this chapter. 
(4)  Temporary uses, as permitted and regulated in section 48-394. 
(5)  Drive-through or drive-though facility. For additional supplementary regulations, see section 48-867(5). 
(6)  Temporary shelters, with the following restrictions: 
a.  Shelters may operate only on nights between November 1 and March 31. 
b.  All persons admitted to shelters must be referred by the intake staff of a licensed county shelter. 
c.  No persons can be admitted to shelters after 9:00 p.m., unless accompanied by a member of the staff of a county shelter or a public human services agency or by a local law enforcement officer; every person in a shelter must leave by 8:00 a.m. 
d.  Transportation by van or other similar means that is sufficient for all persons admitted must be provided both to and from the shelters. 
e.  A total of no more than 30 homeless persons may be served by all shelters in the city on any single night. 
f.  No persons who are under the influence of alcoholic or drugs can be allowed in the shelters. 
g.  All health, safety and fire codes must be complied with. 
h.  Any standards applicable to county shelters with regard to staff/client ratio, level of staff training, procedures for monitoring clients while at the shelter, and resources available for cases of emergency shall also apply as a minimum standard to every shelter in the city. 
(7)  Motor vehicle sales (new or used) or rental as provided in section 48-522(12). 
(Code 1973, § 81-50; Code 1982, § 38-26(b); Ord. No. 1127, 12-9-1985; Ord. No. 1130, 1-27-1986; Ord. No. 1139, 5-27-1986; Ord. No. 1142, 6-23-1986; Ord. No. 1170, 1-12-1987; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1557, 10-15-1996; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 1826, § 38-26, 11-10-2008) 
Sec. 48-548. - Conditions applying to permitted uses. 
    Conditions applying to permitted uses in the M-1, light industry district are as follows: 
(1)  B-3 district uses, when located in the M-1 district, shall be subject to the same requirements as apply in the B-3 district. 
(2)  All other uses shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Where located within 100 feet of a major thoroughfare as designated by the official major thoroughfare plan, or within 200 feet of an R district, except as otherwise provided herein, such use shall be conducted within an enclosed building, or behind a solid fence or wall not less than six feet high, except for parking or loading areas. 
b.  Along any side or rear lot line adjoining an R district, there shall be provided a buffer in accordance with the provisions of article V, division 8 of this chapter. 
c.  All powdery or dusty materials, such as sand, gravel, cement, coal, grain and the like shall be stored within entirely enclosed buildings or bins. All liquid or other materials that might be hazardous or noxious shall be stored underground, and not closer than 50 feet to any property line. 
(Code 1973, § 81-50; Code 1982, § 38-26(c); Ord. No. 1127, 12-9-1985; Ord. No. 1130, 1-27-1986; Ord. No. 1139, 5-27-1986; Ord. No. 1142, 6-23-1986; Ord. No. 1170, 1-12-1987; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1557, 10-15-1996; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004) 
Sec. 48-549. - Buffer required if adjoining R district. 
    Along any side or rear lot line adjoining an R district there shall be provided a buffer in accordance with the provisions of article V, division 8 of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 81-50; Code 1982, § 38-26(d); Ord. No. 1127, 12-9-1985; Ord. No. 1130, 1-27-1986; Ord. No. 1139, 5-27-1986; Ord. No. 1142, 6-23-1986; Ord. No. 1170, 1-12-1987; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1557, 10-15-1996; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004) 
Sec. 48-550. - Accessory uses permitted. 
    Accessory uses permitted in the M-1, light industry district are as follows: 
(1)  Accessory uses permitted and as regulated in the B-3 district. 
(2)  Dwelling unit for a caretaker in a self storage warehouse. 
(3)  Other accessory uses, not otherwise prohibited, which are customarily accessory and incidental to any permitted use. 
(Code 1973, § 81-50; Code 1982, § 38-26(d); Ord. No. 1127, 12-9-1985; Ord. No. 1130, 1-27-1986; Ord. No. 1139, 5-27-1986; Ord. No. 1142, 6-23-1986; Ord. No. 1170, 1-12-1987; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1557, 10-15-1996; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004) 
Sec. 48-551. - Additional requirements. 
    There are no additional requirements applicable to the M-1, light industry district. 
(Code 1973, § 81-50; Code 1982, § 38-26(e); Ord. No. 1127, 12-9-1985; Ord. No. 1130, 1-27-1986; Ord. No. 1139, 5-27-1986; Ord. No. 1142, 6-23-1986; Ord. No. 1170, 1-12-1987; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1557, 10-15-1996; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004) 
Sec. 48-552. - Conflicting provisions. 
    In any conflict between this section and section article V, division 5 of this chapter, as applies to mixed-use redevelopments, the provisions of article V, division 5 of this chapter shall govern. 
(Code 1973, § 81-50; Code 1982, § 38-26(f); Ord. No. 1127, 12-9-1985; Ord. No. 1130, 1-27-1986; Ord. No. 1139, 5-27-1986; Ord. No. 1142, 6-23-1986; Ord. No. 1170, 1-12-1987; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1557, 10-15-1996; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004) 
Sec. 48-553. - Prohibited uses. 
    Prohibited uses in the M-1, light industry district are as follows: 
(1)  Any use in conflict with any provision of this Code or state law regulating nuisances. 
(2)  Any dwelling, school, hospital or other institution for human care, other than a penal institution. 
(3)  Ammonia, chlorine or bleaching powder manufacture. 
(4)  Boilermaking. 
(5)  Brewing or distilling of liquors. 
(6)  Dangerously flammable plastics manufacture such as celluloid. 
(7)  Crematory. 
(8)  Distillation of coal, wood or bones. 
(9)  Dyeing establishments. 
(10)  Fat rendering. 
(11)  Fertilizer manufacture. 
(12)  Gas (illuminating or heating) manufacture. 
(13)  Glue, size and gelatin manufacture. 
(14)  Incineration or reduction of garbage offal, dead animals or refuse. 
(15)  Iron, steel, brass or copper works. 
(16)  Junk, scrap paper or rag storage or baling. 
(17)  Lamp black manufacture. 
(18)  Lime, cement or plaster of Paris manufacture. 
(19)  Oil cloth or linoleum manufacture. 
(20)  Paint, oil, varnish, pigment or turpentine manufacture. 
(21)  Petroleum refining. 
(22)  Printing ink manufacture. 
(23)  Rawhides or skins-Storage, curing or tanning. 
(24)  Rubber manufacture from the crude material. 
(25)  Shoddy manufacture or wool scouring. 
(26)  Slaughtering of animals or fowl. 
(27)  Smelting. 
(28)  Soap manufacture. 
(29)  Starch, glucose or dextrine manufacture. 
(30)  Stockyard. 
(31)  Sugar refining. 
(32)  Sulphurous, sulphuric, nitric or hydrochloric acid manufacture. 
(33)  Tallow, grease or lard manufacture or refining. 
(34)  Tar distillation or manufacture. 
(35)  Trailer camp. 
(36)  Automobile wrecking yard. 
(37)  Fireworks, manufacture or storage. 
(38)  Fuel gas storage, liquid fuel storage above ground. 
(Code 1973, § 81-50; Code 1982, § 38-26(g); Ord. No. 1127, 12-9-1985; Ord. No. 1130, 1-27-1986; Ord. No. 1139, 5-27-1986; Ord. No. 1142, 6-23-1986; Ord. No. 1170, 1-12-1987; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1557, 10-15-1996; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004) 
Secs. 48-554-48-584. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - O-D, OFFICIAL DESIGN DISTRICT 

Sec. 48-585. - Intent. 
    For the O-D, official design district, in promoting the general purposes of this division, the specific intent of this section is to produce an orderly, harmonious and appropriate development of the areas with due regard to their special characteristics and peculiar suitability for particular uses, so that no building can be placed or built without considering its total effect on the whole design. 
(Code 1973, § 81-52; Code 1982, § 38-27; Ord. No. 1127, 12-9-1985; Ord. No. 1130, 1-27-1986; Ord. No. 1131, 3-10-1986; Ord. No. 1142, 6-23-1986; Ord. No. 1531, 12-11-1995; Ord. No. 1536, 2-26-1996; Ord. No. 1541, 3-26-1996; Ord. No. 1557, 10-15-1996; Ord. No. 1561, 12-9-1996) 
Sec. 48-586. - Principal uses permitted by right. 
    The following uses for the O-D, official design district shall be permitted as specified in the projected land use plan, as adopted by the council and planning commission in accordance with article II, division 4 of this chapter: 
(1)  Municipal center area. 
a.  One-family dwellings. 
b.  Public buildings. 
c.  Public parks, playgrounds and community centers. 
d.  Professional office buildings, provided that the floor area of the building at the ground floor level may be designated for and devoted to any retail use permitted by right in the B-1 district, subject to the conditions set forth in section 48-488(2). 
e.  Hotels and motels when located within 200 feet of a primary state highway. 
f.  Any principal use permitted in the B-1 district when located within 200 feet of a primary state highway. 
g.  Any other use designated by an official design for all or any part of the district, approved by the planning commission and the council in accordance with the provisions of article II, division IV of this chapter. 
(2)  Historic area. 
a.  Any principal use permitted in the T-1 district. 
b.  Any principal use permitted in the B-2 district. 
(Code 1973, § 81-52; Code 1982, § 38-27(a); Ord. No. 1127, 12-9-1985; Ord. No. 1130, 1-27-1986; Ord. No. 1131, 3-10-1986; Ord. No. 1142, 6-23-1986; Ord. No. 1531, 12-11-1995; Ord. No. 1536, 2-26-1996; Ord. No. 1541, 3-26-1996; Ord. No. 1557, 10-15-1996; Ord. No. 1561, 12-9-1996) 
Sec. 48-587. - Conditional uses permitted by special use permit. 
    Conditional uses permitted by special permit in the O-D, official design district are as follows: 
(1)  Outdoor uses, as permitted and regulated in section 48-454(1). 
(2)  Laundry or dry cleaning establishment, other than a depot or self-service laundry, subject to the same conditions imposed under section 48-454(6). 
(3)  Satellite television antenna or ground-mounted conventional television or radio antenna, as permitted and regulated in article V, division 9 of this chapter. 
(4)  Temporary shelters, with the following restrictions: 
a.  Shelters may operate only on nights between November 1 and March 31. 
b.  All persons admitted to shelters must be referred by the intake staff of a licensed county shelter. 
c.  No persons can be admitted to shelters after 9:00 p.m., unless accompanied by a member of the staff of a county shelter or a public human services agency or by a local law enforcement officer; every person in a shelter must leave by 8:00 a.m. 
d.  Transportation by van or other similar means that is sufficient for all persons admitted must be provided both to and from the shelters. 
e.  A total of no more than 30 homeless persons may be serviced by all shelters in the city on any single night. 
f.  No persons who are under the influence of alcohol or drugs can be allowed in the shelters. 
g.  All health, safety and fire codes must be complied with. 
h.  Any standards applicable to county shelters with regard to staff/client ratio, level of staff training, procedures for monitoring clients while at the shelter, and resources available for cases of emergency shall also apply as a minimum standard to every shelter in the city. 
(Code 1973, § 81-52; Code 1982, § 38-27(b); Ord. No. 1127, 12-9-1985; Ord. No. 1130, 1-27-1986; Ord. No. 1131, 3-10-1986; Ord. No. 1142, 6-23-1986; Ord. No. 1531, 12-11-1995; Ord. No. 1536, 2-26-1996; Ord. No. 1541, 3-26-1996; Ord. No. 1557, 10-15-1996; Ord. No. 1561, 12-9-1996) 
Sec. 48-588. - Conditions applying to permitted uses. 
    Conditions applying to permitted uses in the O-D, official design district are as follows: 
(1)  In any part of an O-D district no building permit or occupancy permit shall be issued, unless the building plans and site plan for a specific land parcel involved are prepared by a registered architect. 
(2)  The applicant shall apply and confer at the initial and preliminary stages with the planning commission in order to provide use, architecture and site planning that is correlated with the objectives of architecture and land uses in the O-D district. 
(3)  In any office building or group of office buildings, the floor area at the ground floor level may be designated for and devoted to retail uses, subject to the conditions set forth in section 48-488(2). 
(Code 1973, § 81-52; Code 1982, § 38-27(c); Ord. No. 1127, 12-9-1985; Ord. No. 1130, 1-27-1986; Ord. No. 1131, 3-10-1986; Ord. No. 1142, 6-23-1986; Ord. No. 1531, 12-11-1995; Ord. No. 1536, 2-26-1996; Ord. No. 1541, 3-26-1996; Ord. No. 1557, 10-15-1996; Ord. No. 1561, 12-9-1996) 
Sec. 48-589. - Accessory uses permitted. 
    Accessory uses permitted in the O-D, official design district are as follows: 
(1)  Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to a permitted principal use on the same lot therewith, including those permitted in the R-1A district and such others as may be incidental to any other use permitted in this district. 
(2)  Outdoor dining when extending a permitted principal indoor food sales or food service use, provided that the zoning administrator approves the location and number of seats and the manner of access. 
(Code 1973, § 81-52; Code 1982, § 38-27(d); Ord. No. 1127, 12-9-1985; Ord. No. 1130, 1-27-1986; Ord. No. 1131, 3-10-1986; Ord. No. 1142, 6-23-1986; Ord. No. 1531, 12-11-1995; Ord. No. 1536, 2-26-1996; Ord. No. 1541, 3-26-1996; Ord. No. 1557, 10-15-1996; Ord. No. 1561, 12-9-1996) 
Secs. 48-590-48-611. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 14. - FP, FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 48-612. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of these provisions is to prevent the loss of life and property, the creation of health and safety hazards, the disruption of commerce and governmental services, the extraordinary and unnecessary expenditure of public funds for flood protections and relief, and the impairment of the tax base by: 
(1)  Regulating uses, activities, and development which, alone or in combination with other existing or future uses, activities, and development, will cause unacceptable increases in flood heights, velocities, and frequencies. 
(2)  Restricting or prohibiting certain uses, activities, and development from locating within districts subject to flooding. 
(3)  Requiring all those uses, activities, and developments that do occur in floodprone districts to be protected and/or floodproofed against flooding and flood damage. 
(4)  Protecting individuals from buying land and structures which are unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazards. 
(Code 1982, § 38-38(art. I(a)); Ord. No. 994, 1-11-1982; Ord. No. 1001, 3-22-1982; Ord. No. 1278, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1426, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 1763, 6-28-2004) 
Sec. 48-613. - Applicability. 
    These provisions shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the city and identified as being in the 100-year floodplain by the Federal Insurance Administration. 
(Code 1982, § 38-38(art. I(b)); Ord. No. 994, 1-11-1982; Ord. No. 1001, 3-22-1982; Ord. No. 1278, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1426, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 1763, 6-28-2004) 
Sec. 48-614. - Compliance and liability. 
(a)  No land shall hereafter be developed and no structure shall be located, relocated, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, or structurally altered except in full compliance with the terms and provisions of this division and any other applicable ordinances and regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this division. 
(b)  The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this division is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may increase by manmade or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This division does not imply that districts outside the floodplain district or that land uses permitted within such district will be free from flooding or flood damages. 
(c)  This division shall not create liability on the part of the city, or any officer or employee, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this division or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Code 1982, § 38-38(art. I(c)); Ord. No. 994, 1-11-1982; Ord. No. 1001, 3-22-1982; Ord. No. 1278, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1426, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 1763, 6-28-2004) 
Sec. 48-615. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This division supersedes any ordinance currently in effect in floodprone districts. However, any underlying ordinance shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that its provisions are more restrictive than this division. 
(Code 1982, § 38-38(art. I(d)); Ord. No. 994, 1-11-1982; Ord. No. 1001, 3-22-1982; Ord. No. 1278, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1426, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 1763, 6-28-2004) 
Sec. 48-616. - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this division shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this division. The remaining portions shall remain in full force and effect; and for this purpose, the provisions of this division are hereby declared to be severable. 
(Code 1982, § 38-38(art. I(e)); Ord. No. 994, 1-11-1982; Ord. No. 1001, 3-22-1982; Ord. No. 1278, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1426, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 1763, 6-28-2004) 
Sec. 48-617. - Penalties. 
(a)  Failure by any person to comply with any of the requirements or provisions of this division shall, upon conviction, constitute a class 1 misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to $2,500.00 or up to 12 months in jail, or both. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties specified in subsection (a) of this section, all other actions are hereby reserved, including an action in equity for the proper enforcement of this division. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of, or noncompliance with, this division shall not excuse the violation or noncompliance to permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any structure constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered, or relocated in violation of this division may be declared by the city to be a public nuisance or unsuitable for human occupancy and abatable as such. Flood insurance may be withheld from structures constructed in violation of this division. If any violation of this division is not corrected within 30 days of issuance of a citation, the city may take action to correct such violations and assess to the property owner the costs and fees incurred therein. 
(Code 1982, § 38-38(art. I(f)); Ord. No. 994, 1-11-1982; Ord. No. 1001, 3-22-1982; Ord. No. 1278, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1426, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 1763, 6-28-2004) 
Sec. 48-618. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Base flood/100-year flood means a flood that, on the average, is likely to occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one percent chance of occurring each year, although the flood may occur in any year). 
    Base flood elevation (BFE) means the Federal Emergency Management Agency designated 100-year water surface elevation. 
    Board of zoning appeals means the board appointed to review appeals made by individuals with regard to decisions of the zoning administrator in the interpretation of this division, or requests for variances to this division. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, street paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Flood. 
(1)  The term "flood" means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry areas from: 
a.  The overflow of inland waters. 
b.  The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff or surface waters from any source. 
(2)  The term "flood" means the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding. 
    Floodplain. 
(1)  The term "floodplain" means a relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream or watercourse which is subject to partial or complete inundation; 
(2)  The term "floodplain" means an area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface water from any source. 
    Floodprone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. 
    Floodway means the designated area of the floodplain required to carry and discharge floodwaters of a given magnitude. For the purpose of this division, the term "floodway" shall mean being capable of accommodating a flood of the 100-year magnitude free from encroachment. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements of individual listing on the National Register, or is designated for protection by the city as a historic structure; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic structures and places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Manufactured home means a structure subject to federal regulations, which is transportable in one or more divisions; is eight body feet or more in width and 40 body feet or more in length in the traveling mode, or is 320 or more square feet when erected on site; is built on a permanent chassis; is designated to be used as a single-family dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required facilities; and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained in the structure. 
    Manufactured home park subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more lots for rent or sale. 
    New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, the term "new construction" means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designated to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as permanent but as temporary living quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Start of construction means the date the building permit was issued, provided that actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The term "actual start" means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings; such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the term "actual start of construction" means the first alteration on any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost or restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. The term "substantial improvement" includes structures which have incurred substantial damage regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to ensure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
(Code 1982, § 38-38(art. II); Ord. No. 994, 1-11-1982; Ord. No. 1001, 3-22-1982; Ord. No. 1278, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1426, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 1763, 6-28-2004) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2 
Secs. 48-619-48-639. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Zoning Districts 

Secs. 48-640. - Established. 
(a)  Basis of districts. The various floodplain districts shall include areas subject to inundation by waters of the 100-year flood. The basis for the delineation of these districts shall be the flood insurance study (FIS) for the city prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), dated July 16, 2004, as amended. 
(1)  Floodway district (FP-1). The floodway district (FP-1) is delineated, for the purposes of this division, using the criteria that certain areas within the floodplain must be capable of carrying the waters of the 100-year flood without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one foot at any point. The areas included in this district are specifically defined in table 2 of the Flood Insurance Study referenced in this section and shown on the most recent flood insurance rate map issued by FEMA accompanying the ordinance from which this subsection is derived. 
(2)  Flood fringe district (FP-2). The flood fringe district (FP-2) shall be that area of the 100-year floodplain not included in the floodway district. The basis for the outermost boundary of the district shall be the 100-year flood elevations contained in the flood profiles of the flood insurance study referenced in this section and as shown on the flood insurance rate map accompanying the ordinance from which this subsection is derived. 
(3)  Special floodplain district. The special floodplain district (FP-3) shall be those areas of the 100-year floodplain for which 100-year flood elevations have been provided in the above-referenced flood insurance study, but for which no floodway has been delineated. The FP-3 areas are shown on the flood insurance rate map accompanying the ordinance from which this subsection is derived. 
(b)  Overlay concept. 
(1)  The floodplain districts described in subsection (a) of this section shall be overlays to the existing underlying districts as shown on the official zoning ordinance map on file with the zoning administrator, and as such, the provisions for the floodplain districts shall serve as a supplement to the underlying district provisions. 
(2)  In any conflict between the provisions or requirements of the floodplain districts and those of any underlying district, the more restrictive provisions shall apply, except that relevant provisions of the floodplain districts must be satisfied. 
(3)  In the event any provision concerning a floodplain district is declared inapplicable as a result of any legislative or administrative actions or judicial decision, the basic underlying provisions shall remain applicable. 
(Code 1982, § 38-38(art. III(a)); Ord. No. 994, 1-11-1982; Ord. No. 1001, 3-22-1982; Ord. No. 1278, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1426, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 1763, 6-28-2004) 
Sec. 48-641. - Official zoning map. 
    The boundaries of the floodplain districts are established as shown on the flood insurance rate map which is declared to be a part of this division and which shall be kept on file by the zoning administrator. 
(Code 1982, § 38-38(art. III(b)); Ord. No. 994, 1-11-1982; Ord. No. 1001, 3-22-1982; Ord. No. 1278, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1426, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 1763, 6-28-2004) 
Sec. 48-642. - District boundary changes. 
    The delineation of any of the floodplain districts may be revised by the city council where natural or manmade changes have occurred and/or where more detailed studies have been conducted or undertaken by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or other qualified agency, or an individual documents the need for such change. However, prior to any such change, approval must be obtained from the Federal Insurance Administration. 
(Code 1982, § 38-38(art. III(c)); Ord. No. 994, 1-11-1982; Ord. No. 1001, 3-22-1982; Ord. No. 1278, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1426, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 1763, 6-28-2004) 
Sec. 48-643. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
    Initial interpretations of the boundaries of the floodplain districts shall be made by the zoning administrator. Should a dispute arise concerning the boundaries of any of the districts, the board of zoning appeals shall make the necessary determination. The person questioning or contesting the location of the district boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present his case to the board and to submit his own technical evidence if he so desires. 
(Code 1982, § 38-38(art. III(d)); Ord. No. 994, 1-11-1982; Ord. No. 1001, 3-22-1982; Ord. No. 1278, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1426, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 1763, 6-28-2004) 
Secs. 48-644-48-674. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - District Provisions 

Sec. 48-675. - Permit requirement. 
    All uses, activities, and development occurring within any floodplain district shall be undertaken only upon the issuance of a floodplain permit which shall be issued by the zoning administrator after review for compliance. An elevation certificate is to be completed based upon as-built conditions for residential construction and for elevated nonresidential construction in the floodplain. A floodproofing certificate is to be completed for nonresidential construction in the floodplain. Copies of these are to be kept on file by the zoning administrator. Such uses, activities and development shall be undertaken only in strict compliance with the provisions of this division and with all other applicable codes and ordinances, such as the state building code, the city's subdivision regulations, and the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act, Code of Virginia, § 10.1-2100 et seq. Prior to the issuance of any such permit, the zoning administrator shall require all applications to include compliance with all applicable state and federal laws. Under no circumstances shall any use, activity, and/or development adversely affect the capacity of the channels or floodway of any watercourse, drainage ditch, or any other drainage facility or system. 
(Code 1982, § 38-38(art. IV(a)(1)); Ord. No. 994, 1-11-1982; Ord. No. 1001, 3-22-1982; Ord. No. 1278, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1426, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 1763, 6-28-2004) 
Sec. 48-676. - Alteration or relocation of watercourse. 
    Prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of any channels or of any watercourse, stream, etc., within this jurisdiction a permit shall be obtained from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the state water control board, and the state marine resources commission. Furthermore, notification of the proposal shall be given by the applicant to all affected adjacent jurisdictions, the Division of Soil and Water Conservation (Department of Conservation and Recreation), and the Federal Insurance Administration. 
(Code 1982, § 38-38(art. IV(a)(2)); Ord. No. 994, 1-11-1982; Ord. No. 1001, 3-22-1982; Ord. No. 1278, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1426, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 1763, 6-28-2004) 
Sec. 48-677. - Site plans and permit applications. 
    All applications for development in the floodplain district and all building permits issued for the floodplain shall incorporate the following information: 
(1)  For structures to be elevated, the elevation of the lowest floor, including the basement. 
(2)  For structures to be floodproofed, nonresidential only, the elevation to which the structure will be floodproofed. 
(3)  The elevation of the 100-year flood. 
(4)  Topographic information showing existing and proposed ground elevations. 
(Code 1982, § 38-38(art. IV(a)(3)); Ord. No. 994, 1-11-1982; Ord. No. 1001, 3-22-1982; Ord. No. 1278, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1426, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 1763, 6-28-2004) 
Sec. 48-678. - Manufactured homes. 
    Manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved on sites shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation collapse and lateral movement. 
(Code 1982, § 38-38(art. IV(a)(4)); Ord. No. 994, 1-11-1982; Ord. No. 1001, 3-22-1982; Ord. No. 1278, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1426, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 1763, 6-28-2004) 
Sec. 48-679. - Recreational vehicles. 
(a)  A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect-type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(b)  Recreational vehicles must meet the permit requirements for placement and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes stated in section 48-678. 
(c)  The following are prohibited uses: 
(1)  Continual storage for more than 180 days. 
(2)  Use as temporary living quarters. 
(3)  Conversion to a permanent dwelling unit. 
(Code 1982, § 38-38(art. IV(a)(5)); Ord. No. 994, 1-11-1982; Ord. No. 1001, 3-22-1982; Ord. No. 1278, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1426, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 1763, 6-28-2004) 
Sec. 48-680. - Subdivision proposals. 
    All new subdivision proposals and other proposed developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, shall include, within such proposals, base flood elevation data. 
(Code 1982, § 38-38(art. IV(a)(6)); Ord. No. 994, 1-11-1982; Ord. No. 1001, 3-22-1982; Ord. No. 1278, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1426, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 1763, 6-28-2004) 
Sec. 48-681. - Floodway district. 
    In the floodway district no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or other development shall be permitted, unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in the 100-year flood elevation. 
(Code 1982, § 38-38(art. IV(b)); Ord. No. 994, 1-11-1982; Ord. No. 1001, 3-22-1982; Ord. No. 1278, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1426, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 1763, 6-28-2004) 
Sec. 48-682. - Flood fringe and special floodplain districts. 
    In the flood fringe and special floodplain districts, the development and/or use of land shall be permitted in accordance with the regulations of the underlying area provided that all such uses, activities, and/or development shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the floodproofing and related provisions contained in the state building code and all other applicable codes and ordinances. Within the special floodplain district, no new construction or development shall be allowed unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the elevation of the 100-year flood more than one foot at any point. 
(Code 1982, § 38-38(art. IV(c)); Ord. No. 994, 1-11-1982; Ord. No. 1001, 3-22-1982; Ord. No. 1278, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1426, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 1763, 6-28-2004) 
Sec. 48-683. - Design criteria for utilities and facilities. 
(a)  Sanitary sewer facilities. All new or replacement sanitary sewer facilities and private package sewage treatment plants, including all pumping stations and collector systems, shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into the floodwaters. In addition, they should be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage and impairment. 
(b)  Water facilities. All new or replacement water facilities shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages. 
(c)  Drainage facilities. All storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow of surface waters without damage to persons or property. The systems shall ensure drainage away from buildings and onsite waste disposal sites. The city council may require a primarily underground system to accommodate frequent floods and a secondary surface system to accommodate larger, less frequent floods. Drainage plans shall be consistent with local and regional drainage plans. The facilities shall be designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties. 
(d)  Utilities. All utilities, such as, but not limited to, gas lines, electrical and telephone systems being placed in floodprone areas should be located, elevated, where possible, and constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flooding occurrence. 
(e)  Streets and sidewalks. Streets and sidewalks should be designed to minimize their potential for increasing and aggravating the levels of flood flow. Drainage openings shall be required to sufficiently discharge flood flows without unduly increasing flood heights. 
(Code 1982, § 38-38(art. IV(d)); Ord. No. 994, 1-11-1982; Ord. No. 1001, 3-22-1982; Ord. No. 1278, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1426, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 1763, 6-28-2004) 
Secs. 48-684-48-709. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - District Permitted, Conditional and Prohibited Uses 

Sec. 48-710. - Floodway district (FP-1). 
    In the floodway district, no development shall be permitted if the proposed development results in any increase in the flood elevation. 
(1)  Permitted uses. The following permitted uses and activities, not otherwise prohibited by law, are permitted provided that they are in compliance with the provisions of the underlying district and provided they do not require structures, fill, or storage of materials and equipment. 
a.  Outdoor gardens for plants under two feet in height. 
b.  Public and private recreational uses and activities such as parks, day camps, picnic grounds, hiking and biking trails. 
c.  Accessory residential uses such as yard areas, gardens, play areas and parking and loading areas. 
d.  Utilities and public facilities and improvements including, but not limited to, railroads, streets, bridges, transmission lines, pipelines and other similar or related uses. 
(2)  Conditional uses. There are no conditional uses in the floodway district. 
(3)  Prohibited uses. Prohibited uses in the floodway district are as follows: 
a.  Storage of materials and equipment that are toxic, flammable or explosive. 
b.  Solid waste, landfills, dumps, junkyards, outdoor storage of vehicles and/or materials. 
c.  The filling of marshlands or wetlands. 
d.  The damming or relocation of any watercourse that will result in any downstream increase in flood levels during the 100-year flood. 
e.  The construction or storage of any object subject to flotation or movement during flooding. 
f.  Commercial parking or loading areas. 
g.  Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. 
(Code 1982, § 38-38(art. V(a)(1)); Ord. No. 994, 1-11-1982; Ord. No. 1001, 3-22-1982; Ord. No. 1278, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1426, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 1763, 6-28-2004) 
Sec. 48-711. - Flood fringe district (FP-2). 
(a)  Permitted uses. Development not otherwise prohibited by law in the flood fringe district shall be permitted in accordance with the regulations of the underlying district; provided that all such development shall be undertaken in strict compliance with the floodproofing and related provisions contained in the state building code and all applicable codes and ordinances. 
(b)  Conditional uses. There are no conditional uses in the flood fringe district. 
(c)  Prohibited uses. Prohibited uses in the flood fringe district are as follows: 
(1)  Storage of materials and equipment that are toxic, flammable or explosive. 
(2)  Solid waste, landfills, dumps, junkyards, outdoor storage of vehicles and/or materials. 
(3)  The filling of marshlands or wetlands. 
(4)  The damming or relocation of any watercourse that will result in any downstream increase in flood levels during the 100-year flood. 
(5)  The construction or storage of any object subject to flotation or movement during flooding. 
(6)  There shall be no filling of land to make a building lot for the purposes of constructing a residential dwelling. 
(7)  Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. 
(d)  Other requirements. Other requirements in the flood fringe district are as follows: 
(1)  The lowest floor elevation, including basement, shall be one foot or more above the 100-year flood elevation. 
(2)  All electrical water heaters, electric furnaces, and other electrical installations shall be prohibited below an elevation of one foot above the 100-year flood elevation. 
(3)  Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the 100-year flood elevation. 
(Code 1982, § 38-38(art. V(a)(2)); Ord. No. 994, 1-11-1982; Ord. No. 1001, 3-22-1982; Ord. No. 1278, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1426, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 1763, 6-28-2004) 
Sec. 48-712. - Special floodplain district (FP-3). 
(a)  Permitted uses. Development not otherwise prohibited by law in the special floodplain district shall be permitted in accordance with the regulations of the underlying district provided that all such development shall be undertaken in accordance with the floodproofing and related provisions contained in the state building code and all applicable codes and ordinances. 
(b)  Conditional uses. There are no conditional uses in the special floodplain district. 
(c)  Prohibited uses. Prohibited uses in the special floodplain district are as follows: 
(1)  Storage of materials and equipment that are toxic, flammable or explosive. 
(2)  Solid waste, landfills, dumps, junkyards, outdoor storage of vehicles and/or materials. 
(3)  The filling of marshlands. 
(4)  The damming or relocation of any watercourse that will result in any downstream increase in flood levels during the 100-year flood. 
(5)  The construction or storage of any object subject to flotation or movement during flooding. 
(6)  There shall be no filling of land to make a building lot for the purposes of constructing a residential dwelling. 
(7)  Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. 
(d)  Other requirements. 
(1)  The lowest floor elevation, including basement, shall be one foot or more above the 100-year flood elevation. 
(2)  All electrical water heaters, electric furnaces, and other electrical installations shall be prohibited below an elevation of one foot above the 100-year flood elevation. 
(3)  Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the 100-year flood elevation. 
(Code 1982, § 38-38(art. V(a)(3)); Ord. No. 994, 1-11-1982; Ord. No. 1001, 3-22-1982; Ord. No. 1278, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1426, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 1763, 6-28-2004) 
Secs. 48-713-48-737. - Reserved. 
Subdivision V. - Variances 

Sec. 48-738. - Factors to be considered. 
    In passing upon applications for variances, the board of zoning appeals shall satisfy all relevant factors and procedures specified in other sections of the this chapter and consider the following additional factors: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities caused by encroachments. No variance shall be granted for any proposed use, development, or activity within any floodway district that will cause any increase in the 100-year flood elevation. No variance shall be granted for any proposed use, development, or activity within any special floodplain district that would, together with all other existing and anticipated development, increase the 100-year flood more than one foot at any point. 
(2)  The danger that materials may be swept on to other lands or downstream to the injury of others. 
(3)  The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions. 
(4)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owners. 
(5)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community. 
(6)  The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location. 
(7)  The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the proposed use. 
(8)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future. 
(9)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area. 
(10)  The safety of access by ordinary and emergency vehicles to the property in time of flood. 
(11)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site. 
(12)  The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(13)  Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this chapter. 
(Code 1982, § 38-38(art. VI); Ord. No. 994, 1-11-1982; Ord. No. 1001, 3-22-1982; Ord. No. 1278, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1426, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 1763, 6-28-2004) 
Sec. 48-739. - Application referral. 
    The board of zoning appeals may refer any application, and accompanying documentation pertaining to any request for a variance, to any engineer or other qualified person or agency for technical assistance in evaluating the proposed project in relation to flood heights and velocities, and the adequacy of the plans for flood protection and other related matters. 
(Code 1982, § 38-38(art. VI); Ord. No. 994, 1-11-1982; Ord. No. 1001, 3-22-1982; Ord. No. 1278, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1426, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 1763, 6-28-2004) 
Sec. 48-740. - Issuance. 
(a)  Variances shall be issued only after the board of zoning appeals has determined that the granting of such will not result in: 
(1)  Unacceptable or prohibited increases in flood heights; 
(2)  Additional threats to public safety; 
(3)  Extraordinary public expense; and 
(4)  The creation of nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public, or conflict with local laws or ordinances. 
(b)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(Code 1982, § 38-38(art. VI); Ord. No. 994, 1-11-1982; Ord. No. 1001, 3-22-1982; Ord. No. 1278, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1426, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 1763, 6-28-2004) 
Sec. 48-741. - Notification of risk. 
(a)  The board of zoning appeals shall notify the applicant for a variance, in writing, that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the 100-year flood elevation increases the risks to life and property, and will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance. 
(b)  A record shall be maintained of the notification specified in subsection (a) of this section, as well as all variance actions, including justification for the issuance of the variances. Any variances which are issued shall be noted in the annual or biennial reports submitted to the Federal Insurance Administrator. 
(Code 1982, § 38-38(art. VI); Ord. No. 994, 1-11-1982; Ord. No. 1001, 3-22-1982; Ord. No. 1278, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1426, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 1763, 6-28-2004) 
Secs. 48-742-48-765. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VI. - Existing Structures in Floodplain Districts 

Sec. 48-766. - Use of structure no longer in conformity. 
    A structure or use of a structure or premises which lawfully existed before the enactment of these provisions, but which is not in conformity with these provisions, may be continued subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Existing structures in the floodway district shall not be expanded or enlarged unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed expansion would not result in any increase in the 100-year flood elevation. 
(2)  Any modifications, alterations, repair, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to a structure and/or use located in any floodplain area to an extent or amount of less than 50 percent of its market value before addition or alteration, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest extent possible. 
(3)  The modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement of any kind to a structure and/or use, regardless of its locations in a floodplain area, to an extent or amount of 50 percent or more of its market value before addition or alteration shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the state building code. 
(4)  Existing structures in the special floodplain district shall not be expanded or enlarged unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses that the proposed expansion or enlargement, together with all other existing and anticipated development, will not cause more than a one foot increase in the 100 year flood elevation. 
(Code 1982, § 38-38(art. VII); Ord. No. 994, 1-11-1982; Ord. No. 1001, 3-22-1982; Ord. No. 1278, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1426, 12-16-1992; Ord. No. 1763, 6-28-2004) 
Secs. 48-767-48-785. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 15. - HCC, HISTORIC AND CULTURAL CONSERVATION DISTRICT 

Sec. 48-786. - Policy, purpose, intent. 
(a)  The council of the city finds that retention and protection of historic, architectural and cultural legacy of the city wherever feasible is important to the environmental well-being of the city, enhances property values, encourages desirable forms of economic development, and provides a stabilizing influence for the community's cultural and social life. The council further finds that visual evidence of the community's history, architecture and characteristic way of life is valuable for educational, cultural and recreational purposes. 
(b)  The council finds that residences, structures and sites of historical, architectural and cultural interest and significance are scattered throughout the small, two square mile area of the city. Such residences and structures consist of a very few built during the colonial period, a somewhat larger number built before the Civil War, and a considerable number built in the period between the Civil War and World War I. Many of these are listed in the city's architectural inventory of 1969, as amended. The council also finds that structures built as residences during or before 1910 are, in general, of historic architectural and cultural interest; and that the significance of these structures may be either as noteworthy landmarks, recognized for their individual merits, or as elements that contribute to the particular qualities of a scene, neighborhood, or locality which has significance. 
(c)  The council further finds that, because of the reasons stated above and because of the scattered location of these structures and sites of historical, architectural and cultural significance, the entire city should be designated as a historic and cultural conservation district. 
(d)  The council, therefore, declares that it is the policy of the city to preserve and protect its architectural, cultural and historical heritage and to encourage and assist preservation of historically, architecturally and culturally significant sites, buildings and structures. 
(e)  The purpose of this division is to establish a historic and cultural conservation district. It is the intent that the benefits to the community and property owners in such district will be realized as fully as possible, with a minimum of expense and delay, in accordance with the objectives of the division. 
(f)  The land use regulations applicable within this district are intended to protect against destruction of structures and to encourage their conservation as part of the cultural, social, economic, political or architectural heritage of the city. 
(g)  It is further the intent of these regulations to utilize the advice of the city historical commission, the city architectural advisory board, and other organization or individuals qualified by experience, training and interest to assist in carrying out the provisions of this division, consistent with the policy of the city. 
(Code 1982, § 38-39(a); Ord. No. 1072, 5-29-1984; Ord. No. 1277, § 7, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1388, 2-10-1992; Ord. No. 1465, 2-28-1994; Ord. No. 1632, 2-8-1999) 
Sec. 48-787. - Creation of the historic architectural review board. 
    There shall be created for purposes as set out in this division a historic architectural review board (referred to as "HARB" or the "board"). The HARB shall have five members. Each member shall be appointed by the city council for staggered terms commencing with two members for two years and three members for four years. In selecting members, the council may consider, among other factors, potential members' demonstrated interest, competence or knowledge in historic preservation, archaeology or planning; and at least one member shall be an architect or an architectural historian. The members of the historic architectural review board after appointment by the city council shall convene the first meeting, at which time the HARB shall select a chairman, vice-chairman, and secretary. The HARB shall meet when necessary to carry out its duties as described herein. The HARB may obtain and utilize the technical assistance of professional advisors where it considers such assistance desirable. 
(Code 1982, § 38-39(b); Ord. No. 1072, 5-29-1984; Ord. No. 1277, § 7, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1388, 2-10-1992; Ord. No. 1465, 2-28-1994; Ord. No. 1632, 2-8-1999) 
Sec. 48-788. - Established. 
    A historic and cultural conservation (HCC) district is hereby established pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 15.1-503.2, as amended, to promote the general welfare through preservation and protection of sites, buildings and structures having historical, architectural or cultural significance. This HCC district is created as a zoning overlay district which shall cover all land within the boundaries of the city. The boundaries of the HCC district are those as stated in the city Charter at section 1.02. Any parcel of land lying in the HCC district shall also be in one or more of the other zoning districts provided for in this chapter. The HCC district regulations contained herein are applicable to the following designated structures and sites: 
(1)  All structures built as residences during or before 1910; and 
(2)  Other structures and sites of historical, cultural or architectural significance expressly designated pursuant to section 48-791. 
(Code 1982, § 38-39(c); Ord. No. 1072, 5-29-1984; Ord. No. 1277, § 7, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1388, 2-10-1992; Ord. No. 1465, 2-28-1994; Ord. No. 1632, 2-8-1999) 
Sec. 48-789. - Official register of protected structures and sites. 
    Upon completion of the certification in section 48-790 or upon specific designation, pursuant to subsection 48-788(2), structures and sites shall be listed in the Official Register of Protected Structures and Sites and the designation shall be recorded in the land records. Listing in the Official Register is not a requirement for protection under this division. 
(Code 1982, § 38-39(d); Ord. No. 1072, 5-29-1984; Ord. No. 1277, § 7, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1388, 2-10-1992; Ord. No. 1465, 2-28-1994; Ord. No. 1632, 2-8-1999) 
Sec. 48-790. - Certification of structures built during or before 1910. 
(a)  The historical commission shall certify to the planning department the date upon which the structure or a significant part thereof was built and shall cite the source for such certification. If an exact date is not ascertainable, the historical commission shall cite evidence that the structure was built during or before 1910. 
(b)  Upon receipt of such certification, the planning department shall notify the owner of the structure that the structure will be placed on the Official Register of Protected Structures and Sites unless an objection is filed within 30 days from the mailing of the notice. Such notice shall include an identification of the lot or parcel which is subject to regulation under this division and the nature of the regulations and the procedure for objection. A copy of the notice shall be sent to the building inspector and zoning administrator. The objection will be heard within 45 days, unless deferred by the planning commission for administrative necessity, or to enable further research or investigation to be made by the owner or on behalf of the city, or for other good cause shown. 
(c)  The planning commission shall hear and decide all objections to the accuracy of the certification. No formal rules of evidence shall apply, but the commission shall hear the owner or his representative and shall hear such other evidence as the commission deems relevant, material and trustworthy. The planning commission may, by its bylaws or by resolution, determine such requirements for handling objections as it deems proper, including such matters as establishing a hearing date after receiving a request, prescribing the form in which evidence about dates of construction shall be submitted, and fixing the time of submission. 
(d)  The owner of the historical commission may appeal the decision of the planning commission to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the clerk of the council within 15 days after the decision by the planning commission. Alternatively, the owner or the historical commission may note the appeal with the planning commission at the time of the planning commission's decision and the planning commission shall forward such notice to the city clerk. The council shall review the record made in the planning commission and decide the appeal within 60 days of its receipt by the clerk, unless extended for good cause. The council shall uphold the planning commission unless the commission's decision was contrary to law or that the decision was not supported by a preponderance of evidence. 
(Code 1982, § 38-39(e); Ord. No. 1072, 5-29-1984; Ord. No. 1277, § 7, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1388, 2-10-1992; Ord. No. 1465, 2-28-1994; Ord. No. 1632, 2-8-1999) 
Sec. 48-791. - Procedure for designating other structures and sites of architectural, historical or cultural significance. 
    The historical commission may petition the planning commission for the addition of residential structures built after 1910 or nonresidential structures built at any time, and of sites which would be regulated under this division. Such structures and sites may be designated in the manner prescribed in article II, division 3, pertaining to amendments, and subject to the following procedures: 
(1)  Petitions shall be accompanied by a written report describing the architectural, historical or cultural significance of the structure and sites to be protected. 
(2)  In making its required recommendation under article II, division 3, the planning commission shall prepare and submit to the city council its recommendations concerning the structure or sites. The planning commission's report shall indicate existing land uses, special problems, trends and other matters bearing upon the proposed designation for architectural, historical and cultural preservation, as well as a description of the lot or parcel which would be made subject to regulation under this division. 
(3)  The council, in designating structures and sites, may do so only if the structure or site meets one or more of the following criteria: 
a.  It exemplifies or reflects important aspects of the cultural, political, economical, social or military history of the nation, state, region or the city. 
b.  It is associated with persons or events of national, state or regional significance. 
c.  It is a good example of local or regional architectural design, making it valuable for the study of a period, style or method of construction which no longer is in general use. 
d.  It contains elements of design, detail, materials or craftsmanship which represent a significant innovation in architecture, construction or technology. 
(Code 1982, § 38-39(f); Ord. No. 1072, 5-29-1984; Ord. No. 1277, § 7, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1388, 2-10-1992; Ord. No. 1465, 2-28-1994; Ord. No. 1632, 2-8-1999) 
Sec. 48-792. - Permits required for properties subject to regulation. 
    In addition to the use regulations within the zoning districts overlaid by the HCC district, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Building permits. The same building permits shall continue to be required for work on structures subject to regulation under this division as for other structures. For all building permit applications, the building inspector shall review available evidence in order to determine in writing if the structure is designated for protection under subsections 48-788(1) or (2). In examining the issue of whether the structure was built as a residence during or before 1910, the inspector shall refer the matter to the director of planning and development for his determination and the inspector shall follow the director's determination. The best available information shall be consulted which shall include consideration of whether the structure has been certified, pursuant to section 48-790. Certification shall be conclusive of the director's and inspector's determination. If certification has not been accomplished, the director must request an opinion from the historical commission, or the director may make an inquiry into other available information. During this inquiry, the application for a building permit shall be held in abeyance until the inquiry is finally completed and the inspector's determination is issued. The application for the building permit shall be held in abeyance for a period not to exceed 30 days. If sufficient evidence exists to support the historical commission's opinion that the structure was built during or before 1910 as a residence and thus a designated structure, the commission shall inform the director of planning prior to the expiration of the 30-day period; if the structure has not yet been certified using the process in section 48-790, the commission shall also proceed to certify the structure by initiating within the 30-day period the notice to the owner of the structure as set out in section 48-790. However, if the owner believes the structure is not designated for protection under subsection 48-788(1), the owner shall have the right to challenge the building inspector's determination before the planning commission and thereafter by appeal to the city council. The appeal to the commission shall be made within 30 days of the date of the inspector's decision; the commission shall conduct the appeal as set out in section 48-790(c). The council shall uphold the commission unless the commission's decision was contrary to law or was not supported by a preponderance of evidence. If an appeal was made at the time of the certification process in section 48-790, no other appeal may be made absent submission of information which was not considered at the time of the original certification. 
(2)  HARB approval required before razing, moving, altering; definitions. No structure designated in subsections 48-788(1) or (2) shall be razed, moved or altered without first obtaining a permit from the building inspector, which shall be issued only after approval of the same by the HARB, or, on appeal, by the city council after consultation with the HARB. The fee for a building permit subject to review by the HARB pursuant to this section shall be one-half the usual building permit fee. Definitions applying to this subsection are as follows: 
    Alter or alteration means a substantial change in the structure and/or its distinguishing qualities or characteristic. Examples include the following: additions to or removal of parts of the structure that increase the floor area or otherwise change substantially its size, height, contour or outline; covering a substantial portion of the exterior of the structure with materials other than the same kind used; removal, alteration or addition of major architectural features, such as porches, dormers, cupolas, stairways, terraces and the like; and any other similar major change not specifically noted. Examples of changes that are not alterations include changes inside the structure; replacement in kind of any features on the exterior of the structure; repainting in the same or a different color; addition or deletion of storm windows and door, window gardens, awnings, temporary canopies, or similar appurtenances and window air conditioners; addition or deletion of television or radio antennas; any alterations to the rear of the structure which cannot be seen from the street contiguous to the front yard of the structure; all improvements, alterations or renovations which can be accomplished without obtaining a building permit; or any similar minor changes. 
    In kind means the same profile, material, design and operating mechanism of the structure that was present when the protection of this section was effective. 
    Moving means changing the location of the structure. It does not include, for example, the temporary lifting of a structure for purposes of adding a basement. 
    Razing means the complete destruction of the structure. 
(3)  Recommendations needed before a review for variance to move. If moving a structure requires a variance, no variance shall be reviewed by the board of zoning appeals until a recommendation has been made by the HARB and the historical commission. 
(4)  Applicability of site plan variances. Nothing in this division is intended to replace existing provisions concerning variances that are related to site plans. 
(5)  Contract owners. A contract owner shall be able to apply for any permit required by this division. 
(6)  Ancillary structures. Altering, construction or reconstruction of all ancillary structures, or outbuildings, shall be no more than 11/2 stories and not exceed 20 feet in height measured to the peak of the roof, of materials, detailing and roof pitch to match the architectural style of the historic structure designated in subsections 48-788(1) or (2), and shall be exempt from architectural and design limitations that are imposed otherwise in the Code. The ancillary structure shall be in style, scale and proportion compatible with the historic structure. HARB approval is required prior to issue of permits by the city. 
(Code 1982, § 38-39(g); Ord. No. 1072, 5-29-1984; Ord. No. 1277, § 7, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1388, 2-10-1992; Ord. No. 1465, 2-28-1994; Ord. No. 1632, 2-8-1999) 
Sec. 48-793. - Procedures for obtaining permits. 
    The procedure for obtaining permits for moving, alterations, razing of a designated structure or construction of an ancillary structure shall be as follows: 
(1)  The HARB shall hold a public hearing on each request for a permit requiring its approval. The board may promulgate guidelines concerning procedures to be followed. 
(2)  Within ten days after receipt of a complete application, the HARB shall notify, by first class mail, owners of adjacent properties and the historical commission of the date of the public hearing on the application. Such hearing shall be held at least ten days but not more than 30 days after such notification. The hearing shall be advertised in at least one newspaper of general circulation in the city and shall include notice of the time and place of the public hearing on the application. 
(3)  At the public hearing, the HARB shall: 
a.  Consider any recommendation from the historical commission. If the commission has not forwarded a recommendation, the board need not delay its own decision, but it may for good cause. 
b.  Hear the applicant and any other person desiring to speak. 
c.  Request such additional information from the applicant as it may desire, so that, if at all possible, the decision need not be deferred to a later meeting. 
(4)  The board shall approve or deny a permit by majority vote, giving reasons for the decision. Failure of the board to reach a final decision within 30 days of receipt by the board of the requested information shall be deemed to be approval by the board. 
(5)  If a variance is required, the board shall forward its recommendations to the board of zoning appeals; and the approval by the HARB shall be conditioned upon the approval of the variance by the board of zoning appeals. 
(6)  Following a decision by the HARB, the building inspector shall allow a ten-day period for appeals. The permit shall be issued or denied according to the decision of the board, unless an appeal has been filed, pursuant to section 48-796. In that case, the building inspector shall not act until a determination has been made on the appeal. 
(Code 1982, § 38-39(h); Ord. No. 1072, 5-29-1984; Ord. No. 1277, § 7, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1388, 2-10-1992; Ord. No. 1465, 2-28-1994; Ord. No. 1632, 2-8-1999) 
Sec. 48-794. - Permit considerations by the HARB. 
(a)  Razing a building or structure. The board shall review the circumstances of the proposed razing and the condition of the structure proposed for razing and shall report its findings based on consideration of the following criteria: 
(1)  Is the building of such architectural or historical interest that razing it would be detrimental to the public interest? In this connection, the HARB must consider the purpose of preservation and may consider the criteria for designating structures listed in section 48-791 and the National Register Criteria for Evaluation. 
(2)  Is the design, texture and material of the building so old or unusual that it could not be reproduced or reconstructed in a financially reasonable manner? 
(3)  Is the building structurally sound or can it be made sound at reasonable cost? 
(4)  If maintained or rehabilitated and used under existing zoning, can the building be expected to yield a reasonable return or beneficial use at reasonable cost to its owner? 
(5)  Could the building be saved from razing by moving it to another site, thus making its present site available for redevelopment in accordance with existing zoning? 
(b)  Moving a building or structure. The board shall consider the following criteria: 
(1)  Would the proposed relocation have a detrimental effect on structural soundness of the building or structure? 
(2)  Would the proposed relocation have a detrimental effect on the historical aspects of other historic structures in the HCC district? 
(3)  Would relocation prevent demolition of the building? 
(4)  Would relocation provide new surroundings that would be harmonious with or incongruous to the historical and architectural aspects of the structure or building? 
(5)  Would relocation of the building help preserve and protect a historic place or area of historic interest in the city? 
(6)  The economic hardship, if any, to the applicant. 
(c)  Altering a building or structure. The board shall consider the drawings and other plans for the proposed alteration. The board shall have the authority to require plans that, in its opinion, provide sufficient detail, clarity and to scale to show the existing conditions and the proposed changes. The board shall adopt rules governing the application procedure. The board shall use the criteria on integrity as set out in the most current National Register Criteria for Evaluation published by the National Park Service and the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation for Historical Preservation Projects. The board shall be able to provide advice to the applicant that it believes would make the alteration more compatible with the structure and not substantially diminish the integrity of the structure. Upon giving advice, the board shall grant the permit. In all cases, the board shall state its advice in writing and the basis for it within 30 days of the receipt of the application to alter a structure. 
(d)  Constructing an ancillary structure. Before any permits are issued by the city to alter or construct an ancillary structure on a land parcel in the historic and cultural conservation district or a parcel of land that is also occupied by a structure on the Official Register of Protected Structures and Sites, application shall be made by the owner by letter to the HARB, via the planning division, with appropriate building plans, including elevations and specifications for all surfaces and materials. The board shall hear the case within 35 days from the receipt of the application. The board will make its decision concerning permit approval in writing within ten days of the conclusion of the hearing. Appeals of HARB decisions may be made under the procedures of section 48-796. City permits may be issued after a HARB approval or conditional approval. 
(Code 1982, § 38-39(i); Ord. No. 1072, 5-29-1984; Ord. No. 1277, § 7, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1388, 2-10-1992; Ord. No. 1465, 2-28-1994; Ord. No. 1632, 2-8-1999) 
Sec. 48-795. - Maintenance of historic properties. 
(a)  Routine maintenance exclusion. Nothing in this division shall be construed to prevent the routine maintenance or repair of any exterior elements of any building or structure so long as there is no change in form or materials. 
(b)  Protective maintenance requirement. Pursuant to Code of Virginia, § 15.1-503.2(b), as amended, the purpose of this division is to prevent the demolition by neglect of any building or structure by permitting permanent damage by weather or vandalism. The intent of this division is to ensure that the owner of any building or structure subject to the provisions of this division shall keep such building or structure properly maintained and repaired in accordance with this division, and the provisions of the building and housing codes. 
(c)  Degree of maintenance required. The degree of maintenance and repair required is that degree sufficient to prevent damage to the structural components and/or the exterior that would cause the collapse of the structure or that would cause the building to become so deteriorated as to prevent its repair and preservation. Acts which the owner may be required to perform, pursuant to this section, shall include the following: 
(1)  Securing the building or structure by boarding up doors and windows; 
(2)  Stabilizing walls, roofs and other parts of the building or structure; and 
(3)  Termite treatment. 
(d)  Enforcement. The board shall request a meeting with an owner when a property is in a seriously deteriorated condition, and the board shall discuss with the owner ways to improve the condition of the building or structure. After this step the board may request the building inspector to investigate further the condition of such building or structure and to make a determination within 14 days of violations of this division. Upon finding that a building is in seriously deteriorated condition which threatens its preservation, the building inspector shall notify the owner, in writing, and shall identify specific repairs and work necessary to comply with the provisions of this division. The owner shall have 90 days from written notification to complete necessary repairs and work identified by the building inspector. Failure to complete the necessary repairs and work within 90 days shall constitute a violation of this division. The owner may appeal an order of the building inspector to the city council. 
(Code 1982, § 38-39(j); Ord. No. 1072, 5-29-1984; Ord. No. 1277, § 7, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1388, 2-10-1992; Ord. No. 1465, 2-28-1994; Ord. No. 1632, 2-8-1999) 
Sec. 48-796. - Appeals to the council. 
    Appeals to decisions of the HARB may be made to the city council: 
(1)  Whenever a permit is denied by the HARB, the applicant for such permit has the right to appeal to and be heard before the city council, provided that he files a petition of appeal in writing with the city clerk within ten days after the decision of the HARB. Alternatively, the owner may note the appeal with the HARB at the time of its decision, and HARB shall forward such notice to the city clerk. 
(2)  Whenever a permit is approved by the HARB, opponents to the granting of such permit have the right to appeal to and be heard before the city council, provided they file a petition signed by at least 25 adult residents and/or persons owning real estate in the city with the city clerk within ten days after the decision by the HARB. On any appeal, the decision of the HARB to grant a permit shall be stayed pending the outcome of the appeal before the city council. 
(3)  Upon receipt of an appeal as provided in subsection (1) or (2) of this section, the city clerk shall notify the city manager, who shall schedule a public hearing before the city council within 30 days of the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. At least ten days notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be given by at least one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. At the public hearing, the council shall hear a representative of the HARB. On any appeal, the city council shall review the record below and it may reverse or modify the decision of the HARB, if it finds the decision is contrary to law or that its decision is not supported by a preponderance of evidence, or it may affirm the decision of the HARB. The council may remand the matter to the HARB any time substantial new evidence is presented to the council. The council's decision shall be forwarded to the building inspector. 
(Code 1982, § 38-39(k); Ord. No. 1072, 5-29-1984; Ord. No. 1277, § 7, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1388, 2-10-1992; Ord. No. 1465, 2-28-1994; Ord. No. 1632, 2-8-1999) 
Sec. 48-797. - Appeals to the circuit court. 
(a)  Any applicant or any petitioners, as specified in section 48-796, aggrieved by a final decision of the city council shall have the right to appeal such decision to the circuit court having proper jurisdiction for review. Such appeal shall be a petition at law, setting forth the alleged illegality of the action of the city council, and shall be filed within 30 days after the final decision is rendered by the city council. The filing of said petition shall stay the decision of the governing body and any permit issued according to that decision, except that the filing of such petition shall not stay the decision of the city council if such decision denies the right to demolish a historic structure or building. 
(b)  The court may reverse or modify the decision of the city council, in whole or in part, if it finds upon review that the decision of the city council is contrary to law or that its decision is arbitrary and constitutes an abuse of discretion, or it may affirm the decision of the city council. 
(Code 1982, § 38-39(l); Ord. No. 1072, 5-29-1984; Ord. No. 1277, § 7, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1388, 2-10-1992; Ord. No. 1465, 2-28-1994; Ord. No. 1632, 2-8-1999) 
Sec. 48-798. - Additional rights of property owners. 
(a)  In addition to the right of appeal hereinabove set forth, the owner of a historic landmark, building or structure, the demolition of which is subject to the provisions of section 48-792, shall, as a matter of right, be entitled to raze or demolish such landmark, building or structure provided: 
(1)  The owner has appealed to the city council for such right; 
(2)  The owner has, for the period of time set forth in the time schedule contained in subsection (c) of this section and at a price reasonably related to its fair market value, made a bona fide offer to sell such landmark, building or structure and the land pertaining thereto, to any person, firm, corporation, government or agency, which gives reasonable assurance that it is willing to preserve and restore the landmark, building or structure and the land pertaining thereto; and 
(3)  No bona fide contract binding upon all parties, shall have been executed for the sale of any such landmark, building or structure and the land pertaining thereto, prior to the expiration of the applicable time period set forth in the time schedule contained in subsection (c) of this section. 
(b)  Any appeal which may be taken to the court from the decision of the city council, whether instituted by the owner or by any other proper party, notwithstanding the provisions heretofore stated relating to a stay of the decision appealed from, shall not affect the right of the owner to make the bona fide offer to sell, pursuant to the provisions referred to subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  The time schedule for offers to sell, pursuant to the provisions of this section, shall be as follows: 
(1)  Five months when the offering price is less than $55,000.00; 
(2)  Six months when the offering price is $55,000.00, or more but less than $75,000.00; 
(3)  Seven months when the offering price is $75,000.00 or more, but less than $90,000.00; and 
(4)  Twelve months when the offering price is $90,000.00 or more. 
(Code 1982, § 38-39(m); Ord. No. 1072, 5-29-1984; Ord. No. 1277, § 7, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1388, 2-10-1992; Ord. No. 1465, 2-28-1994; Ord. No. 1632, 2-8-1999) 
Sec. 48-799. - Official plaques. 
    The city shall, upon request of the owner of a structure in the Official Register of Protected Structures and Sites, make available a plaque which is suitable in terms of materials and aesthetics for mounting on an exterior wall. This plaque shall indicate in wording to be determined by the planning department that the building is officially designated as historically or culturally significant. 
(Code 1982, § 38-39(n); Ord. No. 1072, 5-29-1984; Ord. No. 1277, § 7, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1388, 2-10-1992; Ord. No. 1465, 2-28-1994; Ord. No. 1632, 2-8-1999) 
Sec. 48-800. - Additional requirements for properties subject to regulation. 
(a)  A lot in the R-1A or R-1B district on which a designated structure is located shall not be reduced in size such that it no longer meets the minimum lot size, frontage, and setback requirements of a lot in the R-1A district. A lot existing at the time of designation of the structure which is substandard with respect to the minimum lot size, frontage, or setback requirements of a lot in the R-1A district shall not be further reduced in size, unless any substandard feature remains unaffected. 
(b)  A lot on which a designated structure is located shall not be utilized in any calculation of land area required in the R-C, R-TH or R-M district. 
(c)  This division shall not apply to any designated structure for which a bona fide site plan or building permit has been filed with the city on or before the first reading of the ordinance from which this division is derived. 
(Code 1982, § 38-39(o); Ord. No. 1072, 5-29-1984; Ord. No. 1277, § 7, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1388, 2-10-1992; Ord. No. 1465, 2-28-1994; Ord. No. 1632, 2-8-1999) 
Sec. 48-801. - Decertification of properties listed on the City of Falls Church Official Register of Protected Structures and Sites "Official Register". 
(a)  Upon sufficient evidence, the city council may decertify certain properties listed on the city's Official Register. In addition to the other requirements of the HCC district, the owner of a property designated as historic, or their agent, may apply for decertification. The application form provided by the department of development services shall be completed; supporting documentation attached; and a fee paid (see chapter 15, Fees). 
(b)  Intent. The intent of this section is to allow a process for decertification of a property listed on the "Official Register" only in those cases where qualified experts have found that the historic fabric of a structure has been destroyed by fire or other "act of God" to such an extent that the continued listing of that property on the "Official Register" no longer serves the goals and purposes of the historic and cultural conservation overlay district. 
(c)  Documentation required. The applicant shall provide as much information as possible to support the application, but not less than two of the following must be provided: 
(1)  An evaluation and written report by a qualified expert (licensed professional with a certification or training in historic preservation) that the structure has lost its historical integrity as a result of a fire or an act of God; 
(2)  An eyewitness account, verbal or written, that the structure protected burned to the degree that no or little original fabric remains; 
(3)  A report from the local fire department that the structure protected burned to the degree that no or little original fabric remains; 
(4)  A newspaper account of the destruction of the structure; 
(5)  Photographs depicting the former and the present condition of the structure protected after "an act of God". 
(d)  Upon receipt of an application for decertification, the director of planning and development services will advise the city manager of the application. The application will be referred to the historical commission, which will consider the evidence submitted and make a recommendation to the planning commission. The historical commission shall hold a meeting to consider the evidence presented within 30 calendar days. 
(e)  Upon receipt of the application for decertification and the historical commission's recommendation, the planning commission will hold a public hearing to consider the evidence presented within 30 calendar days. The planning commission shall forward its recommendation, along with the historical commission's recommendation, to the city council. Should the planning commission recommend denial, a super majority vote of the council would be required to grant the decertification. 
(f)  Upon receipt of the application and the recommendations of the historical commission and the planning commission, the city council shall meet and hold a public hearing as soon as possible, but not more than 45 calendar days after receipt. Following the public hearing, the council will continue the item to receive additional specified information or approve the application or deny the application, stating its reason for the decision. The council action to decertify a specific property shall be by ordinance. 
(g)  Following any city council approval to decertify a particular parcel/structure, the applicant shall return to the city the historic designation plaque attached to the structure. After which, the city shall issue a letter to the applicant confirming the council's action and receipt of the plaque. The city shall take the necessary action within ten working days of receipt of the plaque. 
(Ord. No. 1889, 2-11-2013) 
Sec. 48-802. - City of Falls Church Official Register of Protected Structures and Sites "Official Register". 
(a)  The zoning administrator, assisted by the director of planning and development services and the building official, shall maintain the "Official Register of Protected Structures and Sites", which shall contain the listing of structures and sites subject to the provisions of division 15. 
(b)  The Official Register replaces all other lists and maps, may be revised and updated, as provided for herein, and shall be the sole record for determining applicability of division 15. 
(Ord. No. 1889, 2-11-2013) 
Secs. 48-803-48-823. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 16. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1915, adopted Mar. 24, 2014, deleted div. 16, §§ 48-824-48-843, entitled "CBPA, Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Overlay District", which derived from: Code 1982, §§ 38-42(a)-(t); Ord. No. 1335, adopted Nov. 12, 1990; Ord. No. 1380, adopted Nov. 11, 1991; Ord. No. 1748, adopted Feb. 9, 2004; and Ord. No. 1766, adopted Sept. 13, 2004. See ch. 35 for similar provisions. 

Secs. 48-824-48-866. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 48-867. - Regulations concerning specified conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses specified in this section shall comply with the following regulations and with any other conditions stipulated by the board of zoning appeals, pursuant to subsection 48-172(5): Exception: city council shall have final authority for the following conditional use applications as provided in subsection (4) of this section: 
  Drive-through and drive-through facilities; 
  Assisted living facilities. 
(1)  Private clubs, lodges and recreational or community facilities, none of which shall be of a commercial nature: Such facilities shall be owned by a nonprofit organization and operated on a nonprofit basis. Such uses shall be screened appropriately to preserve the character of surrounding uses. 
a.  A swimming pool, including the apron, filtering and pumping equipment, and any buildings, shall be at least 75 feet from the nearest property line and at least 125 feet from any existing dwelling on an adjoining property; except that where the lot upon which it is located abuts land in a commercial or industrial district, the pool may be constructed not less than 25 feet from the nearest property line of such land in a commercial or industrial district. Such pool shall have direct access to a collector street or higher functional classification street. 
b.  Noise levels shall be within those stipulated in chapter 14, article III, pertaining to noise. 
c.  Provisions for concessions for the serving of food, refreshments or entertainment for club members and guests may be permitted, in conformance with health department and alcoholic board of control regulations. 
(2)  Hospitals for human care, rest homes, nursing homes, convalescent homes, orphanages, or similar residential institutions, provided such use will not constitute a nuisance because of traffic, noise, number of patients or persons being cared for, or the type of physical activity; that said use will not adversely affect the present character or future development of the surrounding residential community. 
(3)  Four to six story apartments: Multifamily dwellings over three stories in height, in accordance with the following supplemental regulations: 
a.  The minimum lot area shall be 21/2 acres. 
b.  The minimum lot area per dwelling shall be as shown in this subsection: 
Type Unit Lot Area per Unit (square feet) Efficiency 800 One bedroom 1,200 Two bedroom 1,600 Three bedrooms and larger 1,800  
c.  The minimum yard requirements set forth in subsection 48-365(3) shall apply and, in addition, a building containing multifamily dwellings shall be set back from every street and lot line, a distance of not less than one foot for each foot of height in excess of 35 feet. 
d.  All buildings, including accessory structures, shall not cover in the aggregate more than 25 percent of the lot area and, together with all vehicular parking areas, loading areas and driveways, shall not cover in the aggregate more than 50 percent of the lot area. 
e.  The minimum lot width shall be 100 feet. 
f.  The maximum building height shall not exceed six stories or 75 feet, whichever is the lesser. 
g.  Lawn and planting areas shall be designed by a landscape architect registered in the state. 
(4)  Conditional use applications subject to city council approval. 
a.  The planning commission, after receiving the recommendations of the architectural advisory board, shall review the application and require such revisions or conditions it deems necessary in order to satisfy the intent of this section. The planning commission shall then recommend approval or denial of the application and submit its recommendation to the city council. 
b.  City council shall, after consideration of the recommendation of the planning commission, have final authority on the application. In deciding to approve or deny the application, city council may require such revisions or conditions it deems necessary to satisfy the intent of this section. 
c.  An application for a special use permit shall be reviewed with due regard to the nature and condition of all adjacent uses and structures, and the probable effect upon them of the proposed use. The review shall also take into account the proposed special characteristics, design, method of operation, effect on traffic conditions, or any other aspects of the particular use or structure. If the planning commission or city council should find, after hearing and considering the reports of the planning staff and the architectural advisory board, that the proposed establishment or use will not adversely affect the peace, health or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood, nor be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood, but will be in accordance with the general purpose and objectives of the land use plan and other parts of the official master plan, and of this chapter, the planning commission or city council may authorize the issuance, by the planning director, of a special use permit. In those instances where the planning commission or city council find that the proposed use may be likely to have an adverse effect as above, the application shall be reviewed to determine whether such effect can be avoided by the imposition of any special requirements or conditions with respect to location, construction, equipment, maintenance or operation, in addition to those expressly stipulated in this chapter for the particular use. If such determination is in the negative, the permit shall be denied. If such determination is in the affirmative, the planning commission may recommend and the city council may authorize the issuance of a special use permit and shall stipulate the requirements or conditions. Further, the planning commission or city council may require that the conditions be indicated on an approved copy of the plans attached to the permit, or shall be recorded by such other method as may be appropriate. The planning commission may recommend and the city council may require satisfactory evidence and guarantee or bond that the conditions stipulated will be and will continue to be complied with. 
d.  Additional conditions applying to drive-thru or drive-through facilities. In addition to the requirements found elsewhere in this chapter, special use permits for drive-thru and drive-through facilities issued by the city council after the effective date of this section shall be subject to the following conditions unless waived or reduced as provided for in subsection (4)d.12. below: 
1.  The plan for a drive-thru or drive-through facility shall be carefully evaluated to ensure that it poses no adverse effect on an R district. This evaluation shall include, but is not limited to, noise, traffic volume and lighting. 
2.  The minimum lot area for a building with a drive-through window shall be no less than one acre (43,560 square feet), with a minimum street frontage of not less than 200 feet. 
3.  A drive-through business window, service area, or vehicle stacking lane shall not be located within a required front, side or rear yard setback area. Where such a vehicle stacking lane, including the required buffer for the lane, abuts a residential zoning district or park, the window, service area, or vehicular stacking lane shall be set back at least 50 feet from the property boundary abutting the residential district or park. 
4.  A drive-through window or menu board shall not be located on the front of any building, nor on the side of a building which faces a public street. Menu boards or other informational boards shall face away from public rights-of-way. 
5.  Drive-through lanes shall be delineated from drive aisles and parking areas with striping, curbing, landscaping, and/or the use of alternative paving material. Where pedestrian areas will intersect with a drive-through lane, crosswalks shall be provided with striping and/or alternative paving material. 
6.  A by-pass lane shall be provided adjacent to the drive-through lane or lanes, with a minimum width of ten feet. No drive-through window or ATM shall be located on a by-pass lane. 
7.  Driveway curb cut. The distance between a public street intersection and a curb cut providing access to or from a parcel with a drive-through shall be a minimum of 150 feet. 
8.  Noise abatement. Plans shall include provisions for noise buffers to adjacent properties. A two-way speaker or phone may be used at the window or menu board provided it does not violate the provisions of the noise ordinances of the city. 
9.  Drive-through lanes shall be buffered against adjacent land uses according to the landscape buffering requirements specified elsewhere in this chapter. 
10.  Special use permits for a drive-through are nontransferable. Unless specifically provided for by the conditions of a permit approved by the city council, or by the board of zoning appeals in the case of permits predating the adoption of this section, a special use permit for a drive-through shall only be valid for the applicant for whom it was approved and cannot be transferred to a new occupant, nor shall a permit for one use be applied to another use, such as from a bank to a restaurant. 
11.  No portion of a drive aisle nor any of the standing spaces required for a drive-through, shall be covered by a roof, overhang, canopy, building or structure within 25 feet of an intersection with any of the following: 
i.  Public right-of-way. 
ii.  A pedestrian walkway. 
iii.  A drive aisle. 
12.  Exceptions to additional conditions. 
i.  The planning commission may recommend and the city council may approve that the conditions set forth in subsections (4)d. 1-11 of this section, be waived or reduced if they are found to be unnecessary in order to satisfy the intent of this section. 
ii.  Drive-thru or drive-through facilities that are substantially contained within a multistory building. The planning commission may recommend and the city council may decide that the conditions set forth in subsections (4)d.1-11 of this section, may be waived or reduced to the extent the conditions are satisfied by the site plan for the multistory building in which the drive-through is contained. The intent of this subsection is to anticipate circumstances where the multistory building, by the nature of its construction and site plan, has the impact of satisfying the conditions of subsections (4)d.1-11 of this section. 
e.  Initial application requirements. All applications for use permits for a drive-thru or drive-through facilities shall include a comprehensive written statement from the applicant describing the proposed use, giving all pertinent data, including specifically: 
1.  Type of operation. 
2.  Hours of operation. 
3.  Estimated number of patrons by a.m./p.m. peak periods and daily. 
4.  Proposed number of employees by shift. 
5.  Architectural and landscaping and signage plans. 
6.  Litter control and recycling plans. 
7.  A traffic study, addressing the following: 
i.  Nature of the product or service offered. 
ii.  Method by which the order is processed or service provided. 
iii.  Time required serving typical customer. 
iv.  Peak demand hours a.m./p.m. 
v.  Existing and projected road capacity and traffic conditions. 
vi.  Trip generation by use type. 
vii.  Pass-by patronage or capture rate. 
viii.  Proposed internal and external flow. 
8.  Any other appropriate public safety or site specific factors. 
f.  Waiver of initial application requirements for use permits for drive-thru and drive-through facilities. The planning director, in consultation with the zoning administrator, city engineer and the building official, may waive any application submission requirement found in subsection 48-867(4)e. of this section, if deemed not necessary for adequate review of the application. The planning director shall inform the planning commission of waivers granted. The planning director, planning commission and city council may require any additional submission requirements which they deem necessary to permit an adequate review of the application. 
g.  Applicants for use permits for drive-through facilities shall be evaluated based on the following criteria: 
1.  Conformity to the master plan; 
2.  Potential adverse effect on nearby neighborhoods and uses; 
3.  Pedestrian safety and circulation impacts, with special concern for other uses in the vicinity, such as a school, place of worship, auditorium, theater or other places of assembly; 
4.  Compatibility of architectural style with surrounding uses in form, materials, colors, scale, etc. In shopping centers an architectural style consistent with those established in the center; 
5.  Adequate spacing in the area between the drive-through window and the public right-of-way; 
6.  Appropriate hours of operation and impact on surrounding uses, with particular emphasis on effects on residential districts; 
7.  Appropriate designation of any pedestrian access way; 
8.  Traffic circulation pattern for safe ingress and egress, as well as separation of uses; 
9.  Clear delineation of drive-through aisles through the use of paving materials, pavement markings, and/or landscaping; 
10.  Noise impact associated with, but not limited to, exterior speakers; 
11.  Compliance with the Clean Air Act, and regional and local air pollution standards; 
12.  Adequacy of landscaping and screening of vehicle use areas; and 
13.  Other factors affecting the health, safety, and general welfare of the community, with particular emphasis on nearby residential neighborhoods. 
h.  Issuance and expiration of permits for a drive-thru or drive-through facility. 
1.  A special use permit for a drive-thru or drive-through facility may be authorized and issued for either a limited or an indefinite period of time, subject in any case to lapse if not implemented within one year from the date of approval by the city council, except as provided in subsections h.2. and 3. of this section, and shall be revocable by the city council upon formal request of the planning director or planning commission at any time for failure to adhere to the applicable conditions. Before revoking any such permit, however, the city council shall conduct a public hearing to receive and review such reports of staff and boards and commissions as it may require, and after giving the grantee at least ten days' written notice of the time and place of such hearing. 
2.  Any special use permit for a drive-thru or drive-through facility which has not been implemented within one year of issuance shall lapse and become void except as provided in subsection h.3. of this subsection. A special use permit for a drive-thru or drive-through facility shall be deemed to have been implemented when substantial construction is started, if it related to construction of a building or facility, or when the certificate of occupancy is issued, if it related to a use involving no construction. 
3.  The planning director may, upon written application by the grantee, authorize one extension, for a period not to exceed 12 months, of a permit that has not been implemented within the initial one-year period, provided that the failure to implement has been due to causes beyond the control of the grantee and provided that the application for the extension is made within 90 days before the expiration of the initial one-year period of validity. 
i.  Renewal and or amendment of drive-through permits approved by the board of zoning appeals. Special use permits for a drive-thru or drive-through facility that were issued by the board of zoning appeals prior to the adoption of this section shall be considered conforming uses and shall be permitted to continue subject to the conditions specified in the permit, if any. Applications for the renewal and or amendment of such permits shall be made to the planning commission as provided for in this section, with the following exception: The conditions found in subsections (4)d.1-11 shall not apply to permits that originated with the board of zoning appeals, provided those permits are found to comply with the operational conditions contained in the permit approval. Amendments of permits that predate this section and that would not otherwise require a site plan may be approved by the planning director. The planning director may also request a review of the amendment by the planning commission in order to determine if the contemplated amendment complies with the intent of this section. 
(Code 1982, § 38-37; Ord. No. 987, 11-9-1981; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1865, 8-8-11; Ord. No. 1908, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 48-868. - Temporary stands or sales facility. 
(a)  A temporary stand or sales facility shall be permitted only within the B-1, B-2, and M-1 districts, except, subject to all other provisions of this chapter, nonprofit, fraternal, service, religious, civic, quasigovernmental or other charitable organizations may operate a temporary stand or sales facility in any district provided the placement of such stand shall not create a public nuisance. The zoning administrator may require of such applicants reasonable precautions to this end. 
(b)  A temporary stand or sales facility for the sale of Christmas trees, food, furniture, paintings, produce, flowers or other items for retail sale may be located on a lot where a permanent structure is located, after obtaining a permit from the zoning administrator, and where the use of such stand is under the control of the business conducted in the permanent structure, subject to the conditions of subsections (c)(1) through (4) of this section. 
(c)  An applicant for a temporary stand of sales facility on a vacant lot may be issued a permit upon meeting the following conditions: 
(1)  No temporary stand or sales facility shall be permitted unless a plan is submitted to the zoning administrator showing adequate parking facilities, the size and shape of the temporary stand or sales facility, its position on the lot, safe methods of ingress and egress from the public street, the items to be sold, and any other matter affecting the public health, safety and welfare. 
(2)  The zoning administrator shall provide forms for an application and for a permit for a temporary stand or sales facility. The public works department shall review each application, and any building or other permits required for the temporary stand or sales facility shall be obtained prior to issuance of the permit by the zoning administrator. A fee shall be collected by the city treasurer with each application for a permit in an amount established by the city council. 
(3)  No temporary stand or sales facility shall be permitted for more than a total of 30 days on any one property within any one calendar year. 
(4)  Any permission to locate a temporary stand or sales facility under this section shall be revoked, in the event the operator fails to comply with any provision of law or condition set forth by these regulations. 
(5)  A bond shall be required in the amount established by the public works director, conditioned on the removal of any structure at the termination of the time allowed in the permit, and the restoration of the property to its condition prior to the placement of the temporary stand or sales facility. 
It shall be the duty of the director of public works to remove all physical evidence of the activity within five days after the termination of the permit, if not removed by the applicant, and the costs incurred and such other costs as may be a condition of the said bond shall be charged against such bond. 
(Code 1973, § 81-68; Code 1982, § 38-36; Ord. No. 1114, 7-8-1985) 
Sec. 48-869. - Mobile food service. 
(a)  The intent of this section shall be to allow certain for-profit sales stands and mobile vendors subject to conditions herein and to establish exemptions for certain civic and nonprofit uses. 
(b)  Mobile food service. For purposes of this section, a mobile food service vendor shall be a for-profit retail use that is operated from a vehicle, cart, push cart or similar conveyance from which food and incidental items are sold for immediate consumption, whether prepared on-site or not, and that is not otherwise defined herein as a temporary stand. Examples include mobile vending of meals, desserts and similar perishable food items. Applications for mobile food service vending shall be evaluated in the same manner as a commercial occupancy permit as provided for elsewhere in this chapter, and shall not operate until an occupancy permit and applicable building and health department approvals have been issued. The following conditions shall also apply to mobile food service vendors: 
(1)  Except as provided herein, mobile food vending is restricted to the B-1, B-2, B-3, O-D and M-1 districts, and shall not park, stand or otherwise occupy a public right-of-way. 
a.  Conditional use of an R district for mobile vending: Mobile food service vendor vehicles may operate on a public street in an R district provided they stop only to conduct transactions, are stopped for no more than five minutes in any single neighborhood, do not block vehicle or pedestrian traffic and do not create a nuisance due to noise or litter. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued without the written consent of the property owner on whose property the mobile food service is to be operated. Such consent shall be attached to the original application. 
(3)  The operation of a mobile food service shall not cause the host property to be in violation of any city Code provision, including, but not limited to, parking, pedestrian and traffic movement, litter and noise. 
(4)  An application for a mobile food service vendor may be referred by the zoning administrator to the planning director, building official, chief of police, fire marshal or other city official who may require the imposition of reasonable conditions on the application in order to ensure compliance with the city Code. 
(5)  Each occupancy permit issued to a mobile food service vendor shall entitle the holder to operate one vehicle within the City of Falls Church as provided herein. The permit shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance, and shall not be transferable to another individual or vehicle. Each vehicle shall require a separate occupancy permit. The limitations of subsection 48-868(c)(3) shall not apply to mobile food service. 
(6)  No mobile service vending vehicle shall operate on any one property for more than three hours per day. 
(7)  The city manager may exempt certain uses such as civic sponsored events, farmers markets, festivals and similar functions from the permitting and location restrictions of this section, and may impose such reasonable conditions as are necessary to satisfy the intent of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1912, 12-9-2013) 
Secs. 48-870-48-897. - Reserved 
DIVISION 2. - OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS 
Subdivision I. - Generally 

Sec. 48-898. - Intent. 
(a)  It is the purpose and intent of this division to provide for the public safety, welfare and convenience, and to stimulate orderly and harmonious growth in all districts by means of regulation of off-street parking; to provide that the streets of the city shall be devoted solely to the purpose of the conveyance of pedestrian, bicycle and vehicular traffic and shall not be used for the purposes of vehicular parking or storage; and to ensure on-site off-street facility locations in such a manner as to encourage the most aesthetic and efficient use of land areas and to provide for the greatest accessibility for those who live, work and trade in the city. 
(b)  In all districts off-street parking shall be in connection with and accessory to each and every use, and, unless prescribed by this chapter, such required off-street parking shall be sited on the same premises as the principal use. 
(Code 1973, § 81-60; Code 1982, § 38-31(a); Ord. No. 619; Ord. No. 790; Ord. No. 804; Ord. No. 811; Ord. No. 924; Ord. No. 960, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1021, 8-9-1982; Ord. No. 1039, 2-28-1983; Ord. No. 1051, 6-13-1983; Ord. No. 1081, 9-10-1984; Ord. No. 1083, 9-24-1984; Ord. No. 1139, 5-27-1986; Ord. No. 1188, 5-26-1987; Ord. No. 1203, 10-13-1987; Ord. No. 1227, 6-13-1988; Ord. No. 1263, 5-22-1989; Ord. No. 1277, § 6, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1590, 10-14-1997; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 1946, 2-8-2016) 
Secs. 48-899-48-929. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - General Regulations 

Sec. 48-930. - Applicability. 
    Municipal parking facilities, private garages or commercial garages and all other parking facilities constructed, used or maintained as a principal or accessory use shall be subject to the restrictions and general regulations of this division, in addition to any special regulations imposed thereon by other provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1973, § 81-60; Code 1982, § 38-31(b)(1); Ord. No. 619; Ord. No. 790; Ord. No. 804; Ord. No. 811; Ord. No. 924; Ord. No. 960, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1021, 8-9-1982; Ord. No. 1039, 2-28-1983; Ord. No. 1051, 6-13-1983; Ord. No. 1081, 9-10-1984; Ord. No. 1083, 9-24-1984; Ord. No. 1139, 5-27-1986; Ord. No. 1188, 5-26-1987; Ord. No. 1203, 10-13-1987; Ord. No. 1227, 6-13-1988; Ord. No. 1263, 5-22-1989; Ord. No. 1277, § 6, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1590, 10-14-1997; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004) 
Sec. 48-931. - Single-family residences excepted. 
    The various provisions of this division, with the exception of the specific use requirements in sections 48-898, 48-932 through 48-935, 48-938, 48-939 and 48-941(2), shall not apply to residential spaces and aisles provided accessory to and on the same property as any single-family residence or townhouse for the exclusive use of the residents of that property; provided, further, that such accessory residential parking spaces comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  No more than four vehicles are to be parked on any one property. 
(2)  No more than one vehicle with an open or enclosed bed for hauling service, and designed to carry, handle, transport and/or move goods or perform services in commerce, industry or trade, but not including passenger cars, station wagons, or similar types and sizes of vehicles that are designed to haul passengers, as provided by subsection 48-237(1), shall be parked on any one property, and when so parked such vehicle must be within a fully enclosed private garage. 
(3)  No vehicle parking shall be permitted in any front yard in a single-family detached residence or townhouse; nor shall any vehicle parking space be provided for any single-family detached residence or townhouse in a front yard, except in designated driveway areas. 
(4)  No front yard of any single-family detached residence or townhouse shall be paved wholly or partially, except for a paved driveway not to exceed 14 feet in width. This subsection shall not be interpreted to prohibit circular driveways or other driveway patterns which are designed to provide access to private garages and/or doorways. 
(5)  Whenever the occupant of a single-family residence is granted a special use permit for a major home occupation, accessory dwelling unit, group home, or prenatal and infant care counseling center, the number of parking spaces provided shall be as set forth in this division or article IV, division 2 of this chapter, unless changed by the conditions set forth in the special use permit. 
    Other than as set forth in subsection (5) of this section, whenever a residence, single-family or multifamily structure is converted to any nonresidential use or experiences a density increase through the partitioning into additional dwelling units, or whenever a residential use is converted into a transient residential use, the use shall immediately conform to all applicable provisions of this division. Prior to conversion or issuance of a certificate of occupancy, a site plan shall be approved if required by division 7 of this article. 
(Code 1973, § 81-60; Code 1982, § 38-31(b)(2); Ord. No. 619; Ord. No. 790; Ord. No. 804; Ord. No. 811; Ord. No. 924; Ord. No. 960, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1021, 8-9-1982; Ord. No. 1039, 2-28-1983; Ord. No. 1051, 6-13-1983; Ord. No. 1081, 9-10-1984; Ord. No. 1083, 9-24-1984; Ord. No. 1139, 5-27-1986; Ord. No. 1188, 5-26-1987; Ord. No. 1203, 10-13-1987; Ord. No. 1227, 6-13-1988; Ord. No. 1263, 5-22-1989; Ord. No. 1277, § 6, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1590, 10-14-1997; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004) 
Sec. 48-932. - Demarcated spaces. 
    All spaces and means of ingress and egress shall be laid out on the parking surface with paint or plastic striping which shall provide a permanent delineation between spaces, aisles and surrounding structures and land. Parking space delineation shall be periodically restored to maintain a clear definition of individual parking spaces. 
(Code 1973, § 81-60; Code 1982, § 38-31(b)(3); Ord. No. 619; Ord. No. 790; Ord. No. 804; Ord. No. 811; Ord. No. 924; Ord. No. 960, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1021, 8-9-1982; Ord. No. 1039, 2-28-1983; Ord. No. 1051, 6-13-1983; Ord. No. 1081, 9-10-1984; Ord. No. 1083, 9-24-1984; Ord. No. 1139, 5-27-1986; Ord. No. 1188, 5-26-1987; Ord. No. 1203, 10-13-1987; Ord. No. 1227, 6-13-1988; Ord. No. 1263, 5-22-1989; Ord. No. 1277, § 6, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1590, 10-14-1997; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 1946, 2-8-2016) 
Sec. 48-933. - Dimensions of off-street parking spaces, aisles and ramps. 
(a)  All off-street parking spaces and adjacent aisles provided in compliance with the requirements of this division shall at least conform to the following minimum dimensions: 

Table 1
Minimum Dimensions for Standard Parking Spaces and Adjacent Aisles 
Parking Angle
(degrees) Stall Width
(feet) Stall Length
(feet) Aisle Width,
One-way/Two-way*
(in feet) 0 (parallel) 8.5 18.0 16.0/22.0 45 9.0 19.0 16.0/- 60 9.0 20.0 16.0/- 90 9.0 18.0 23.0/23.0 * Except for aisles adjacent to parallel parking spaces, aisles adjacent to parking spaces with parking angles of less than 90 degrees shall provide for one-way traffic only.  
(b)  All off-street parking spaces, aisles and ramps shall conform to the following specifications: 
(1)  Aisles providing access to off-street parking areas but not immediately adjacent to or providing direct access to an off-street parking space shall be at least 22 feet in width if designated for two-way traffic, and at least 16 feet in width if designated for one-way traffic. Aisles providing access to any off-street loading space shall be a minimum of 22 feet in width. 
(2)  No back-out onto a public street shall be permitted except for detached one-family and townhouse dwellings. All parking areas shall have adequate maneuvering space to allow safe vehicular entrance and exit. 
(3)  Aisles, ramps, turnarounds and curbs shall be designed to provide for convenient and safe maneuvering of vehicles using the facility. Turning aisles or ramps with two-way traffic shall have radii and aisle widths sufficient for two cars to pass on the turn. Minimum requirements to meet this standard shall be determined by the director of engineering and construction division. 
(4)  No portion of a circular ramp may be considered as an aisle for cars in adjacent parking spaces. 
(5)  Ramp design in multilevel garages shall provide for slopes mild enough to ensure driver visibility of the pavement at all times. 
(6)  There shall be a minimum vertical clearance free of all obstructions to a height of seven feet for all portions of any off-street parking facility. 
(7)  The stall width, length and height clearance of required parking spaces shall not be encroached upon by columns, utilities, bollards or other similar structures on any surface parking lot or in structure or underground parking. Parking spaces for which there is an encroachment into the stall width, length or height clearance shall not be counted toward minimum parking requirements. 
(8)  When required parking spaces are provided within a structure, no part of a column shall be located within three feet back from the aisle edge of the parking space. 
(Code 1973, § 81-60; Code 1982, § 38-31(b)(4); Ord. No. 619; Ord. No. 790; Ord. No. 804; Ord. No. 811; Ord. No. 924; Ord. No. 960, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1021, 8-9-1982; Ord. No. 1039, 2-28-1983; Ord. No. 1051, 6-13-1983; Ord. No. 1081, 9-10-1984; Ord. No. 1083, 9-24-1984; Ord. No. 1139, 5-27-1986; Ord. No. 1188, 5-26-1987; Ord. No. 1203, 10-13-1987; Ord. No. 1227, 6-13-1988; Ord. No. 1263, 5-22-1989; Ord. No. 1277, § 6, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1590, 10-14-1997; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 1946, 2-8-2016) 
Sec. 48-934. - Off-street loading space. 
    All off-street loading spaces provided in compliance with the requirements of this section shall be at least ten feet in width and 30 feet in length. All off-street loading spaces shall conform to the following additional specifications: 
(1)  There shall be a minimum vertical clearance free of all obstructions to a height of 15 feet for all portions of any off-street loading space. No obstruction shall project into this minimum clearance. 
(2)  There shall be no obstruction within or near the bounds of any required off-street loading space which would interfere with the normal availability and use thereof, or the access between the loading space and the premises to which it is accessory. 
(3)  No vehicle, trailer or equipment of any nature shall continuously occupy any off-street loading space for more than two consecutive working days nor shall any vehicle, trailer, equipment or material of any nature occupy any required off-street loading space except while in the process of being loaded onto or unloaded from a mode of transportation. 
(Code 1973, § 81-60; Code 1982, § 38-31(b)(5); Ord. No. 619; Ord. No. 790; Ord. No. 804; Ord. No. 811; Ord. No. 924; Ord. No. 960, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1021, 8-9-1982; Ord. No. 1039, 2-28-1983; Ord. No. 1051, 6-13-1983; Ord. No. 1081, 9-10-1984; Ord. No. 1083, 9-24-1984; Ord. No. 1139, 5-27-1986; Ord. No. 1188, 5-26-1987; Ord. No. 1203, 10-13-1987; Ord. No. 1227, 6-13-1988; Ord. No. 1263, 5-22-1989; Ord. No. 1277, § 6, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1590, 10-14-1997; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004) 
Sec. 48-935. - Standing spaces. 
    Standing spaces, as defined in section 48-2, shall be provided for all uses oriented for the use of motor vehicle operators and for all drive-through facilities and standing spaces shall conform to the following standards: 
(1)  No standing space may occupy any portion of an aisle, driveway or entrance necessary for access to required off-street parking or loading spaces. 
(2)  Standing spaces shall be a minimum of eight feet in width and 20 feet in length. 
(3)  Standing spaces may not be used to satisfy the off-street parking or loading requirements of this division. 
(4)  Standing spaces may be provided in the form of a queue in the primary access aisle leading to a drive-in facility, in which instance such an aisle shall be of a minimum width of 12 feet. 
(5)  A drive-in window shall not project more than one foot into an aisle. 

(Code 1973, § 81-60; Code 1982, § 38-31(b)(6); Ord. No. 619; Ord. No. 790; Ord. No. 804; Ord. No. 811; Ord. No. 924; Ord. No. 960, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1021, 8-9-1982; Ord. No. 1039, 2-28-1983; Ord. No. 1051, 6-13-1983; Ord. No. 1081, 9-10-1984; Ord. No. 1083, 9-24-1984; Ord. No. 1139, 5-27-1986; Ord. No. 1188, 5-26-1987; Ord. No. 1203, 10-13-1987; Ord. No. 1227, 6-13-1988; Ord. No. 1263, 5-22-1989; Ord. No. 1277, § 6, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1590, 10-14-1997; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004) 
Sec. 48-936. - Joint and off-site parking. 
(a)  Whenever a parking facility is jointly used by two or more uses, as prescribed by subdivision III of this division, or whenever a use provides off-street parking in excess of the requirements of this division, that portion of such off-street parking facility located nearest the primary entrance or entrances of any such use for which the parking is required shall be considered the required off-street parking and shall in no way be encumbered. 
(b)  No portion of any required off-street parking area, whether on-site or off-site shall be more than 500 feet, as measured along the shortest safe and unobstructed pedestrian path, from a principal entrance to the structure to which it is accessory. 
(c)  Whenever off-site parking is provided, the off-street parking area immediately adjacent to the principal use shall be reserved for the exclusive use of clients, customers, patrons or patients, or tenants if the principal use includes residential uses. The area furthest from the principal use, but within 500 feet of a principal entrance, shall be reserved for the exclusive use of employees. 
(d)  All off-street parking spaces provided in satisfaction of the provisions of this division shall be conveniently usable without causing undue hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, traffic congestion or interference with the safe and convenient access to other provided off-street parking spaces and shall provide for safe and convenient ingress and egress from the public streets. 
(e)  When required by the provisions of this division, off-street loading spaces shall be provided immediately adjacent to loading docks, bays, doorways or other means of egress or ingress into the principal building, structure or use to which they are accessory. 
(Code 1973, § 81-60; Code 1982, § 38-31(b)(7); Ord. No. 619; Ord. No. 790; Ord. No. 804; Ord. No. 811; Ord. No. 924; Ord. No. 960, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1021, 8-9-1982; Ord. No. 1039, 2-28-1983; Ord. No. 1051, 6-13-1983; Ord. No. 1081, 9-10-1984; Ord. No. 1083, 9-24-1984; Ord. No. 1139, 5-27-1986; Ord. No. 1188, 5-26-1987; Ord. No. 1203, 10-13-1987; Ord. No. 1227, 6-13-1988; Ord. No. 1263, 5-22-1989; Ord. No. 1277, § 6, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1590, 10-14-1997; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 1946, 2-8-2016) 
Sec. 48-937. - Handicap parking. 
    Off-street parking spaces and related access aisles and accessibility routes for handicapped persons shall be provided in accordance with the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code (VUSBC), as amended and the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990, including any reference to specifications. The number of parking spaces for handicapped persons shall be included in the total required spaces. Each such parking space shall be identified by an above-grade sign which meets the requirements of the director of public works. 
(Code 1973, § 81-60; Code 1982, § 38-31(b)(8); Ord. No. 619; Ord. No. 790; Ord. No. 804; Ord. No. 811; Ord. No. 924; Ord. No. 960, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1021, 8-9-1982; Ord. No. 1039, 2-28-1983; Ord. No. 1051, 6-13-1983; Ord. No. 1081, 9-10-1984; Ord. No. 1083, 9-24-1984; Ord. No. 1139, 5-27-1986; Ord. No. 1188, 5-26-1987; Ord. No. 1203, 10-13-1987; Ord. No. 1227, 6-13-1988; Ord. No. 1263, 5-22-1989; Ord. No. 1277, § 6, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1590, 10-14-1997; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 1946, 2-8-2016) 
Sec. 48-938. - Entrances. 
(a)  Vehicular entrances to off-street parking areas shall conform to standards established in the Virginia Department of Transportation's Road and Bridge Standards. Vehicular entrances to off-street parking areas shall be no less than 22 feet in width, if providing access to any aisle for use by two-way traffic; nor less than 12 feet in width, if providing access to an aisle restricted to one-way traffic. 
(b)  The number of vehicular entrances to off-street parking and loading areas shall be limited to those required for reasonable access to that use and shall be located with due consideration for safety, traffic circulation and impact on adjacent properties. 
(c)  All vehicular entrances and exits to off-street parking and loading areas shall be set back at least 25 feet from the point of tangency of the curb at any intersecting street or projected right-of-way lines shown on the official major thoroughfare plan, whichever is the greater. 
(d)  There shall be no vehicular entrance or exit to commercial or business off-street parking or loading areas within 100 feet of an R district unless the planning commission finds that there is no other feasible location, considering public safety and adequate vehicular circulation. 
(Code 1973, § 81-60; Code 1982, § 38-31(b)(9); Ord. No. 619; Ord. No. 790; Ord. No. 804; Ord. No. 811; Ord. No. 924; Ord. No. 960, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1021, 8-9-1982; Ord. No. 1039, 2-28-1983; Ord. No. 1051, 6-13-1983; Ord. No. 1081, 9-10-1984; Ord. No. 1083, 9-24-1984; Ord. No. 1139, 5-27-1986; Ord. No. 1188, 5-26-1987; Ord. No. 1203, 10-13-1987; Ord. No. 1227, 6-13-1988; Ord. No. 1263, 5-22-1989; Ord. No. 1277, § 6, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1590, 10-14-1997; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004) 
State Law reference- Ramps must comply with state standards, Code of Virginia, § 15.2-2021. 
Sec. 48-939. - Occupancy of required yards. 
    In commercial and transitional districts, off-street parking and loading areas or structures may not occupy any required yard. In residential districts, off-street parking and loading areas or structures may occupy any required rear or side yard but shall not occupy any portion of any required front yard. 
(1)  No portion of any required off-street parking or loading space shall occupy or use any public street, right-of-way, alley or property, except by expressed permission of the city council. 
(2)  Whenever the bulk of a building requires on-site parking greater than that which may be provided at surface level, such additional parking shall be provided in a parking structure of a design and materials compatible with the principal habitable building or within the principal habitable building. 
(3)  Underground parking may occupy the total area of any property; however, when constructed beneath any required front, side or rear yard, such required yards shall be restored and planted or landscaped in accordance with the specifications of the city arborist. 
(Code 1973, § 81-60; Code 1982, § 38-31(b)(10); Ord. No. 619; Ord. No. 790; Ord. No. 804; Ord. No. 811; Ord. No. 924; Ord. No. 960, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1021, 8-9-1982; Ord. No. 1039, 2-28-1983; Ord. No. 1051, 6-13-1983; Ord. No. 1081, 9-10-1984; Ord. No. 1083, 9-24-1984; Ord. No. 1139, 5-27-1986; Ord. No. 1188, 5-26-1987; Ord. No. 1203, 10-13-1987; Ord. No. 1227, 6-13-1988; Ord. No. 1263, 5-22-1989; Ord. No. 1277, § 6, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1590, 10-14-1997; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 1946, 2-8-2016) 
Sec. 48-940. - Accessory structures and incidental provisions. 
(a)  Requirements. Accessory structures may be provided for use of vehicle attendants or patrons. Such structures shall be subject to the same yard requirements as the parking or vehicle use areas to which they are accessory. Such structures shall be of permanent construction and designed to be compatible with other structures on the site. Entrance controls shall not be located so as to cause waiting vehicles to stand on a public street. Accessory equipment such as trash containers, air conditioning units and electrical transformers may be located within the required landscaped areas, provided they are appropriately screened. 
(b)  Lighting. All lighting equipment used in illumination of off-street parking and vehicle use areas shall conform to the appropriate provisions of chapter 14, article V, pertaining to outdoor lighting, and shall be confined to the limits of the parking area unless otherwise permitted. 
(c)  Paving. All off-street parking and vehicle use areas provided in satisfaction of the requirements of this division shall be paved with materials that meet city specifications and may include pervious materials. 
(Code 1973, § 81-60; Code 1982, § 38-31(b)(11); Ord. No. 619; Ord. No. 790; Ord. No. 804; Ord. No. 811; Ord. No. 924; Ord. No. 960, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1021, 8-9-1982; Ord. No. 1039, 2-28-1983; Ord. No. 1051, 6-13-1983; Ord. No. 1081, 9-10-1984; Ord. No. 1083, 9-24-1984; Ord. No. 1139, 5-27-1986; Ord. No. 1188, 5-26-1987; Ord. No. 1203, 10-13-1987; Ord. No. 1227, 6-13-1988; Ord. No. 1263, 5-22-1989; Ord. No. 1277, § 6, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1590, 10-14-1997; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 1946, 2-8-2016) 
Sec. 48-941. - Use of parking spaces. 
    Except as otherwise provided by this division, off-street parking spaces required herein shall be occupied only by motor vehicles owned by occupants, employees, patrons or visitors of the property, but not by vehicles stored or displayed for sale or hire or for any other purpose which is classed by this chapter as a principal use. 
(1)  Up to five or not more than ten percent, whichever is less, of required off-street parking spaces may be converted to bicycle parking, moveable storage containers, electric vehicle charging stations, car share spaces, motorcycle parking spaces and the like, subject to approval by the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator may approve such applications to convert spaces where they are accompanied by a description of the proposed use of the converted parking spaces, justification for the conversion and a plan depicting the spaces proposed to be converted, and the zoning administrator finds that the spaces are not needed for off-street parking for the use of the property and that they are reasonably likely to be used for the purpose of the conversion. 
(2)  Except for emergencies where it is impractical to move a vehicle, no automobile repairs or service shall be conducted on or in any off-street parking or loading area. 
(3)  No trailers or vehicle accessories of any description or type shall occupy any off-street parking or loading space, except as follows: 
a.  House trailers, utility trailers, boat trailers and other non-motorized vehicles, or any vehicle which depends on another for locomotion, may be stored in an off-street parking or loading space, provided it remains attached to the primary vehicle upon which it is dependent, and is parked in such a manner as not to interfere with the required access to any other required space. 
b.  Cargo trailers may be detached from the traction vehicle upon which they are dependent, and may occupy required off-street loading spaces only while being loaded or unloaded. 
c.  Neither a trailer, nor other vehicle or combination of vehicles having a combined overall length in excess of 35 feet shall be parked or stored in any R or T district, or on any public street or alley; except, that one house trailer, utility trailer or boat trailer, not exceeding 4,500 pounds gross weight, may be parked or stored in an enclosed private garage or in the rear yard of the property of its owner; provided the wheels or other transporting devices shall not be removed except for temporary repair. 
d.  Trailers occupying any off-street parking or loading space shall not be connected to any utility service or to the ground or to another structure in any manner that would prevent their ready removal; except when necessary for the preservation of cargo, trailers may be connected to electric lines or other facilities while being unloaded or awaiting unloading. 
e.  Trailers shall not be occupied for living or for business purposes, in any district of the city; except, that contractors may park or temporarily store equipment trailers and office trailers when necessary to the construction or improvement of a structure; provided such trailers are located on the same site as such construction or improvement, and provided, further, that they are removed promptly at the completion of such construction or improvement and prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Code 1973, § 81-60; Code 1982, § 38-31(b)(12); Ord. No. 619; Ord. No. 790; Ord. No. 804; Ord. No. 811; Ord. No. 924; Ord. No. 960, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1021, 8-9-1982; Ord. No. 1039, 2-28-1983; Ord. No. 1051, 6-13-1983; Ord. No. 1081, 9-10-1984; Ord. No. 1083, 9-24-1984; Ord. No. 1139, 5-27-1986; Ord. No. 1188, 5-26-1987; Ord. No. 1203, 10-13-1987; Ord. No. 1227, 6-13-1988; Ord. No. 1263, 5-22-1989; Ord. No. 1277, § 6, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1590, 10-14-1997; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 1946, 2-8-2016) 
Secs. 48-942-48-968. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Administrative Regulations 

Sec. 48-969. - Parking requirements. 
    Minimum parking requirements may be reduced or modified through reductions in the amount of required parking (section 48-970), shared parking arrangements (section 48-971), and off-site parking agreements (section 48-972), subject to approval by the planning commission as part of a site plan application. The planning commission may modify the requirements of this subsection where adjacent properties are developed under a unified site plan or where the strict interpretation of these provisions would reduce the usable area of a site to a point that would preclude a reasonable use. The commission may also attach conditions to any such waiver or modification to assure that the results of the waiver of modification shall be in accord with the purposes and intent of this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 1946, 2-8-2016) 
Sec. 48-970. - Reduction in required parking. 
(a)  Applicants for site plans and special exception approvals for office or mixed-use developments may request a reduction in required parking (Table 3) subject to submission and approval of a transportation demand management (TDM) plan. The TDM must be submitted at the time the site plan or special exception application is filed and may include a variety of measures including, but not limited to, dedicated carpool and vanpool spaces, bike share stations and/or contributions toward bike share stations, shuttle service from Metro, transit subsidies, transit information kiosk, and the like. The TDM plan should provide sufficient information to justify the level of parking reduction requested. Applicants shall provide monitoring reports at one, three and five-years following occupancy to assess the TDM plan implementation. 
(b)  The applicant, building owner, their successor or assigns will be responsible for implementing the TDM over the life of the building(s) and taking corrective action as needed to manage on-site parking demand. 
(c)  After a project is approved using the parking reductions of this section, the city manager shall monitor the residential districts adjacent to the project to determine if vehicular parking remains reasonably available for the residents of such district, and if there is a determination that such parking availability has been adversely impacted, to proactively work with the residents of such district to implement residential parking restrictions as appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 1946, 2-8-2016) 
Sec. 48-971. - Shared parking requirements. 
    Off-street parking or loading facilities and driveways or aisles for two or more structures or uses are permitted, provided that all applicable provisions of this division and the following specifications are complied with: 
(1)  Wherever uses are mixed or combined within a structure or on a premises, or collective parking is provided for two or more uses or structures, the total requirements for off-street parking or loading facilities shall be the sum for the various uses or structures computed separately, except as provided below in subsection a. 
a.  The following conditions shall apply to any parking facility for a development containing a mix of uses: 
1.  The mixed-use property and the mixed-use shared parking facility must be owned by the same developer/owner or must be the subject of a recorded shared parking agreement made between current and future owners of the properties involved and that conveys with the land. Any such agreements must also contain a provision for parking facility maintenance. Any changes to the agreement must be approved by the planning commission. 
2.  The distance between the shared parking facility and the entrance to the establishments being served shall not exceed 500 feet as measured along the shortest safe and unobstructed pedestrian path. Shared parking facilities located on a separate lot from the establishments being served must meet the requirements of subsections 48-936(b) and (c). 
3.  Parking spaces for handicapped or disabled persons may not be included in any shared parking calculation. 
4.  All shared parking spaces must be available for use by all participants in the shared parking agreement. No reserved spaces may be part of the shared parking agreement. 
5.  The planning director shall determine at the time of site plan review that shared parking on the site can meet the total required in Table 2. Particular attention is needed to assure that sufficient and convenient short-term parking will be available to commercial establishments during the weekday daytime period. The shared parking spaces must be located in the most convenient and visible area of the parking facility nearest the establishments being served. 
6.  All subsequent changes in use(s) require a new occupancy permit and proof that sufficient parking will be available to meet the required parking as determined by applying Table 2. Table 2 determines the minimum number of spaces required to receive occupancy permits. 
7.  The requirements of Table 2 apply to all proposed uses for any one phase of development in addition to the ultimate buildout of the development. 
b.  Calculation of shared parking. Structures or developments that contain a mix of uses on the same parcel may reduce the amount of required off-street parking in accordance with the following methodology: 
1.  Determine the minimum automobile parking requirements in accordance with Table 2 for each use as if it were a separate use. 
2.  Multiply each amount of parking by the corresponding percentages for each of the five time periods set forth in Table 2. 
3.  Calculate the total amount of required parking for each time period. 
4.  Select the time period total with the highest value as the required minimum number of off-street parking spaces for the site. 
5.  It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to perform any studies or site evaluations as necessary to determine the acceptable number of spaces. No modification in parking ratios, as set forth in the table in section 48-1004, shall be granted without approval of the planning commission. 
Table 2
Parking Requirements by Time Period 
Use Weekday Weekend Day
6:00 a.m.-6:00 p.m. Evening
6:00 p.m.-12:00 mid. Day
6:00 a.m.-6:00 p.m. Evening
6:00 p.m.-12:00 mid. Night Time
12:00 mid.-6:00 a.m. Industrial/warehouse/business and professional offices, including medical and dental 100% 10% 10% 5% 5% Retail business and service establishments 60% 90% 100% 70% 5% Hotels/motels* 75% 100% 75% 100% 75% Restaurant 50% 100% 100% 100% 10% Indoor commercial recreation establishments and non-adult theaters 40% 100% 80% 100% 10% All other uses 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%  
* Rental rooms only. Other uses in hotel figured separately. 
(Code 1973, § 81-60; Code 1982, § 38-31(c)(1); Ord. No. 619; Ord. No. 790; Ord. No. 804; Ord. No. 811; Ord. No. 924; Ord. No. 960, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1021, 8-9-1982; Ord. No. 1039, 2-28-1983; Ord. No. 1051, 6-13-1983; Ord. No. 1081, 9-10-1984; Ord. No. 1083, 9-24-1984; Ord. No. 1139, 5-27-1986; Ord. No. 1188, 5-26-1987; Ord. No. 1203, 10-13-1987; Ord. No. 1227, 6-13-1988; Ord. No. 1263, 5-22-1989; Ord. No. 1277, § 6, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1590, 10-14-1997; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 1946, 2-8-2016) 
Sec. 48-972. - Off-site parking requirements. 
(a)  In all districts off-street parking may be provided off site within 500 feet, as measured along the shortest safe and unobstructed pedestrian path, from a principal entrance to the structure to which it is accessory, subject to the requirements of section 48-936(b) and (c). 
(b)  When any off-site parking is met through contract agreement or lease between two or more parties, one copy of the agreement, subject to the requirements established in this section, must be on file with the zoning administrator. The agreement shall contain, among other items required by the negotiating parties, the following: 
(1)  The name, address and status of each of the parties to the negotiation, including a certification of competence to enter into the specified agreement. 
(2)  The term of validity. In new construction, the term of validity of an agreement for the use of off-street parking facilities to fulfill the requirements of this division shall be at least ten years or, in the case of the parking being provided for a specific tenant, the term of the lease, whichever is greater. In redevelopment or renovation scenarios or in the case that the lessee of the facility is also a tenant or lessee of the principal structure or premises to which the parking shall be accessory, the term of validity of the agreement may coincide with the full period of validity of the lease for use of the principal structure. 
(3)  A plat depicting the parking facilities or any portion thereof for which agreement has been negotiated. This plat shall be drawn to scale and shall show accurately: 
a.  The precise location of the parking facility involved in the agreement. 
b.  The location and description of the principal uses and affected properties of all the parties entering into the agreement, including dimensions of distances between each use and the parking facility. 
c.  The location and size of all parking spaces, access aisles, driveways, entrances and exits, upon which agreement has been reached regarding usage. 
d.  Such other information as is required by the general regulations of this division. 
(4)  The plat submitted in compliance with subsection (b)(3) of this section shall be in addition to, and shall not be deemed to satisfy the requirements of division 7 of this article, pertaining to the site plan. 
(c)  A notarized copy of any agreement required by this section shall be submitted to the zoning administrator prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the use for which such parking is required. Copies of the agreement shall be forwarded to the department of public works and the department of planning and development for approval. Once copies of any such agreement are approved and the facilities described thereon certified to comply with all applicable provisions of this Code, the zoning administrator shall credit such additional parking facilities toward the off-street parking requirements of the principal use to which it is, by agreement, assigned and shall simultaneously annotate the certificate of occupancy to reflect such a conditional nature. 
(d)  If the validity of any agreement submitted in compliance with this section lapses, expires or for any reason becomes null and void, the certificate of occupancy issued under the consideration of this section shall be suspended effective the date of such lapse, expiration or voiding. Unless additional agreements are made whereby the requirements of this section are satisfied within 60 days of such suspension of the certificate of occupancy, the use for which the certificate of occupancy was issued shall cease and shall not resume until such time as all requirements of this section are once again satisfied. 
(e)  Acceptance of any agreement involving the use of off-street parking facilities shall not obligate the city to enforce the provisions of such agreement, nor shall it render the city liable for any damages, injury or loss resulting from the implementation of the various provisions of such agreements. 
(f)  It is the obligation of the lessee or party granted the use of any off-street parking or loading facilities or entrances or driveways under the terms of any agreement complying with the provisions of this section to negotiate the renewal of any such agreement prior to their expiration, and to provide copies of such new and/or supplemental agreements in the form and manner specified by this section. 
(g)  All copies of any agreement relating to the use of any off-street parking facility required by this section shall be notarized in the manner prescribed by the state code. 
(Code 1973, § 81-60; Code 1982, § 38-31(c)(2); Ord. No. 619; Ord. No. 790; Ord. No. 804; Ord. No. 811; Ord. No. 924; Ord. No. 960, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1021, 8-9-1982; Ord. No. 1039, 2-28-1983; Ord. No. 1051, 6-13-1983; Ord. No. 1081, 9-10-1984; Ord. No. 1083, 9-24-1984; Ord. No. 1139, 5-27-1986; Ord. No. 1188, 5-26-1987; Ord. No. 1203, 10-13-1987; Ord. No. 1227, 6-13-1988; Ord. No. 1263, 5-22-1989; Ord. No. 1277, § 6, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1590, 10-14-1997; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 1946, 2-8-2016) 
Secs. 48-973-48-1002. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Regulation by Use Types 

Sec. 48-1003. - Requirements. 
(a)  Parking, loading, unloading and maneuvering space for service vehicles must be provided for every building, structure or use that receives or distributes materials or merchandise by vehicular mode. 
(b)  Where no specific requirement is stated for a use, or where existing parking is nonconforming, the zoning administrator shall determine an alternate minimum parking requirement based on the most similar prescribed use (as determined by the zoning administrator based upon the factors below) and/or existing site conditions. In such instances the applicant shall provide the following information: 
(1)  Type of uses; 
(2)  Number of employees; 
(3)  Building design capacity; 
(4)  Square feet of sales area and service area; 
(5)  Parking spaces proposed on-site; 
(6)  Parking spaces provided elsewhere; 
(7)  Hours of operation; 
(8)  Proximity to Metro and/or other transit; 
(9)  Other information as required by the zoning administrator. 
(c)  When units of measurement determining the number of required parking spaces result in the requirement of a fractional space, one additional parking space shall be required. 
(d)  Temporary uses, including temporary stands permitted under section 48-868 shall be subject to the requirements applicable to the most similar permanent use. 
(Code 1973, § 81-60; Code 1982, § 38-31(d)(1); Ord. No. 619; Ord. No. 790; Ord. No. 804; Ord. No. 811; Ord. No. 924; Ord. No. 960, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1021, 8-9-1982; Ord. No. 1039, 2-28-1983; Ord. No. 1051, 6-13-1983; Ord. No. 1081, 9-10-1984; Ord. No. 1083, 9-24-1984; Ord. No. 1139, 5-27-1986; Ord. No. 1188, 5-26-1987; Ord. No. 1203, 10-13-1987; Ord. No. 1227, 6-13-1988; Ord. No. 1263, 5-22-1989; Ord. No. 1277, § 6, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1590, 10-14-1997; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 1946, 2-8-2016) 
Sec. 48-1004. - Table of use types. 
    In all districts off-street parking areas, off-street loading areas and standing spaces shall be provided in connection with, accessory to, and on the same premises as, each and every use, including municipal facilities, in the amount specified within this section in Table 3. Bicycle parking shall be provided for office, retail, multifamily and hotel development projects for employees and visitors/customers on private property as specified below in Tables 4 and 5. 
(1)  Bicycle parking requirements apply to both special exception projects and by-right projects when site plans are required under section 48-1134. 
(2)  Bicycle parking requirements are applied to each use separately. 
(3)  Office, residential and hotel bicycle storage facilities must be visible from an elevator, a visitor/customer entrance, or installed in an area within the garage that will be seen by a parking attendant, security guard or property manager. Retail bicycle parking locations shall be installed at highly visible exterior locations within 50 feet of the primary building entrances unless there are physical obstructions that cannot be changed or moved to accommodate the bicycle parking within the 50-foot distance, as determined by the director of development services. In the case where an obstruction cannot be moved or changed, signs directing cyclists to the bicycle parking will be required at the entrance(s). No bicycle parking facilities shall encroach on the public right-of-way unless approved or any required fire egress. 
Table 3
Parking Requirements by Use 
Use Types Loading Required Off-Street Parking and Standing Spaces Cultural, Entertainment and Recreational Uses Amusements  Billiards 1 per 200 sf of floor area  Miniature golf and outdoor installations 1 per 400 sf of the designated site area  Amusement arcades 1 per two amusement machines Cultural Activities  Art galleries, libraries, museums 1 per 400 sf of floor area  Botanical gardens/arboretums and zoos 1 per 500 sf of designated site area  Historical and monumental sites planning commission determination upon recommendation of historical commission Parks planning commission determination based upon such criteria as the number of persons expected to use the facility at any one time, their means of transportation and the availability of on- or off-street parking spaces nearby. Public Assembly  Amphitheaters, band shells, coliseums, stadiums 2 1 per 3 seats or six-foot benches  Auditoriums, assembly halls, community centers, dance halls, legitimate and motion picture theatres:   Fixed seats 1 1 per 4 seats based on maximum seating capacity in main assembly   Without fixed seats 1 1 per 60 sf of floor area Recreational Activity  Day camp, outdoors 1 per 10 pupils, plus 1 per staff member  Gymnasiums 1 1 per 4 seats  Sports activities    Bowling    Indoor 5 per alley    Outdoor 1 per 400 sf of designated site area   Riding stables 1 per every 2 stalls   Skating, ice and roller    Indoor 1 per 60 sf of floor area or 1 per 4 seats, whichever is greater    Outdoor 1 per 200 sf of designated site area   Swimming pools 1 per 54 sf of water surface area   Tennis courts 2 per court Manufacturing Assembly, distribution, fabrication, packaging, processing; bottling, canning, chemical, chipping, curing, cutting, electrical, extruding, milling, punching, stamping, thermal 2 1 per 500 sf of floor area Industrial research, development and testing 1 1 per 300 sf of floor area Office Business, general and governmental buildings 1 1 per 450 sf of floor area Professional office buildings, mixed professional uses composing 50 percent or more of the total floor area 1 1 per 450 sf of floor area Residence Dwellings:  One-family detached and two-family semidetached 1 per dwelling unit  Multifamily 1.0 per efficiency unit, no bedroom 
1.50 per one bedroom unit 
  
2 per two bedroom unit 
2 per three or more bedroom unit  Townhouse 2.5 per dwelling unit Group quarters:  Boardinghouse, lodginghouse, or roominghouse 1 per residence unit, plus two spaces for employees  Convalescent, human care, nursing or rest home, sanitarium 1 1 per 4 beds of maximum capacity, plus 1 for every full-time staff member on the maximum shift, and 1 per attending physician  Dormitory, fraternity or sorority 1 per 2 beds, plus one per 200 sf of floor area  Foster home 1 per full- or part-time staff member  Religious accommodations 1 per 10 beds with a minimum of 4 spaces Home occupations According to specific use type Transient lodgings:  Hotel and motel 1 1 per guestroom, plus one employee space per ten guestrooms  Tourist home 1 per guestroom, plus two spaces for employees Prenatal and infant care counseling center in an R-1A or R-1B district As required by special use permit conditions Service Business services:  Advertising, adjustments and collections, bonding, consulting, consumer and mercantile credit, data processing, detective and protective, employment, stenographic, public relations 1 per 300 sf of floor area  Blueprinting, delivery, duplicating, hand tool rental, mailing, office equipment leasing and sales, photocopying and finishing, printing, trading stamps 1 1 per 200 sf of floor area  Warehousing and storage:   Indoor 4 1 per 1,000 sf of floor area   Outdoor 2 1 per 2,000 sf of total site area   Self-storage warehouse * 1 per 400 sf of office floor area, plus 2 spaces for employees  Vehicle and wheeled equipment 1 1 per 1,000 sf of total site area Contract construction services 2 1 per 500 sf of floor area Educational services:  Day care and kindergarten 1 per 125 sf of floor area, plus 2 for employees  Nursery 1 per 175 sf of floor area, plus two per employee  Schools:   Instructional:    Arts, commercial, drafts, driving, physical culture, physically and mentally handicapped, professional 1 per 4 students of maximum capacity, plus 1 per classroom and 1 per full-time staff member on maximum shift   Parochial, private or public:    Elementary, intermediate or junior high 1 1 per teacher, employee or administrator whether full- or part-time, if activities of personnel are conducted between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.    High school or college or preparatory 1 1 per teacher, employee or administrator whether full- or part-time, plus one for every 10 students of maximum enrollment or capacity Finance, insurance and real estate services:  Banks, savings and loan associations 1 per 300 sf of floor area   Drive-in 5 standing spaces, per teller window  Insurance 1 per 300 sf of floor area  Real estate 1 per 200 sf of floor area Governmental services:  Postal   Window service 4 2 per employee, clerk or carrier on maximum shift   Mail handling station with no window service 4 1 per employee, clerk or carrier on maximum shift  Protection functions, fire, police 2 per full-time employee on maximum shift  Armed Forces recruitment 1 per employee on maximum shift Personal services:  Apparel and accessory repair 1 per 200 sf of floor area  Barbershop, beauty salon 3 per 100 sf of floor area  Cemeteries 1 per 2,500 sf of total site area  Funeral home, crematory, mortuary 2 1 per four seats in chapels or parlors with fixed seats or one per 100 sf of floor area of assembly rooms without fixed seats for services, plus five for employees  Laundering, dry cleaning:   Automatic, self-service 1 1 per two cleaning or laundry machines   Depot 1 1 per 50 sf of floor area   On-premises finishing 1 1 per 200 sf of floor area  Other 1 per 200 sf of floor area Professional services:  Architect, artist, attorney, engineer 1 per 300 sf of floor area  Medical:   Clinic, outpatient 1 1 per 200 sf of floor area   Dental office 1 per 300 sf of floor area   Life science laboratory and research 1 1 per 200 sf of floor area   Physician and surgeon 1 per 200 sf of floor area  Musician 1 per 300 sf of floor area  Other 1 per 300 sf of floor area  Veterinary:   Indoor 1 1 per 300 sf of floor area   Outdoor 1 1 per 500 sf of designated site area  Repair services:   Motor vehicle    Maintenance and mechanical repair 2 per service bay for employee parking, 5 per bay for vehicle storage    Drive-through maintenance and mechanical repair 1 per service bay, plus 4 per bay for employee parking, 5 per bay for vehicle standing    Painting and bodywork 2 per service bay for employee parking, 10 per of first 3 bays for vehicle storage    Wash, full-service 2 for employees, 10 spaces per service bay for vehicle standing    Wash, self-service 5 per bay for vehicle standing   Note-Establishments offering a variety of motor vehicle repair and maintenance services shall be required to meet the requirements of this section per use type that will be present on site.  General maintenance:   Indoor 1 1 per 400 sf of floor area   Outdoor 1 1 per 1,000 sf of total site area  Miscellaneous services:   Business and labor associations 1 per 100 sf of floor area   Churches, synagogues, temples and places of worship 1 per 4 seats in sanctuary   Civic, fraternal, political, private, religious and social, nonprofit associations 1 per 60 sf of floor area with a minimum of 10   Open air business and temporary stands not otherwise categorized by use type 1 1 per 200 sf of designated site area   Sign painters, cabinet, carpentry and refinishing 1 1 per 500 sf of floor area   Welfare and charitable centers 1 per 200 sf of floor area Trade Retail:  Apparel and accessories 1 per 250 sf of floor area Automotive:  Accessory sales:   Indoor 1 1 per 250 sf of floor area   Outdoor 1 1 per 1,000 sf of total site area with a minimum of 10 spaces   Dealership, New and Used:    Indoor 2 1 per 400 sf of floor area devoted to display    Outdoor 2 1 per 1,000 sf of total site area with a minimum of 10 spaces   Inspection stations 5 standing spaces   Gasoline service stations 1 2 standing spaces per fueling service bay, 3 vehicle storage spaces per service bay, 2 for employees, plus 1 employee space per service bay.  Note-Gasoline stations shall provide 1 per 100 sf of floor area dedicated to sale of food and non-auto oriented goods in addition to other requirements.  Motorcycle and accessory sales 1 1 per 250 sf of floor area  Marine 2 1 per 400 sf of floor area or site area devoted to display Building materials, contractor supplies, hardware:  Air conditioning, brick, concrete aggregates, electric, glass, heating, metals, plumbing, tile, wood   Indoor 2 1 per 400 sf of floor area   Outdoor 2 1 per 1,000 sf of total site area  Hardware 1 1 per 400 sf of floor area  Storage of gravel, sand, etc., outdoors 2 1 per 1,000 sf of total site area Food:  Automobile-oriented convenience food store 1 1 per 100 sf of floor area  Baker, confectionery, dairy, delicatessen, groceries, meats, poultry, produce, seafood 1 1 per 250 sf of floor area Furniture, home furnishings, household appliances, radio and television, rental, sales and service 1 1 per 400 sf of floor area Garden supplies, greenhouses and nursery stock:  Indoor 1 1 per 250 sf of floor area  Outdoor 1 1 per 600 sf of designated site area General merchandise, antiques, bicycles, books, department stores, drugs, dry goods, florist, jewelry, magazine, novelty, optical, pet, photographic, secondhand merchandise, sporting goods, stationery, tobacco, variety store and vending machine operation 1 1 per 250 sf of floor area Machinery sales:  Indoor 1 1 per 500 sf of floor area minimum 5 spaces  Outdoor 1 1 per 1,000 sf of total site area Restaurant, liquor outlet, tavern 1 1 per 100 sf of space used by customers Restaurant Drive-through 12 standing spaces, or as determined by use permit Shopping center 2 1 per 300 sf of floor area Wholesale, inventory, sales, storage not otherwise classified 2 1 per 1,000 sf of floor area devoted to enclosed storage Transportation, Communication and Utility Automobile parking, attendant, shelter 1 per employee on the maximum shift Communications facilities, broadcasting studios, message centers, telephone exchange, transmitting stations and towers 1 per 300 sf of floor area Motor vehicle transportation:  Bus equipment maintenance and garaging 2 2 per service bay or stall, plus 1 per vehicle storage space  Motor freight equipment maintenance and garaging 2 2 per service bay or stall, plus 1 per vehicle storage space  Taxicab:   Equipment maintenance and garaging 1 2 per service bay or stall, plus 1 per vehicle storage space   Convenience stands 2 standing spaces Utility-Generation plants, refuse disposal, regulating substations, sanitary landfills, storage, solid waste disposal 1 1 per 1,000 sf of total site area * Loading spaces for self storage warehouse - 1 space per 20,000 sf of floor area. 
sf = square feet.  
Table 4
Bicycle Parking Requirements 
Use Type Short-Term/Visitor/Customer Long-Term/Employee/Resident Office 3 loops (6 spaces) or 1/20,000 sq. ft. office GFA or portion thereof, whichever is greater 3 loops (6 spaces) or 1/6,000 sq. ft. office GFA or portion thereof, whichever is greater Retail 3 loops (6 spaces) or 2/10,000 sq. ft. of retail GFA or portion thereof, for the first 50,0000 sq. ft., and 1 additional for every 12,500 sq. ft. or portion thereof, whichever is greater 3 loops (6 spaces) or 1/25,000 sq. ft. of retail GFA or portion thereof, whichever is greater Multifamily 3 loops (6 spaces) or 1/50 units or portion thereof, whichever is greater 3 loops (6 spaces) or 1/2.5 units or portion thereof, whichever is greater Hotel 3 loops (6 spaces) or 1/50 hotel, rooms or portion thereof whichever is greater 3 loops (6 spaces) or 1/10 hotel rooms or portion thereof, whichever is greater  
Table 5
Bicycle Storage Requirements 
Use Type Short-Term/Visitor/Customer Long-Term/Employee/Resident Office Class 2 or Class 3 Class 1 or 2 Retail Highly visible exterior locations within 50 feet of the entrance Highly visible exterior locations within 50 feet of the entrance Multifamily Class 2 or Class 3 Class 1 or Class 2 Hotel Class 2 or Class 3 Class 2 or Class 3  
;sz=9;Class 1 storage = locked storage room or cage; 
;sz=9;Class 2 = protected or covered bicycle parking; 
;sz=9;Class 3 = light security for visitors 
(Code 1973, § 81-60; Code 1982, § 38-31(d)(2); Ord. No. 619; Ord. No. 790; Ord. No. 804; Ord. No. 811; Ord. No. 924; Ord. No. 960, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1021, 8-9-1982; Ord. No. 1039, 2-28-1983; Ord. No. 1051, 6-13-1983; Ord. No. 1081, 9-10-1984; Ord. No. 1083, 9-24-1984; Ord. No. 1139, 5-27-1986; Ord. No. 1188, 5-26-1987; Ord. No. 1203, 10-13-1987; Ord. No. 1227, 6-13-1988; Ord. No. 1263, 5-22-1989; Ord. No. 1277, § 6, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1590, 10-14-1997; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 1946, 2-8-2016) 
Sec. 48-1005. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Created. Uses which do not conform to all applicable requirements of this chapter shall, upon the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived, become nonconforming. No use which is made nonconforming by virtue of the adoption of the ordinance from which this division is derived shall be expanded, extended or enlarged in any way that would increase the off-street parking requirement unless and until such increased requirement is satisfied. 
(b)  Uses made nonconforming by governmental action. 
(1)  No use which, prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived, had or by subsequent future action of the federal, state or city governments shall have any portion of its required off-street parking or loading area condemned, confiscated or acquired by any means by any governmental authority, shall by virtue of such action become nonconforming. 
(2)  All uses which remain conforming by virtue of the provisions of this subsection (b), although providing off-street parking or loading space insufficient to satisfy the requirements of this division, shall be allowed to expand or enlarge upon provisions of such additional off-street parking or loading space as may be required for the expansion or enlargement alone. 
(3)  Whenever a use, described by this subsection (b), is combined with other properties and through such combination satisfies all applicable provisions of this division, it may no longer have recourse to the special immunities of this subsection (b). 
(Code 1973, § 81-60; Code 1982, § 38-31(e); Ord. No. 619; Ord. No. 790; Ord. No. 804; Ord. No. 811; Ord. No. 924; Ord. No. 960, 2-23-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1021, 8-9-1982; Ord. No. 1039, 2-28-1983; Ord. No. 1051, 6-13-1983; Ord. No. 1081, 9-10-1984; Ord. No. 1083, 9-24-1984; Ord. No. 1139, 5-27-1986; Ord. No. 1188, 5-26-1987; Ord. No. 1203, 10-13-1987; Ord. No. 1227, 6-13-1988; Ord. No. 1263, 5-22-1989; Ord. No. 1277, § 6, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994; Ord. No. 1590, 10-14-1997; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 1946, 2-8-2016) 
Secs. 48-1006-48-1023. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RESERVED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1872, adopted Mar. 12, 2012, deleted div. 3, §§ 48-1024-48-1027, entitled "Inoperable Vehicles", which derived from: Code 1973, § 81-61; Code 1982, §§ 38-32(a)-(i); and Ord. No. 1154, adopted Aug. 11, 1986. 

Secs. 48-1024-48-1052. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - FILLING STATIONS AND PUBLIC GARAGES 

Sec. 48-1053. - Vehicular entrances and exits. 
(a)  No automobile filling station, public garage, or automobile repair shop shall have a vehicular entrance or exit within 400 feet along the same side of a street and in the same block, of the premises of any school, public playground, church, hospital, public library, or institution for children or dependents, except where such use is accessory to such property; and no part of any such automobile filling station, garage, or shop shall be within 100 feet of any of the said public, semipublic, or institutional buildings or properties. 
(b)  On all corner lots, all vehicular entrances to or exits from any automobile filling station, or public garage or automobile repair shop, and curb openings shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from the corner property lines extended or from the established right-of-way lines, as specified in section 48-1102, whichever is the greater. All curb openings, whether on a corner lot or not, shall not exceed 40 feet in width at the curbline and 30 feet at the property line. There shall be a minimum of 40 feet measured along the curbline between any two successive driveways. 
(Code 1973, § 81-62; Code 1982, § 38-33(a), (c); Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994) 
Sec. 48-1054. - Restrictions for oil draining pits and other such appliances. 
    No automobile filling station or public garage shall be permitted where any oil draining pit or visible appliance for any such purpose, other than filling caps, is located within 12 feet of any street lot line or within 25 feet of an R district, except where such appliance or pit is within a building. 
(Code 1973, § 81-62; Code 1982, § 38-33(b); Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994) 
Sec. 48-1055. - Regulation of drive-through facilities. 
    Drive-through facilities shall be regulated in accordance with subsection 48-867(4). 
(Code 1973, § 81-62; Code 1982, § 38-33(d); Ord. No. 1477, 5-9-1994) 
Secs. 48-1056-48-1078. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - MIXED-USE REDEVELOPMENT (MUR) REGULATIONS 

Sec. 48-1079. - Intent. 
    The intent of the MUR, mixed-use redevelopment in this division is to promote parcel consolidation resulting in mixed-use redevelopment projects that are viable for the longterm in areas designated with the MUR symbol on the city comprehensive plan future land use plan map in a creative, physically and functionally integrated, innovative, and well-designed manner. This development shall be in conformance with the desired character expressed within the comprehensive plan, and shall allow for greater flexibility than many of the traditional zoning controls related to land use, density, setbacks, parking, other design elements, and the timing and sequencing of the development approval process. Furthermore, it is the intent of the mixed-use redevelopment (MUR) to: 
(1)  Attract new development that will generate jobs and create positive net revenues for the city. 
(2)  Create a mixture of office, retail, recreational, hotel, and residential uses within a single structure or within multiple, but physically and functionally integrated and related structures and open spaces, as recommended by the comprehensive plan, while protecting the residential character of surrounding neighborhoods. 
(3)  Provide an alternative for more efficient utilization of the city's land resources, resulting in multistory buildings, smaller networks of utilities, structured or underground parking, shared stormwater management and roads, greater opportunities for useable public and private open space, and reduced needs for automotive travel with retail and employment centers located near housing. 
(4)  Encourage harmonious and coordinated development of sites, considering the existing natural features, pedestrian and vehicular circulation, and compatibility with the surrounding residential and commercial properties. 
(5)  Encourage the application of professional planning and creative design techniques to achieve an overall coordinated development, eliminating the negative impacts of piecemeal development. 
(6)  Encourage development that is of excellent design and architecture. 
(Code 1982, § 38-34(a)(1); Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1670, 3-13-2000; Ord. No. 1671, 4-10-2000) 
Sec. 48-1080. - General requirements. 
(a)  Evidence of control and future development potential. All property to be developed within a MUR shall be a single parcel of land and shall not be subdivided, except in accordance with chapter 38, pertaining to subdivisions. Upon approval of a MUR site plan, any building permit, subdivision plat, subsequent site plans or amendment, or any other application for development shall be in substantial conformance with the approved site plan. Any such subsequent application will be reviewed on the basis that it will not: 
(1)  Impair the ability of the project to be developed, as approved; 
(2)  Jeopardize approved pedestrian, vehicular, or utility connections on the property; 
(3)  Adversely affect the practicality or cost of maintaining common or shared facilities on the property; 
(4)  Change the ability of reduced parking spacing under shared parking to meet needs; or 
(5)  Fragment the property in a manner to negate the intent of consolidation of parcels, as stated in section 48-1079. 
(b)  Minimum project area. The site area for all MUR applications must be at least 21/2 contiguous acres. 
(c)  Affordable dwelling units. All residential units are subject to the provisions of article VII of this chapter. 
(d)  Parking requirements. Parking requirements shall be met in accordance with individual use requirements, as described in division 2 of this article, or may take advantage of a shared parking or reduced parking approach described in the text and table of this subsection (d). Landscaping requirements for parking areas in section 48-940 do not apply to MUR applications. For MUR application landscaping requirements, see subsections (f) through (h) of this section. Applicants may choose one of the following shared parking or reduced parking options: 
(1)  Specific use parking reductions. Applicants may request from the planning commission, during the site plan process, a consideration for a reduction in the parking requirements of division 2 of this article for a specific use, if verifiable data is produced that supports a reduction in parking and loading spaces. 
(2)  Parking reductions for use of alternative modes of transportation. Applicants may request from the planning commission, during the site plan process, a consideration for a reduction in the parking requirements of division 2 of this article of up to 20 percent for reduced parking demands due to the use of or incentives for the use of modes of transportation other than single-occupancy vehicles, such as carpooling, metro shuttle buses, proximity to metro, or contribution to city transit services. Verifiable data must be produced that supports a reduction in parking for these purposes. 
(3)  Shared parking. Shared parking for developments containing a mix of uses. 
a.  When any land and/or buildings are contiguous to one another, and are used for two or more purposes, the number of parking spaces shall be computed by multiplying the minimum requirements in division 2 of this article by the appropriate percentage as shown in the following parking credit schedule for each of the five time periods. The number of parking spaces required for the mixed-use development is then determined by adding the results in each column. The column total that generates the highest number of parking spaces becomes the parking requirement. 
Shared Parking Requirements by Time Period 
Use Weekday Weekend Day Evening Day Evening Night Industrial/warehouses/business and professional offices, including medical and dental 100% 10% 10% 5% 5% Retail business and service establishments 60% 90% 100% 70% 5% Hotels/motels 75% 100% 75% 100% 75% Restaurants 50% 100% 100% 100% 10% Indoor commercial recreation establishments and nonadult theaters 40% 100% 80% 100% 10% All other uses 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% Note-Time periods: Day: 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Evening: 6:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight Night: 12:00 midnight to 6:00 a.m.  
b.  The following conditions shall apply to any parking facility for a development containing a mix of uses: 
1.  The mixed-use property and mixed-use shared parking facility must be owned by the same developer/owner or must be the subject of a recorded shared parking agreement made between current and future owners of the properties involved and shall convey with the land. Any such agreements must also contain a provision for parking facility maintenance. Any changes to the agreement must be approved by the planning commission. There cannot be greater than 500 linear feet, measured along the most appropriate walking route between the shared parking facility and the entrance to the establishments being served. Shared parking facilities located on a separate lot from the establishments being served must meet the requirements of division 2 of this article. 
2.  Parking for the handicapped spaces may not be shared or included in any shared parking calculation. 
3.  All shared parking spaces must be available for common use by all participants in the shared parking agreement. No reserved spaces may be part of the shared parking agreement. 
4.  The planning staff shall determine at the time of site plan approval that shared parking is possible and appropriate at the location proposed. Particular attention is needed to ensure that sufficient and convenient shortterm parking will be available to commercial establishments during the weekday daytime period. The shared parking spaces must be located in the most convenient and visible area of the parking facility nearest the establishment being served. 
5.  All subsequent changes in use require a new occupancy permit and proof that sufficient parking will be available. The table in subsection (d)(3)a of this section determines a minimum number of spaces required to receive occupancy permits. 
6.  The requirements described in the table in subsection (d)(3)a of this section apply to all proposed uses for any one phase of development in addition to the ultimate buildout for the development. 
7.  A parking facility, for the purposes of this section, is defined as a surface parking lot or group of lots, a parking structure, or a garage. 
(4)  Surface parking. Surface parking shall not occupy more than 25 percent of the gross site area. Parking at grade that is covered as the first level of a parking structure does not count within this 25 percent requirement. If development of a project will be phased, in accordance with section 48-1139, such that structured parking will not be built within the first phase and surface parking will occupy more than 25 percent of the gross site area, the applicant must show the ultimate plan for buildout of the site with a maximum of 25 percent of the gross site area dedicated to surface parking. A conditional use permit is required for any surface parking facilities that occupy greater than 25 percent of the gross site area, during any phase of the development project. This conditional use permit shall place a time limit on the temporary allowance for greater than 25 percent surface parking. In addition, the applicant must comply with the general design standards in subsection (f) of this section and parking design and landscaping standards in subsections (f) through (h) of this section. 
(e)  Setback requirements. Development shall comply with a minimum project area perimeter-building setback of 14 feet from the face of the curb or if there is no curb, from the property line, and a maximum project area perimeter-building setback of 20 feet. In addition, in MUR 1 areas, residential townhouses shall be set back no less than 20 feet from the face of the curb. The 14-foot minimum setback requirement does not apply when the perimeter of a MUR project adjoins an R district, in which case the setback shall be no less than 20 feet. No setback regulations between the interior uses apply to MUR applications. Two exceptions apply to the 20-foot maximum setback condition. When either of the following conditions exist, there will be no maximum setback requirements: 
(1)  Public open spaces are created on the perimeter that serves the uses adjoining it. 
(2)  Ancillary parking facilities are created on the perimeter that is bounded on three sides by retail space. 
(f)  General design requirements. Pursuant to the city Charter, section 17.10, all development in MUR areas must be in accordance with the design and appearance standards as set forth in the city's community appearance plan. These community appearance plan standards are designed to promote developments of excellent design and architecture that create a main street-type appearance on Broad and Washington Streets, and that are compatible with the surrounding area. In addition, the following design standards must be met: 
(1)  Buildings that front on Broad Street and Washington Street shall contain the following pedestrian-friendly features: 
a.  Direct access to pedestrian ways serving the use and to adjacent public streets. 
b.  Provision of seating, landscaping, lighting, and artistic or architectural embellishments on building facades and in public open spaces. 
c.  Architectural details in building facades that break up large blank walls. 
d.  Large first floor display windows that provide visual access into buildings for pedestrians and drivers. 
(2)  Wherever possible, parking and loading spaces shall be located to the rear of structures and shall be screened, in accordance with the requirements of this division. 
(3)  When parking areas are permitted to front on Broad Street, Washington Street, or Maple Avenue, decorative pavement materials, such as brick pavers or cobblestones, or textured pavement, shall be integrated with standard asphalt or concrete pavement treatments. 
(4)  Structures shall be designed and constructed to include features, such as: facade setbacks and recesses for purposes of plazas, arcades, open space, and streetscape features or furniture; different architectural treatment of ground-level areas; canopies and awnings for functional purposes and visual interest, balconies, terraces, and yards for use and visual interest; wall materials that reflect materials in the nearby street frontage; facade offsets, pitched and varied rooflines, textured materials, and like devices to visually lessen the bulk of buildings that are greater in bulk than generally permitted in the zoning district. 
(5)  The visual impact of structured parking facilities should be reduced through design and topography. 
(6)  If residential townhouses or apartments are permitted and constructed within MUR application areas, they shall be physically and functionally integrated within the overall development, such that there are pedestrian connections to the remainder of the development and such that any buffers do not physically impede these connections. 
(g)  Streetscape improvement requirements. Streetscape improvements, that are consistent with the design shown in the city's adopted streetscape plan, shall be provided along all frontages on public streets for which streetscape plans have been adopted. Landscaping within setback areas should be compatible with, if not an extension of, the streetscape treatments in the public right-of-way. Landscaped areas within the streetscape shall not count towards the landscaping and open space requirements of subsection (h) of this section. 
(h)  Landscaping and open space requirements. Section 48-940 does not apply to MUR applications. The remainder of division 2 of this article is applicable. 
(1)  All MUR site plan applications must contain a landscaping plan. A minimum of 15 percent of the gross site area must be landscaped open space. The term "landscaped open space" is defined in section 48-2. This 15 percent may include up to five feet of landscaped perimeter setback areas. A five-foot landscaped open space area, as defined in section 48-2, must be included on all MUR application area perimeter streets as part of the 14- to 20-foot required perimeter setback. MUR application area perimeters that are not bounded by street frontage and abut properties outside of the MUR application area must comply with the site screening requirements of this section. Five percent of the interior of all surface parking facilities must be landscaped. The internal area of a parking facility is defined by the perimeter of the curbs or edge of paving. This five percent of interior surface parking areas may also be included within the 15 percent gross site area requirement. Structured parking facilities must include a minimum of two percent of landscaped area on the top decks, with the remaining three percent to be planted adjacent to the ground level of the parking structure. Rear townhouse yards cannot be applied to the 15 percent landscaped open space requirement. The following standards also apply to the 15 percent gross site area landscaped open space requirements: 
a.  The five percent landscaping requirement for the interior of surface parking areas must be in the form of islands which must include a mixture of shade trees, shrubs, groundcover, and perennials to maximize shade potential and visual buffers. Each island must contain a minimum of one canopy tree and 150 square feet. 
b.  Best management practices shall be employed in establishing stormwater management techniques, as described in the Falls Church Watershed Management Plan, section 4.0. 
c.  The two percent landscaping requirement for the top decks of structured parking facilities should include three-foot perimeter planters at certain locations and corner planters with shade trees. The majority of the remaining three percent of landscaping adjacent to the ground level of the structure should be comprised of evergreen screening with the capacity to grow to a minimum of eight feet in height. 
d.  Landscaping within the required perimeter setback area shall include street-type shade trees, measuring from two to 21/2 inches in caliper, planted at intervals of 30 to 40 feet. In addition, a combination of large shrubs, small shrubs, and groundcover (not to include turf grass) arranged formally or informally, that will cover the entire area at maturity, shall be required. Groundcover shall not comprise more than 15 percent of the site screen area. Large shrubs shall measure at least 30 inches in height at the time of planting and reach a minimum mature height of 31/2 feet. Small shrubs shall measure at least 18 inches in height at the time of planting and reach a maximum of 31/2 feet at maturity. Enough large shrubs must be planted to maintain a visual buffer the length of the setback area, if a MUR area perimeter is adjacent to an adjoining property and is not separated by a street, subsection (h)(2) of this section will govern the requirements for that section of the perimeter. 
e.  All plant materials must be inspected by the city arborist prior to planting and shall meet the city's approved plant list and commercial site planting requirements. Installation may be spot checked by the city arborist. 
f.  Landscaped open space shall be consolidated into useable areas when possible. 
(2)  Site screening is required between adjoining uses and development not separated by a street at a MUR application area perimeter. All MUR site plan applications must adhere to the following site screening requirements to provide a visual buffer between adjoining uses. These requirements apply only to perimeter boundaries of any MUR application and not to district separations that are interior to a MUR application area. Site screening requirements vary depending on the intensity of both the district in which a use is proposed and its neighboring district. 
a.  Site screening requirement A. A ten-foot wide landscaped planting strip shall include street-type shade trees, measuring from two to 21/2 inches in caliper, planted at intervals of 30 to 40 feet. In addition, a combination of large shrubs, small shrubs, and groundcover (not to include turf grass), arranged formally or informally, that will cover the entire area at maturity shall be required. Groundcover shall not comprise more than 15 percent of the site screen area. Large shrubs shall measure at least 30 inches in height at the time of planting and reach a minimum mature height of 31/2 feet. Small shrubs shall measure at least 18 inches in height at the time of planting and reach a maximum of 31/2 feet at maturity. Enough large shrubs must be planted to maintain a visual buffer the length of the site screen area. All species must be approved by the city arborist. 
b.  Site screening requirement B. A ten-foot wide landscaped planting strip shall include street-type shade trees, measuring from two to 21/2 inches in caliper, planted at intervals of 30 to 40 feet. In addition, a combination of large shrubs, small shrubs, and groundcover (not to include turf grass), arranged formally or informally, that will cover the entire area at maturity shall be required. Groundcover shall not comprise more than 15 percent of the site screen area. Large shrubs shall measure at least 30 inches in height at the time of planting and reach a minimum mature height of 31/2 feet. Small shrubs shall measure at least 18 inches in height at the time of planting and reach a maximum of 31/2 feet at maturity. Enough large shrubs must be planted to maintain a visual buffer the length of the site screen area. In addition to this vegetation, a screening element of at least six feet in height must be created to consist of either a masonry wall, a combined three foot high earthen berm with the required landscaping located atop the berm, or a solid wood fence. All species must be approved by the city arborist. 
c.  Site screening requirement C. 
1.  A seven-foot-wide landscaped planting strip shall include evergreen trees planted at intervals of six to ten feet, measuring a minimum of six feet in height at the time of planting and reaching a minimum height of 12 feet at maturity. In addition to this vegetation, a screening element of at least six feet in height must be created to consist of either a masonry wall or a solid wood fence. All species must be approved by the city arborist. 
2.  Requirements A, B, and C are standards for the size and site screening area and the density and type of landscaping/planting. The developer may substitute a higher site screening requirement, requirement C being higher than B, and B being higher than A. In certain situations, as designated in the table in this subsection, either site screening requirement B or C may be used. Existing trees and other vegetation may be used for site screening, if they are healthy and are approved as part of the landscaping plan by the city arborist. All site screening required by this section must be installed prior to the occupancy of the use. Where compliance with this regulation is not possible because of seasonal planting limitations, the city arborist shall grant an appropriate delay. 
Zoning district in which the proposed use or 
development is located Zoning district in which each adjacent use is located Lower District intensity Higher R-1A R-1B R-C R-TH R-M O-D T-1 T-2 B-1 B-2 B-3 M-1 R-M B or C B or C B or C B or C A B or C A A A A A B or C T-1 B or C B or C B or C B or C A A A A A A A B or C T-2 B or C B or C B or C B or C A A A A A A A B or C B-1 B or C B or C B or C B or C A A A A A A A B or C B-2 B or C B or C B or C B or C A A A A A A A B or C B-3 B or C B or C B or C B or C B or C A A A A A A B or C M-1 B or C B or C B or C B or C B or C B or C B or C B or C B or C B or C B or C A  
(i)  MUR application requirements and procedures in addition to division 7 of this article, pertaining to site plan requirement, are as follows: 
(1)  Requirements. In addition to the site plan application requirements in division 7 of this article, a complete MUR application shall include the following: 
a.  A statement of how the proposed development will be consistent with the city comprehensive plan and its future land use plan map. 
b.  A statement of how the proposed development will be consistent with article VII of this chapter pertaining to affordable dwelling units. 
c.  A statement of how the proposed development will be consistent with the design and appearance standards as set forth in the city's community appearance plan. 
d.  A table including the total number of square feet of floor area that will be dedicated to specific permitted uses as required by section 48-1081. 
e.  A statement of the floor area ratio of the project as a whole, and number of townhouse units per acre, if applicable. 
f.  A statement of number of parking spaces, and if utilized, an explanation of how shared parking reduction formulas in subsections (d)(1) through (3) of this section are being applied. 
g.  Location of and gross number of square feet of each area to be counted as landscaped open space in meeting the 15 percent requirement of subsection (h) of this section. 
h.  Location of public uses such as schools, parks, playgrounds, and other useable open space, if any are proposed. 
i.  A statement of the expected schedule of development. 
j.  A fiscal impact assessment of the proposed project, including the number of projected school age children. All projected costs and revenues associated with the proposed development must be stated in both average and marginal terms. 
k.  An analysis of traffic impacts associated with the development proposal. 
l.  A three-dimensional massing model of the proposed development. This may be submitted as a hand drawing or computer-aided drawing. 
m.  A statement of all anticipated off-site improvements, such as roads, sewer and drainage facilities, or other public improvements, necessary to construct the proposed development, as well as other amenities. 
(2)  Procedure. 
a.  All MUR applications will be processed as described in division 7 of this article. The planning director will initially review the conceptual plan and application based on the established MUR criteria. Following this review, there shall be a pre-site plan filing concept meeting with the planning commission, staff and applicant to provide comments prior to significant site plan engineering and formal site plan filing under division 7 of this article; 
b.  MUR applicants may apply for phased site plan review per section 48-1139. It is preferred that the commercial components of approved MUR site plans be constructed prior to or simultaneous with the residential components; however, any one of the following options is allowed for the phasing of the residential component of MUR projects: 
1.  Option 1. No more than 50 percent of the building permits for residential units displayed on an approved MUR site plan may be granted prior to an approved footer inspection for all new commercial construction displayed on that approved site plan; 
2.  Option 2. One hundred percent of building permits for residential units displayed on an approved MUR site plan may be granted prior to an approved footer inspection for all new commercial construction displayed on that approved site plan, if a letter of credit or bond is posted in the amount of 25 percent of the cost constructing all new commercial structures and parking facilities displayed on the approved site plan; 
c.  Option 3. One hundred percent of building permits for residential units displayed on an approved MUR site plan may be granted following the completion and satisfactory inspection of all site preparation requirements including site preparation; earthwork; utility services; drainage/containment; foundation/load bearing elements; tunneling, boring and jacking; and bases, ballasts, pavements, and appurtenances, for the entire MUR application site as displayed on the approved site plan and subdivision. In addition, the posting of a letter of credit or bond in the amount of the cost of constructing all of the parking facilities displayed on the approved site plan is required for the use of this option; or 
d.  Option 4. Application for any phasing options other than those listed above may be made to the city council, which may, in its discretion, and following consideration by council of the recommendation of the planning commission, grant a construction phasing permit that shall meet the public purposes expressed in this division, pertaining to MUR. For purposes of this option, the planning commission shall report its recommendation to the city council within 45 days of the date of referral of the applicant's complete application the planning commission. Notwithstanding any other provision, this option 4, shall not become effective until such time as the council adopts appropriate standards for the implementation and administration of this option. 
The preexisting commercial structures within a MUR application area shall not be basis for receiving residential building permits prior to the footer inspections for all commercial structures shown on the approved site plan. 
(Code 1982, § 38-34(a)(2); Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1670, 3-13-2000; Ord. No. 1671, 4-10-2000) 
Sec. 48-1081. - Specific site plan requirements for MUR options 1, 2 and 3. 
(a)  Mixed-use redevelopment (MUR) option 1. All of the following sections apply to the mixed-use redevelopment (MUR) project option 1, in addition to those described in section 48-1080. 
(1)  Where permitted. The MUR option 1 may be utilized only where the MUR 1, symbol appears on the future land use plan map of the comprehensive plan within the R-M, T-1, T-2, B-1, B-3, or M-1 zoning districts. 
(2)  MUR option 1 permitted uses. All of the uses listed in sections 48-362, 48-393, 48-423, 48-453, 48-521, and 48-546 are permitted. Apartment structures, indoor commercial recreation uses, and senior assisted living facilities are permitted within MUR option 1 applications when overall site densities do not exceed the maximum allowed floor area ratio listed in this section. Residential townhouse structures are also permitted within MUR option 1 applications at a maximum density of 12 units per acre, if maximum site floor area ratio requirements are not exceeded. The following additional requirements apply to townhouses within MUR 1 areas: 
a.  Design and appearance standards for townhouses within the city's community appearance plan must be followed. 
b.  Once constructed, townhouses must comply with the permitted uses listed within article IV, division 5. 
c.  Townhouses are not allowed to front on Broad or Washington Street. 
d.  Townhouses must not exceed 35 feet in height. 
e.  There shall be at least four but no more than eight townhouse dwellings continuously connected. 
f.  Generally, no more than two abutting townhouses shall have the same front yard setbacks and abutting townhouses shall not have a common roofline. 
g.  No individual townhouse shall have a driveway opening directly onto an existing public street. 
h.  End unit townhouse exteriors shall be wrapped with a consistent material and finish on all three exterior sides. 
(3)  Ratio requirements. MUR option 1 ratio of use requirements are as follows: 
a.  Applications for development within all MUR option 1 areas must meet each of the following tests for gross square footage: 
1.  For every 1,000 square feet of residential space, a minimum of 2,000 square feet of office space, 1 2,000 square feet of retail space, 2, 3 2,000 square feet of hotel space; or a total of 2,000 square feet of a combination of these uses must also be constructed. 
2.  For every 1,000 square feet of office space, 1 a minimum of 100 square feet of retail space must also be constructed. 2, 3 
3.  For every 1,000 square feet of retail space, 2, 3 a minimum of 500 square feet of office 1 500 square feet of residential space; 500 square feet of hotel space; or 500 square feet of the combination of these uses must also be constructed. 
4.  For every 1,000 square feet of hotel space, a minimum of 50 square feet of retail space 2, 3 must also be constructed. 
Note-For gross amounts of square feet not equal to a multiple of 1,000 the numbers will be rounded down at and below 500 and rounded up above 500. 
Footnotes: 
1 Applicable office space is referenced in sections 48-453(5), 48-453(6), 48-486(3), 48-486(b)(5), 48-521(6), 48-546(3), and 48-546(4). 
2 Applicable retail and service establishments are referenced in sections 48-453(16), 48-486(13), and 48-521(16). 
3 This retail space shall be organized to promote first floor pedestrian interest. 
b.  The square footage requirements outlined in this section apply specifically to the property defined in the MUR option 1 application, and shall not include any existing surrounding uses. Structures that exist on the interior of MUR application areas may be included in the above square footage requirements if substantially redeveloped to satisfy MUR criteria. When the square footage of preexisting commercial structures is used to satisfy the MUR 1 ratio of use requirements of this subsection (a)(3) of this section, these square feet must be included in the aggregate square footage of all structures shown in the site plan application and meet the ratio of use requirements for the square footage of all structures shown in the site plan application. All other requirements of this division 5, except for setback and building height requirements, apply to existing commercial structures within MUR application areas. The above requirements pertain to the gross square feet of structural floor area, excluding parking structures. 
(4)  Allowed density and building heights for MUR option 1 applications. To encourage parcel consolidation, developments of greater than 21/2 acres will receive a two percent density bonus for each additional acre. The following table describes maximum density and building height requirements: 
Total 
Project 
Acreage* Minimum 
FAR Percentage Density (FAR) Bonus Maximum 
FAR** with 
Bonus Maximum Building Height (in feet)*** 2.5 .75 N/A 1.50 35-75 3.0 .75 2% 1.53 35-75 4.0 .75 4% 1.56 35-75 5.0 .75 6% 1.59 35-75 6.0 .75 8% 1.62 35-75 7.0 .75 10% 1.65 35-75 8.0 .75 12% 1.68 35-75 9.0 .75 14% 1.71 35-75 10.0 .75 16% 1.74 35-75 *For applications that include land area between two of the listed acreage, the acreage will be rounded down at and below 0.5 and rounded up above 0.5. 
  
**Maximum FARs are based on developments with no below grade parking facilities. Applications that include below grade facilities may be granted higher maximum FARs as determined by the planning commission. 
  
***See subsection (a)(5)b of this section for an explanation of building heights.  
(5)  Conditions applying to MUR option 1 applications. 
a.  All MUR option 1 applications shall comply with the minimum and maximum FAR and other provisions in the table in subsection (a) of this section. These figures are also stated in article V, division 6 of this chapter, pertaining to height, lot and yard regulations. Parking structures may be excluded from the FAR calculations; however above-grade parking structures must comply with height requirements. 
b.  All MUR option 1 applications are subject to the following building heights: Within the MUR 1 option, the areas defined by the curbs of West Broad Street or South Maple Avenue and 200 feet beyond those curbs, which are not otherwise restricted, there is a maximum building height of 75 feet, except when the MUR application area adjoins an R (R-1A, R-1B, R-C, R-TH, R-M) district and the 200 feet area reaches within or beyond 150 feet of the R district boundary line. Only in that case, is a building height of 75 feet allowed from the curbs of West Broad Street or South Maple Avenue and up to a distance that is a minimum of 150 feet from the adjoining R district boundary line. Outside of these areas all MUR option 1 applications are subject to the height limitations defined in article V, division 6 of this chapter for each of the applicable underlying zoning districts and intended uses. See the diagram in this section. 

Example of an MUR 1 application that does not adjoin an R district 

Example of an MUR 1 application adjoining R district area and in which case the 200 feet area shown above reaches within or beyond 150 feet of the R district boundary line. 
c.  All structures that are within 80 feet of Park Avenue and Ellison Street shall be of similar character to structures across the street from them. 
(b)  Mixed-use redevelopment (MUR) option 2. All of the following sections apply to the mixed-use redevelopment (MUR) option 2, in addition to those described in section 48-1080. 
(1)  Where permitted. The MUR option 2 may be utilized only where the MUR 2 symbol appears on the future land use plan map of the comprehensive plan within the B-2 zoning district. 
(2)  MUR option 2 permitted uses. All of the uses listed in section 48-486 are permitted. In addition indoor commercial recreation uses are also permitted within all MUR option 2 applications. 
(3)  MUR option 2 ratio of use requirements. 
a.  Applications for development within all MUR option 2 areas must meet each of the following tests for gross square footage: 
1.  For every 1,000 square feet of residential space, a minimum of 4,000 square feet of office space, 1 4,000 square feet of retail space, 2, 3 4,000 square feet of hotel space; or a total of 4,000 square feet of a combination of these uses must also be constructed. 
2.  For every 1,000 square feet of office space, 1 a minimum of 75 square feet of retail space 2, 3 must also be constructed. 
3.  For every 1,000 square feet of retail space, 2, 3 a minimum of 500 square feet of office, 1 500 square feet of residential space; 500 square feet of hotel space; or 500 square feet of the combination of these uses must also be constructed. 
4.  For every 1,000 square feet of hotel space, a minimum of 50 square feet of retail space 2, 3 must also be constructed. 
Note-For gross amounts of square feet not equal to a multiple of 1,000 the number will be rounded down at and below 500 and rounded up above 500. 
Footnotes: 
1 Applicable office space is referenced in sections 48-453(5), 48-453(6), 48-486(3), 48-486(5), 48-521(6), 48-546(3), and 48-546(4). 
2 Applicable retail and service establishments are referenced in sections 48-453(16), 48-486(13), and 48-522(16). 
3 This retail space shall be organized to promote first floor pedestrian interest. 
b.  The square footage requirements in this section apply specifically to the property defined in the MUR option 2 application, and shall not include any existing surrounding uses. Structures that exist on the interior of MUR application areas may be included in the above square footage requirements if substantially redeveloped to satisfy MUR criteria. When the square footage of preexisting commercial structures is used to satisfy the MUR 1 ratio of use requirements in subsection (a)(3)a of this section, these square feet must be included in the aggregate square footage of all structures shown in the site plan application and meet the ratio of use requirements for the square footage of all structures shown in the site plan application. All other requirements of this division, except for setback and building height requirements, apply to existing commercial structures within MUR application areas. The above requirements pertain to the gross square feet of structural floor area, excluding parking structures. 
(4)  Allowed density and building heights for MUR option 2 applications. To encourage parcel consolidation, developments of greater than 21/2 acres will receive a three percent density bonus for each additional acre. The following table describes maximum density and building height requirements: 
Total 
Project 
Area* Minimum 
FAR Percentage Density (FAR) Bonus Maximum 
FAR** with 
Bonus Maximum Building Height(in feet) 2.5 .75 N/A 1.80 87 3.0 .75 3% 1.85 87 4.0 .75 6% 1.91 87 5.0 .75 9% 1.96 87 6.0 .75 12% 2.02 87 7.0 .75 15% 2.07 87 8.0 .75 18% 2.12 87 *For applications that include land area between two of the listed acreage, the acreage will be rounded down at and below 0.5 and rounded up above 0.5. 
  
**Maximum FARs are based on developments with no below grade parking facilities. Applications that include below grade facilities may be granted higher maximum FARs as determined by the planning commission.  
(5)  Conditions applying to MUR option 2 applications. 
a.  All MUR option 2 applications shall comply with the minimum and maximum FAR and other provisions in the above table. These figures are also stated in article VI, division 6 of this chapter, pertaining to height lot and yard regulations. Parking structures may be excluded from FAR calculations; however above-grade parking structures must comply with height requirements. 
b.  All MUR option 2 applications are subject to an 87-foot maximum height limitation. 
(c)  Mixed-use redevelopment (MUR) option 3. All of the following sections apply to the mixed-use redevelopment (MUR) option 3 in addition to those described in section 48-1079. 
(1)  Where permitted. The MUR option 3 may be utilized only where the MUR 3 symbol appears on the future land use plan map of the comprehensive plan within the B-3 and M-1 zoning districts. 
(2)  MUR option 3 permitted uses. All of the uses listed in sections 48-521 and 48-546 are permitted. In addition, apartment structures, indoor commercial recreation uses, and senior assisted living facilities are also permitted within all MUR option 3 applications. 
(3)  MUR option 3 ratio of use requirements. 
a.  Applications for development within all MUR option 3 areas must meet each of the following tests for gross square footage: 
1.  For every 1,000 square feet of residential space, a minimum of 3,000 square feet of office space 1 ; 3,000 square feet of retail space, 2, 3 3,000 square feet of hotel space; or a total of 3,000 square feet of a combination of these uses must also be constructed. 
2.  For every 1,000 square feet of office space 1 , a minimum of 100 square feet of retail space 2, 3 must also be constructed. 
3.  For every 1,000 square feet of retail space 2, 3 , a minimum of 500 square feet of office 1 ; 500 square feet of residential space; 500 square feet of hotel space; or 500 square feet of the combination of these uses must also be constructed. 
4.  For every 1,000 square feet of hotel space, a minimum of 50 square feet of retail space 2, 3 must also be constructed. 
Note-For gross amounts of square feet not equal to a multiple of 1,000 the numbers will be rounded down at and below 500 and rounded up above 500. 
Footnotes: 
1 Applicable office space is referenced in sections 48-453(5), 48-453(6), 48-486(3), 48-486(5), 48-521(6), 48-546(3), and 48-546(4). 
2 Applicable retail and service establishments are referenced in sections 48-453(16), 48-486(13), and 48-521(16). 
3 This retail space shall be organized to promote first floor pedestrian interest. 
b.  The above square footage requirements apply specifically to the property defined in the MUR option 3 application, and shall not include any existing surrounding uses. Structures that exist on the interior of MUR application areas may be included in the above square footage requirements if substantially redeveloped to satisfy MUR criteria. When the square footage of preexisting commercial structures is used to satisfy the MUR 1 ratio of use requirements in subsection (a)(3)a of this section, these square feet must be included in the aggregate square footage of all structures shown in the site plan application and meet the ratio of use requirements for the square footage of all structures shown in the site plan application. All other requirements of this division, except for setback and building height requirements, apply to existing commercial structures within MUR application areas. The above requirements pertain to the gross square feet of structural floor area, excluding parking structures. 
(4)  Allowed density and building heights for MUR option 3 applications. To encourage parcel consolidation, developments comprised of greater than 21/2 acres will receive a three percent density bonus for each additional acre. The following table describes maximum density and building height requirements: 
Total 
Project 
Area* 
(Acres) Minimum FAR Maximum FAR** With Bonus FAR Bonus (%) Maximum 
Building 
Height*** 
(in feet) 2.5 0.75 1.80 N/A 63 3.0 0.75 1.85 3% 63 4.0 0.75 1.91 6% 75 5.0 0.75 1.96 9% 75 6.0 0.75 2.02 12% 87 7.0 0.75 2.07 15% 87 8.0 0.75 2.12 18% 87 9.0 0.75 2.18 21% 87 10.0 0.75 2.23 24% 87 11.0 0.75 2.29 27% 87 12.0 0.75 2.34 30% 87 13.0 0.75 2.39 33% 87 14.0 0.75 2.45 36% 87 15.0 0.75 2.50 39% 87 16.0 0.75 2.56 42% 87 17.0 0.75 2.61 45% 87 18.0 0.75 2.66 48% 87 19.0 0.75 2.72 51% 87 *For applications that include land area between two of the listed acreage, the acreage will be rounded down at and below 0.5 and rounded up above 0.5. 
  
**Maximum FARs are based on development with no below grade parking facilities. Applications that include below grade facilities may be granted higher maximum FARs as determined by the planning commission. 
  
***Maximum allowed building heights are increased within the MUR 3 option as the total project area is increased. See subsection , for an explanation of the bulk plane requirement.  
(5)  Conditions applying to MUR option 3 applications. 
a.  All MUR option 3 applications shall comply with the minimum and maximum FAR and other provisions in the above table. These figures are also stated in article VI, division 6 of this chapter, pertaining to height, lot and yard regulations. Parking structures may be excluded from FAR calculations, however above-grade parking structures must comply with height requirements. 
b.  All MUR option 3 applications are subject to an 87-foot maximum height limitation. 
c.  Public open spaces are encouraged in these areas as either small internal parks or plazas or external spaces with access to West Broad Street. 
d.  All buildings that front on Broad Street and not otherwise restricted, shall be subject to an angle of bulk plane of 17.5 degrees. See diagram below. 

e.  The upper stories of a building of maximum permitted height must be set back farther than the maximum building setbacks described in section 48-1080(e). 
(Code 1982, § 38-34(b); Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1670, 3-13-2000; Ord. No. 1671, 4-10-2000) 
Secs. 48-1082-48-1100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - HEIGHT, LOT AND YARD REGULATIONS 

Sec. 48-1101. - General requirements. 
    The building height, lot size and yard regulations indicated in this division shall be observed unless otherwise specified for particular uses or situations elsewhere in this chapter. With respect to regulations on maximum height, the building shall not exceed either the specified number of stories or the specified number of feet. 
District Uses Min. 
Height 
(Stories) Max. 
Height 
(Stories) Max. 
Height 
Range 
(feet) Min. Lot 
Area 
(square 
feet) Min. Lot 
Width 
(feet) Min. Lot 
Area Per 
Family 
(square 
feet) Min. 
FAR Max. 
FAR 
Range Min. 
Front 
Yard 
(feet) Max. 
Front 
Yard 
(feet) Min. Side 
Yard 
Each Side 
(feet) Min. Rear 
Yard (feet) Max. Lot 
Coverage 
(Percent) T-1 None None 25*/ 
20 (11) None 10 30 25 1-Family Dwellings 2- 1/2 35 7,500 60 7,500 25* None 10 30 25 (As regulated in R-1B) 2-Family Dwellings 2- 1/2 35 12,000 100 6,000 25* None 10 30 25 (As regulated in R-1B) Townhouses 3 35 130,680 24 2,460 (5) 25 None None (6) 40 40 (7) (As regulated in R-TH) All other uses 3 45 15 None 10 None (1) 40 T-2 All uses 3 45 None None 15/ 
20 (11) None 10 None (1) 40 B-1 All uses 4 55 None None 14/ 
20 (11) None None (10) None (10) B-2 All uses 2 7 75 None None 14/ 
20 (11) None None (10) None (10) B-3 All uses 4 55 None None 14/ 
20 (11) None None (10) None (10) M-1 Principal uses permitted in B-3 district 4 45 None None 15 (12) / 
20 (11) None None (13) 30 All other uses 4 45 25 (2) None None (3) None (4) MUR Option 1 None 35-75 (15) 0.75 1.50-1.74 (14) 14 (10) 20 None (10) None (10) Option 2 None 87 .75 1.80-2.12 (14) 14 (10) 20 None (10) None (10) Option 3 None 63-87 (16) .75 1.80-2.72 (14) 14 (10) 20 None (10) None (10) O-D All uses 4 50 14,000 75 25 (8) 15 30 (9) 35  
Note: (-) See explanation notes: *Refer to subsection 48-1102(c). Text of ordinance governs vs. chart Explanation notes for this section: (1) Where adjoining any residential district not less than 15 feet. (2) Where located on a major thoroughfare as designated by the official major thoroughfare plan, or where across the street from or in the same block front with an R district, the minimum front yard shall be 50 feet; otherwise, 25 feet. (3) 15 feet except: a. Where adjoining an R district, in which case not less than 30 feet; or b. Where adjoining a side street, in which case not less than required by subsection 48-1102(g), if greater than 15 feet. (4) None required except where abutting, either directly or across an alley, an R district, in which case not less than 60 feet. (5) Smaller minimum lot area permitted under subsection 48-331(9). (6) None required except for corner lots where the side yard shall be no less than 20 feet and for interior end lots where the side yard shall be no less than ten feet. (7) Larger maximum lot coverage permitted under subsection 48-331(9). (8) Required minimum front yard depth or minimum rear yard depth to be landscaped when contiguous to a public thoroughfare. (9) Required minimum rear yard depth not contiguous to a public thoroughfare to include a landscaping strip in accordance with the provisions of subsection 48-1102(i). (10) There shall be no side or rear yard setback except when adjoining R district, in which case the setback shall be no less than 20 feet. (11) 20 feet for commercially-zoned properties (B, M, T) with frontage on the following streets: Broad Street and Washington Street. These requirements may be reduced; by the planning commission as part of a site plan review or by city council as part of a special exception. Distance shall be measured from the face of the curb, to the narrowest point of the face of the building. (12) The minimum front yard shall be 15 feet, except where the city council had adopted a policy or plan which sets forth the future curb-to-curb width of the vehicle travelway of the street which abuts the property, in which case the setback may be reduced to provide a minimum distance of 20 feet from the face of the planned curb to the front building setback line. (13) None required except: a. Where adjoining an R district, in which case not less than ten feet. b. Where adjoining a side street, in which case one foot or more as may be required by subsection 48-1102(g) of this section; c. Where a side yard contains off-street parking, a landscaped area of a minimum average width of eight feet shall be provided which vehicles may overhang. (14) Range of maximum allowed FAR without bonuses to maximum allowed FAR with bonuses (See subsections 48-1081(a)(4), and 48-1081(c)(4). for information on bonuses for acreage consolidation). (15) Range of maximum allowed building heights for MUR 1 projects are those that exist within article V, division 6 of this chapter for the underlying zoning districts, except for buildings fronting on West Broad Street or South Maple Avenue where the maximum building height is 75 feet (See subsection 48-1081(a)(3) for additional information). (16) Range of maximum building heights for MUR 3 projects is determined by the number of acres that are consolidated within each project (See subsection 48-1081(c)4 for additional information). Buildings within MUR 3 projects that front on Broad Street are also subject to a bulk plane restriction (See subsections 48-1081(c)(5)d and e for additional information).  
(Code 1973, § 81-54; Code 1982, § 38-28(a); Ord. No. 586; Ord. No. 866; Ord. No. 880; Ord. No. 898; Ord. No. 908; Ord. No. 924; Ord. No. 987, 11-9-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1081, 9-10-1984; Ord. No. 1167, 11-24-1986; Ord. No. 1209, 1-25-1988; Ord. No. 1244, 12-12-1988; Ord. No. 1277, § 4, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1429, 2-8-1993; Ord. No. 1578, 5-12-1997; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1695, 3-26-2001; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 1799, 12-12-2006; Ord. No. 1909, 10-28-2013) 
Sec. 48-1102. - Additional requirements, exceptions and modifications. 
(a)  Structures permitted above height limit. 
(1)  Radio or transmission towers or masts, or necessary industrial, utility or public service structures and monuments, spires, belfries, steeples, flagpoles, commercial and public utility wireless masts, water tanks and silos may exceed the height limit in the zoning district no more than 25 feet. 
(2)  Fire or parapet walls shall not exceed four feet above the height of the building. 
(3)  Penthouses or roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the building, skylights, towers or similar roof structures shall not exceed a maximum of 20 feet above the height of the building and shall be concealed either by a parapet wall or by exterior architectural material of the same type and quality as that used in the exterior walls of the building. 
(4)  Chimneys and smokestacks which are an integral part of a penthouse may exceed the height of the building by no more than 24 feet. 
(5)  No penthouse, roof structure or any other enclosure above the height limit shall be used for any purpose other than to service the principal building; provided no penthouse roof structure or any other enclosure above the height limit shall be allowed for the purpose of providing habitable floorspace for permitted or accessory uses. 
(b)  Substandard lots. 
(1)  Any lot of official record as of February 14, 1944, or any lot of a subdivision approved by the city from February 14, 1944, to the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived, which does not meet the lot size requirements for the district in which it is located, may be used for a one-family dwelling, provided: 
a.  It is in an R district; and 
b.  It cannot reasonably be combined with other property to meet the minimum size requirements. Contiguous substandard lots shall be considered combined for the purposes of administering all zoning regulations as of August 1, 2013, if one home straddled or touched the contiguous lots as of that date, and that home used both substandard lots for setback purposes. The limitations of this subsection shall not apply to substandard lots for which all of the following are true on or before August 1, 2014: 
1.  The substandard lots have been placed in separate ownership and Arlington County land recordation of such has been completed and presented to staff. 
2.  A complete grading plan meeting all the requirements of the City of Falls Church Code for the subject lots has been applied for and accepted by the city for review. 
3.  A demolition permit for the house has been applied for and demolition has been completed under that permit within six months of issuance. 
(2)  If the requirements of subsection (b)(1)a and b of this section are met, then: 
a.  A substandard lot's side yard may be reduced to not less than 20 percent of the lot width, but not to less than 71/2 feet in any case. 
b.  A substandard lot's rear yard may be reduced to not less than 30 percent of the lot depth but not less than 20 feet in any case. 
c.  The substandard lot building height shall be determined as a ratio of actual lot area to the required lot area, multiplied by the maximum allowable height in the underlying zoning district. However, the substandard lot building height shall not be required to be less than 25 feet 
(c)  Front yards. In any R district, the minimum front yard for new construction, new buildings, and new additions to existing residential structures, except for corner lots in R-1A and R-1B districts, shall be the average of the nearest front yards on either side, or if there be a building on one side only, then it shall be the same as the front yard for that building; provided, no front yard shall be less than 30 feet in an R-1A district and 25 feet in an R-1B district, and that no front yard need be more than 50 feet. For corner lots in R-1A and R-1B districts, the average setback requirement shall apply only to the front yard on which an existing or proposed front door of a residential structure faces. Except for vacant corner lots, the average setback requirement shall apply only to the front yard on which a front door will face. For those corner lots on which the front door does not clearly face either front yard (residence sited on diagonal) averaging shall not be required. 
(d)  Measurement of yards. The minimum front yard depths specified herein and the minimum width of side yards on the street sides of corner lots shall be measured from the existing street right-of-way line, except where a street is designated for widening or extension by the official major thoroughfare plan, the measurement shall be taken from the future right-of-way line. In determining the location of such future right-of-way line, it shall be assumed that the street is to be widened equally on both sides of the centerline to the full width designated by the official major thoroughfare plan, unless there is on file with the planning commission an attested copy of an officially adopted detailed plan for such street widening, extension, or location, in which case the latter shall control. In no case shall any street in an R or T district be considered, for the purposes of this division, as having a right-of-way less than 50 feet wide, nor in any other district less than 60 feet wide. Each yard shall be measured horizontally to the nearest point of the building or nearest line of the use area, except for allowable projections. 
(e)  Buildings and projections in yards. The following buildings, uses and architectural features may occupy or project into required yards as indicated: 
(1)  Minimum front, rear, or street side yard. 
a.  Cornices, eaves, or other architectural features: two feet, six inches. 
b.  Uncovered stairs or fire escapes: four feet, six inches. 
c.  Terraces, steps, uncovered porches and landings, not higher than the entrance floor of the building: six feet. 
d.  Bay windows and balconies occupying not more than one-third of the wall length: three feet. 
(2)  Interior side yard. The same projections named in subsection (e)(1) of this section may project the same distances into a minimum side yard along an interior side lot line, provided no such projection may exceed three feet. Any permitted use other than a building may occupy any part of a minimum interior side yard. 
(3)  Minimum rear yard, except residential developments requiring site plans. Any permitted use or accessory structure not over 11/2 story or 12 feet in height, such buildings occupying in the aggregate not more than 30 percent of the minimum rear yard area. Such buildings shall be located not less than ten feet from the principal building, not less than ten feet from all street and alley lines and not less than three feet from all other lot lines. Accessory uses, other than buildings, may occupy all or any part of a required rear yard. 
(4)  Front yard in the R-1A or R-1B district only. In addition to the projections as set forth in subsection (e)(1) of this section, a deck or unenclosed porch, may project up to eight feet into the required front yard; an enclosed portico or porch, not more than eight feet in width, may not project more than eight feet into the required front yard. 
(f)  Attached accessory buildings. A private garage or other accessory structure may be attached to the principal building, if made structurally a part thereof or may be attached by a covered passageway not less than ten feet wide. Such accessory structure may not occupy any part of a required front or side yard. 
(g)  Awnings and canopies projecting into front yards and public rights-of-way. In a B, M, or O-D district, an awning or canopy may project a maximum of five feet from a building facade into a minimum front yard, provided the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Such an awning or canopy may also project into the public right-of-way; provided the public works director approves such installation, and provided in the event a public works project needs to be performed, that the structure shall be temporarily removed at no cost to the city. Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the owner of the property shall enter into an agreement with surety in the form of a bond, in an amount determined by the director of public works, to cover the costs of possible removal of the structure and to ensure the awning or canopy shall be kept in proper and safe condition at all times. 
(2)  If a sign or logo is to be placed on an awning or canopy, the provisions of article VI of this chapter, pertaining to signs, shall apply. 
(3)  An awning or canopy shall not extend over a tree well or planting strip or extend closer than eight feet to a street curb. 
(4)  The design, color and placement of an awning or canopy shall be in harmony with the building to which it is attached and with adjacent buildings, businesses, signs, awnings and canopies. 
(h)  The following criteria shall apply to any fence, wall or topographic feature, provided that in all cases no such fence, wall or feature shall conflict with the visibility requirements found in section 48-1103 and shall not be located in a public right-of-way: 
(1)  In any front yard, height shall not exceed four feet. 
(2)  In any side or rear yard, and in yards abutting a public park, trail or unopened rights-of-way, height shall not exceed seven feet. 
(3)  When enclosing a playground, park, schoolyard or similar recreational facility, height shall not exceed ten feet in any yard. 
(4)  Existing fences on historic properties may be repaired or replaced to a height matching the existing fence or seven feet, whichever is lower. 
(5)  The limitations of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit any necessary retaining wall or natural topographic feature. Ornamental features such as post caps or finials shall not count towards fence height. Fences enclosing a pool shall be subject to the requirements of the state building code. For purposes of this section, trees, shrubs and other plantings shall not constitute a fence or wall. 
(i)  Buffer strips. In a B or M district where the property abuts an R district, there shall be provided a buffer strip having the minimum specifications set forth in division 8 of this article, subject to the provisions governing minimum vision, section 48-1103. 
(j)  Utility installations. 
(1)  All utility pedestals, transformers, switchgear, air conditioning equipment and concrete foundation pads associated with underground installation, connection and distribution shall be placed, at or below grade level, at least three feet from the side or rear lot lines. Placement shall not be in yards abutting streets. Each apparatus shall be effectively screened from pedestrian view by shrubbery or architectural material compatible with the exterior of the principal structure. If such apparatus is air handling with exhaust or blower, it shall be so located as not to vent toward immediately contiguous property. 
(2)  Prior to the erection, installation or placement of foundation for any of the apparatus referred to in subsection (j)(1) of this section, an application for a permit shall be filed with the zoning administrator accompanied by plans and elevations drawn to scale. Such drawings, submitted in duplicate, shall depict the specific location in relation to the principal structure, property lines, height, type and octave frequency in cycles per second of all apparatus whether above or below grade level. The data submitted in compliance hereto shall not be deemed sufficient to fulfill the requirements of chapter 6, but are in addition thereto. 
(3)  Upon certification by the zoning administrator of the proper location of a foundation pad, the division of inspections shall issue a permit as described in chapter 6. 
(Code 1973, § 81-54; Code 1982, § 38-28(b); Ord. No. 586; Ord. No. 866; Ord. No. 880; Ord. No. 898; Ord. No. 908; Ord. No. 924; Ord. No. 987, 11-9-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1081, 9-10-1984; Ord. No. 1167, 11-24-1986; Ord. No. 1209, 1-25-1988; Ord. No. 1244, 12-12-1988; Ord. No. 1277, § 4, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1429, 2-8-1993; Ord. No. 1578, 5-12-1997; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1695, 3-26-2001; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 1799, 12-12-2006; Ord. No. 1872, 3-12-2012; Ord. No. 1902, 7-22-2013) 
Sec. 48-1103. - Corner lots, minimum vision. 
(a)  On corner lots in all zoning districts there shall be no obstructions to vision between a height of 31/2 feet and ten feet above the elevation of the established curb, or, if no curb exists, above the established elevation of the centerline of the intersecting streets. The plane of unimpeded vision shall be within a triangular area bounded by the established street lines and a diagonal straight line connecting points along the street lines, or their projections, each point of which is the following distance from the point of intersection of such established street lines or their projections: 
(1)  For corner lots having an interior angle of 90 degrees, 25 feet; 
(2)  For corner lots having an interior angle of between 91 degrees and 140 degrees, 25 feet minus two feet for each 20 degrees or fraction thereof by which the angle exceeds 90 degrees; 
(3)  For corner lots having an interior angle of less than 90 degrees, 25 feet plus two feet for each 20 degrees or fraction thereof by which the angle is less than 90 degrees. 
(b)  Columns, sign posts and utility poles, owned by the city, state or public utility corporations and tree trunks which do not exceed one foot square or three feet in circumference natural topography, and buildings existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall not be considered obstructions to vision within the meaning of this subsection. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall be minimum requirements. In the interest of public safety, the zoning administrator, acting in concert with the director of public works and chief of police, may determine that due to street configuration, slope of land, or other natural or permanent obstructions to vision at or near a given intersection whether or not protected by mechanical signalization or other traffic controls, more stringent requirements must be met. Such a determination, when stated in writing by the zoning administrator setting forth the more stringent requirements and duly made known to any affected property owner, shall have the same force and effect of law as if incorporated formally into the provisions of this section. Any property owner affected by the more stringent requirements imposed by the zoning administrator may appeal such determination to the board of zoning appeals, in accordance with the provisions of subsection 48-173(b). 
(Code 1973, § 81-54; Code 1982, § 38-28(c); Ord. No. 586; Ord. No. 866; Ord. No. 880; Ord. No. 898; Ord. No. 908; Ord. No. 924; Ord. No. 987, 11-9-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1081, 9-10-1984; Ord. No. 1167, 11-24-1986; Ord. No. 1209, 1-25-1988; Ord. No. 1244, 12-12-1988; Ord. No. 1277, § 4, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1429, 2-8-1993; Ord. No. 1578, 5-12-1997; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1695, 3-26-2001; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 1799, 12-12-2006) 
Sec. 48-1104. - Conditional uses permitted by special use permit. 
    Conditional uses permitted by special use permits are prohibited. 
(Code 1973, § 81-54; Code 1982, § 38-28(d); Ord. No. 586; Ord. No. 866; Ord. No. 880; Ord. No. 898; Ord. No. 908; Ord. No. 924; Ord. No. 987, 11-9-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1081, 9-10-1984; Ord. No. 1167, 11-24-1986; Ord. No. 1209, 1-25-1988; Ord. No. 1244, 12-12-1988; Ord. No. 1277, § 4, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1429, 2-8-1993; Ord. No. 1578, 5-12-1997; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1695, 3-26-2001; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 1799, 12-12-2006) 
Sec. 48-1105. - Accessory uses permitted. 
    Permitted accessory uses are as follows: 
(1)  Private gardens. 
(2)  Outdoor lighting as permitted in chapter 14, article V, pertaining to outdoor lighting. 
(3)  Private off-street parking as permitted in article V, division 2 of this chapter. 
(4)  Private swimming pools and tennis courts. 
(5)  Playgrounds. 
(6)  Fences, decks, terraces, greenhouses, strange buildings, canopies and similar uses and structures. 
(Code 1973, § 81-54; Code 1982, § 38-28(e); Ord. No. 586; Ord. No. 866; Ord. No. 880; Ord. No. 898; Ord. No. 908; Ord. No. 924; Ord. No. 987, 11-9-1981; Ord. No. 999, 2-22-1982; Ord. No. 1081, 9-10-1984; Ord. No. 1167, 11-24-1986; Ord. No. 1209, 1-25-1988; Ord. No. 1244, 12-12-1988; Ord. No. 1277, § 4, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1382, 11-25-1991; Ord. No. 1429, 2-8-1993; Ord. No. 1578, 5-12-1997; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1695, 3-26-2001; Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004; Ord. No. 1799, 12-12-2006) 
Secs. 48-1106-48-1133. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - SITE PLANS 

Sec. 48-1134. - When required. 
(a)  A site plan shall be required for: 
(1)  The construction, development or redevelopment of a structure, paved area, wall, or drainage facility on public or private property when such sitework: 
a.  Significantly affects pedestrian, vehicular or drainage facilities; 
b.  Reduces or eliminates any site feature which is required by this chapter; or 
c.  Involves structural additions of more than 25 square feet of floor area. 
(2)  The conversion to condominiums or cooperatives of residential or commercial structures. 
(3)  The conversion of residential structures and uses to nonresidential structures and uses, except as provided for in this section. 
(4)  City-owned facilities, except below ground water and sewer facilities located outside the city, prior to submittal to the approving authority of the jurisdiction in which the facility is located. 
(5)  Any disturbance of land exceeding 2,500 square feet and all development or redevelopment in a Chesapeake Bay preservation area overlay district, resource protection area or resource management area as defined in article IV, division 16 of this chapter. 
(6)  Drive-thru or drive-through facility as defined in section 48-2 and as regulated by section 48-867 when: 
a.  The application is for a new permit or for a permit that is not otherwise transferable from the permit holder to a second party. 
b.  The application is for the renewal of an expired or expiring permit. 
c.  The application is for the renewal of a permit that has been revoked. 
d.  The application is not already part of a larger site plan. 
(b)  Except within Chesapeake Bay preservation areas where all construction will be subject to article IV, division 16 of this chapter and applicable site plan requirements, a site plan is not required for the construction of one-family or two-family detached dwellings and their accessory structures in the R-1A and R-1B districts for the construction of patios or open porches which are accessory to existing residential uses in any district, or for the following uses when permitted in the R-1A or R-1B districts by special use permit: Accessory dwelling units, group homes, major home occupations, antennas, transmitters, or prenatal and infant care counseling centers; provided, however, that no such special use permit shall be granted without the approval of the building inspector and fire marshal. 
(Code 1973, § 81-56; Code 1982, § 38-29(a); Ord. No. 595; Ord. No. 640; Ord. No. 704; Ord. No. 881; Ord. No. 1042, 3-28-1983; Ord. No. 1058, 8-8-1983; Ord. No. 1072, 5-29-1984; Ord. No. 1118, 9-9-1985; Ord. No. 1237, 9-12-1988; Ord. No. 1263, 5-22-1989; Ord. No. 1277, § 5, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1332, 11-12-1990; Ord. No. 1335, 11-12-1990; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1865, 8-8-11) 
Sec. 48-1135. - Preliminary survey documents. 
    As the first step in the site plan process, the applicant shall provide an accurate survey of existing features on and around the site, including at least the following: 
(1)  A site drawing to scale locating all existing trees on the site that measure at least two inches in diameter at 41/2 feet above grade, which shall identify each tree by size (diameter at 41/2 feet above grade), species, and condition as determined by a licensed and/or certified arborist, or a similar professional approval by the city manager. 
(2)  A map identifying the location of existing buildings, existing and proposed public and private easements, underground facilities, and any floodplain or Chesapeake Bay preservation area district, if applicable. 
(3)  The information required in subsections (1) and (2) of this section shall be reviewed by city staff within two weeks of submission by the applicant and a copy shall be provided to the tree commission. Shortly after review, the staff will meet with the applicant to discuss any impediments to development, or conditions disclosed on the maps, which, in the staff's opinion, could complicate or delay consideration of a site plan. Any deficiencies in the preliminary plans will be raised at that time, and a deadline established for submission of revised or amended plants, if necessary. No development site plan may be received until preliminary plans required by this subsection have been submitted. 
(Code 1973, § 81-56; Code 1982, § 38-29(b); Ord. No. 595; Ord. No. 640; Ord. No. 704; Ord. No. 881; Ord. No. 1042, 3-28-1983; Ord. No. 1058, 8-8-1983; Ord. No. 1072, 5-29-1984; Ord. No. 1118, 9-9-1985; Ord. No. 1237, 9-12-1988; Ord. No. 1263, 5-22-1989; Ord. No. 1277, § 5, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1332, 11-12-1990; Ord. No. 1335, 11-12-1990; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999) 
Sec. 48-1136. - Board and departmental actions required prior to planning commission consideration. 
(a)  All site plans shall be referred for review to the departments of planning, public works and public utilities, including the building inspector, fire marshal, arborist and zoning administrator. When appropriate, site plans shall also be referred for review to other agencies, such as the health department, police department and the state department of transportation. 
(b)  Each such agency shall review plans for compliance with applicable laws and standards and shall report in writing to the planning commission. 
(c)  The architectural advisory board shall review in an advisory capacity all site plans prior to final consideration by the planning commission and shall report its recommendations, annotations, and stipulations to the planning commission. The architectural advisory board review shall address: 
(1)  Architectural design. 
(2)  Texture, color and materials of construction. 
(3)  Scale of development. 
(4)  Aesthetic and spatial relationship of development. 
(5)  Landscaping configuration. 
(6)  Location of signs and exterior lighting. 
(d)  The historical commission shall review, in an advisory capacity, proposed names of developments or redevelopment on or contiguous to any designated historical site in the city, as listed in the Architectural Inventory of 1969, as amended. Conflict in project naming shall be resolved by the planning commission. Site plans shall not receive final consideration until all such agencies, the architectural advisory board and the historical commission have had an opportunity to comment. In general, two weeks shall be provided for such comments. 
(Code 1973, § 81-56; Code 1982, § 38-29(c); Ord. No. 595; Ord. No. 640; Ord. No. 704; Ord. No. 881; Ord. No. 1042, 3-28-1983; Ord. No. 1058, 8-8-1983; Ord. No. 1072, 5-29-1984; Ord. No. 1118, 9-9-1985; Ord. No. 1237, 9-12-1988; Ord. No. 1263, 5-22-1989; Ord. No. 1277, § 5, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1332, 11-12-1990; Ord. No. 1335, 11-12-1990; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999) 
Sec. 48-1137. - Required information. 
    Site plans shall be prepared and certified by an engineer, architect, landscape architect and/or land surveyor duly authorized by the state to practice. The city may require certification of plans or plan elements by professionals in particular disciplines when deemed necessary. The name, address and certification of such persons preparing the plan shall be included on the face of the plan. A site plan shall be prepared at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet or larger, and a vicinity map showing the location of the tract shall be included, at a scale of not less than one inch equals 2,000 feet. Any site plans submitted according to this chapter shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Boundary of the entire tract by courses and distances with reference to true meridian and/or scaled coordinates in accordance with the National Geodetic Survey. 
(2)  Area of the tract. 
(3)  Zone of the tract. 
(4)  Name and address of the present record owner of the tract and a statement that the owner or contract owner joins in the site plan and agrees to be bound by all site plan requirements. If any person represents the owner, the owner must provide a statement of that person's authority. 
(5)  Subdivision plat, when applicable. If a site plan covers more than one lot or parcel, a subdivision plat which binds the properties to the uses shown on the site plan shall be made part of the plan submittal. Approval and recordation of such plat shall be a condition of approval of the site plan. 
(6)  Owner, zoning district and present use of all contiguous property. 
(7)  Existing widths and master plan widths of streets adjoining the tract (right-of-way and pavement widths). 
(8)  Where a private street or drive is proposed, the site plan and plat shall state clearly that the street or drive is private, that it is to be privately maintained, and that no city refuse collection, snow plowing or maintenance will be provided on such private streets or drives. Easements for public street maintenance shall not be accepted. Public maintenance and other services shall be provided only on public streets. 
(9)  Location of existing and proposed edge of pavement or curbs. 
(10)  Location of existing and proposed easements, both public and private and underground facilities. 
(11)  Location of existing and proposed buildings and their dimensions. 
(12)  Floor area and use of existing and proposed buildings. 
(13)  Height of buildings in feet and in number of floors. 
(14)  A schedule showing compliance with the off-street parking and loading requirements of article V, division 2 of this chapter. 
(15)  The location and dimensions, vertical clearance and the type of surfacing of off-street parking, loading and standing spaces and aisles, in accordance with article V, division 2 of this chapter. 
(16)  The location and dimensions of bicycle storage areas. 
(17)  Location of existing and proposed poles, fire hydrants, retaining walls, pump islands, signs, doorways, window wells, guy wires or other structures in relation to automobile parking or maneuvering of pedestrian traffic. 
(18)  Travel lanes for firefighting equipment shall be designated as "Fire Lanes" where necessary to prevent obstruction by unattended vehicles. 
(19)  Location, if applicable, of any floodplain district. 
(20)  Location, type and size of vehicular entrances and driveways. 
(21)  Location and type of existing and proposed curbs and curb cuts. 
(22)  Location and width of existing and proposed sidewalks and other pedestrian areas. 
(23)  Location, type and height of existing and proposed fences and walls. 
(24)  A separate landscape plan which satisfies the requirements of section 44-109(a), and other applicable provisions of chapter 44. 
(25)  Topography, existing and proposed at an interval not greater than two feet, indicating areas of major grading and slopes to be maintained. 
(26)  Disposition of stormwater drainage and detention systems indicating pipe sizes, types and grades, including all calculations. 
(27)  Existing and proposed sanitary sewerage facilities, indicating pipe size, types and grades and where connection is to be made to the city system, including all calculations. 
(28)  All artificial outdoor light sources and accompanying structural supports, indicating all details required as regulated by chapter 14. 
(29)  Location of trash storage and type of enclosures and screening. 
(30)  Location of existing and proposed utility apparatus associated with aboveground and underground installation, connection and distribution as approved by the respective utility corporations. 
(31)  Building elevations to scale, showing all sides of buildings, building materials, opening details, roofing materials, dimensions, and other miscellaneous architectural features. 
(32)  Delineation of resource protection areas and resource management areas pursuant to article IV, division 16 of this chapter, pertaining to the Chesapeake Bay preservation area overlay district (CBPA). 
(Code 1973, § 81-56; Code 1982, § 38-29(d); Ord. No. 595; Ord. No. 640; Ord. No. 704; Ord. No. 881; Ord. No. 1042, 3-28-1983; Ord. No. 1058, 8-8-1983; Ord. No. 1072, 5-29-1984; Ord. No. 1118, 9-9-1985; Ord. No. 1237, 9-12-1988; Ord. No. 1263, 5-22-1989; Ord. No. 1277, § 5, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1332, 11-12-1990; Ord. No. 1335, 11-12-1990; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999) 
Sec. 48-1138. - Waiver of site plan requirements. 
    The planning commission may waive any particular requirement under section 48-1137 in any case in which the commission finds any of the following: 
(1)  The particular requirement is unreasonable in the particular circumstances, because of the small size of the project or because of the presence of other exceptional circumstances; 
(2)  The essential objectives of this division can be achieved in the absence of the particular requirement; 
(3)  Waiver of the requirement would not be substantially detrimental to the health, safety, and general welfare of the community; or 
(4)  That such requirement constitutes an unnecessary hardship. 
(Code 1973, § 81-56; Code 1982, § 38-29(e); Ord. No. 595; Ord. No. 640; Ord. No. 704; Ord. No. 881; Ord. No. 1042, 3-28-1983; Ord. No. 1058, 8-8-1983; Ord. No. 1072, 5-29-1984; Ord. No. 1118, 9-9-1985; Ord. No. 1237, 9-12-1988; Ord. No. 1263, 5-22-1989; Ord. No. 1277, § 5, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1332, 11-12-1990; Ord. No. 1335, 11-12-1990; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999) 
Sec. 48-1139. - Phased development. 
    A portion of an approved site plan may be released for development and may be issued building and development permits if it is designated as phased development on the approved site plan on which the balance of the site is shown as subsequent phases. Each phase of the plan shall comply with all provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 81-56; Code 1982, § 38-29(f); Ord. No. 595; Ord. No. 640; Ord. No. 704; Ord. No. 881; Ord. No. 1042, 3-28-1983; Ord. No. 1058, 8-8-1983; Ord. No. 1072, 5-29-1984; Ord. No. 1118, 9-9-1985; Ord. No. 1237, 9-12-1988; Ord. No. 1263, 5-22-1989; Ord. No. 1277, § 5, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1332, 11-12-1990; Ord. No. 1335, 11-12-1990; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999) 
Sec. 48-1140. - Other requirements. 
    To further the purposes of this chapter and to ensure public safety and general welfare, the planning commission, departments, divisions and agencies charged with the responsibility for the review and approval of site plans may require the following in addition to improvements required elsewhere in this chapter: 
(1)  Pedestrian walkways within the site and to adjacent sites. 
(2)  Connection, wherever possible, of walkways and driveways to similar facilities in adjacent developments. 
(3)  Easement necessary for public facilities to be publicly maintained, clearly defining the purpose intended for each easement. 
(4)  Dedication of right-of-way for streets and sidewalks, and the construction thereon, in accordance with the master plan, except where site plans involve structural additions of less than 1,500 square feet of floor area, and where the new development will not impact on the public transportation system in a measurable way. Density, coverage and other calculations shall be based on the lot area remaining after such dedications, unless this chapter specifies in a particular case that gross site area is to be utilized for such calculations. 
(5)  Adequate signs to prohibit parking along travel lanes or driveways. 
(6)  Preservation of as many live trees as practical. 
(7)  Provision for appropriate shade trees along street right-of-way and sidewalks and in pedestrian and parking areas. 
(Code 1973, § 81-56; Code 1982, § 38-29(g); Ord. No. 595; Ord. No. 640; Ord. No. 704; Ord. No. 881; Ord. No. 1042, 3-28-1983; Ord. No. 1058, 8-8-1983; Ord. No. 1072, 5-29-1984; Ord. No. 1118, 9-9-1985; Ord. No. 1237, 9-12-1988; Ord. No. 1263, 5-22-1989; Ord. No. 1277, § 5, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1332, 11-12-1990; Ord. No. 1335, 11-12-1990; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999) 
Sec. 48-1141. - Required considerations. 
    In determining whether the final site plan should be approved, the planning commission shall consider applicable city ordinances, the recommendations from participating agencies, staff and advisory boards, and the plan's impact on the general safety and public welfare, including: 
(1)  Consistency with the city comprehensive plan and its future land use plan map. 
(2)  Potential impact on existing and proposed public utilities. 
(3)  Potential impact on existing and approved uses on adjacent property. 
(4)  Emergency vehicle access; separation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic; location of ingress and egress; sight distances. 
(5)  Special topographic features. 
(6)  Proximity to any storm drainage facility and floodplain. 
(7)  Adequacy of shielding of open or enclosed parking through the use of decorative walls, fences, screenings, plantings and earthworks. 
(8)  Adequacy of landscaping. 
(9)  Proximity to structures or sites listed in the official register of protected structures and sites. On sites containing, contiguous to or facing structures on the official register, the planning commission shall consider the following criteria. The term "contiguous" means that the site has a common border with the side of a parcel with a designated structure, and the term "facing" means being across a street or alley from a parcel with a designated structure, including being diagonally across from a corner parcel with a designated structure. 
a.  The scale of new buildings and of their components shall have good proportion and be compatible with the adjacent designated structure. Components include such elements as windows, doors, eaves, parapets and porches. Scale concerns the way the mass of a building is divided into components and the relation between the size of components, the size of the building and the size of people. 
b.  When more than one building is proposed, there shall be harmony of the buildings in texture, lines, rhythms, mass and materials. 
c.  The selection of materials shall be based on the suitability to the type of building and to the design for which they are used, as well as for harmony with adjoining buildings. 
d.  The size of buildings (height, area covered, percent of lot covered, mass) shall be compatible with nearby designated structures to the extent that such compatibility is reasonable for the zoning district and uses permitted. 
e.  Screening between buildings shall be provided when the new building is a markedly different style from the designated building. 
f.  Landscaping shall be compatible with that of adjacent properties. 
g.  The extent to which the applicant would suffer economic hardship shall be considered. 
(10)  Impact on water quality pursuant to article IV, division 16, pertaining to the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Overlay District. 
(Code 1973, § 81-56; Code 1982, § 38-29(h); Ord. No. 595; Ord. No. 640; Ord. No. 704; Ord. No. 881; Ord. No. 1042, 3-28-1983; Ord. No. 1058, 8-8-1983; Ord. No. 1072, 5-29-1984; Ord. No. 1118, 9-9-1985; Ord. No. 1237, 9-12-1988; Ord. No. 1263, 5-22-1989; Ord. No. 1277, § 5, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1332, 11-12-1990; Ord. No. 1335, 11-12-1990; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999) 
Sec. 48-1142. - Approval by the planning commission or planning director. 
(a)  Approval by the planning commission shall be required where new gross floor area exceeds 50 percent of the existing floor area or exceeds 1,500 square feet. All other site plans may be approved by the planning director, after compliance with all recommendations and stipulations required herein. Nothing herein shall prevent the planning director from referring the plan to the commission for approval. 
(b)  Any reference to planning commission approval shall also apply to planning director approval. 
(c)  When the planning commission deems a proposed siting is not in the public interest, within the criteria set forth in section 48-1141, the commission shall deny the site plan. 
(d)  Denial by the planning director of a site plan may be appealed to the planning commission. 
(e)  Following approval by the planning commission, copies of the final site plan showing planning commission, architectural advisory board and staff annotations and stipulations as well as any special use permits and/or variances granted by the board of zoning appeals, with any conditions and/or stipulations set forth in connection therewith, shall be submitted to the planning department for staff approval and release prior to the issuance of building or development permits. 
(f)  Notwithstanding any provisions in this chapter to the contrary, the planning director is authorized to accommodate and permit by administrative site plan amendment, the location of limited improvements to existing single-family attached or detached homes in site planned communities, provided such features are not explicitly prohibited in the approved site plan for the community. Limited improvements include, decks, porches and patios and similar features which are deemed to result in only minor effect on the character of established residential communities subject to site plan approval. Nothing herein shall prevent the planning director from referring the plan amendment to the commission for approval. 
    The director shall be guided in his or her decisions by the standards below and may request modifications of a specific proposal in order that the proposal may comply with zoning ordinance standards and provided the following requirements are met: 
(1)  The property owner shall make application to the planning director requesting an administrative site plan amendment and shall provide all information deemed necessary to consider the application. At the time of application, the applicant shall pay a fee in accordance with the city's adopted fee schedule; 
(2)  The applicant shall provide notice, by certified mail, to the homeowners association in the community to which the subject property belongs and to owners of each property abutting to or across the street from the subject property informing them that a request for administrative site plan amendment has been submitted and will be considered by the planning director. If the property abutting to or across the street from the subject property is of condominium ownership, then notification sent to the condominium association shall be sufficient to satisfy this provision; 
(3)  For applications concerning properties located in communities with homeowners association architectural review processes, the applicant shall submit evidence of approval of the amendment proposed by the applicable homeowners association. For properties without homeowners association architectural review processes, the applicant shall submit a notarized affidavit stating that an architectural review process does not exist in the subject community; 
(4)  The proposed improvement shall be located no closer than half the distance to the rear lot line, except that it may be permitted five feet from any rear property line if such rear property line is contiguous to common open space within the site planned development. The proposed structure may be no closer than one foot to a side lot line (for attached single-family dwellings) or consistent with the community's established detached single-family home side setbacks; 
(5)  The planning director may impose conditions upon the approval as deemed necessary in the public interest to secure compliance with the considerations in this section; and 
(6)  If the planning director does not approve an administrative site plan amendment, the applicant may file a request for consideration of a site plan amendment by the planning commission, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1973, § 81-56; Code 1982, § 38-29(i); Ord. No. 595; Ord. No. 640; Ord. No. 704; Ord. No. 881; Ord. No. 1042, 3-28-1983; Ord. No. 1058, 8-8-1983; Ord. No. 1072, 5-29-1984; Ord. No. 1118, 9-9-1985; Ord. No. 1237, 9-12-1988; Ord. No. 1263, 5-22-1989; Ord. No. 1277, § 5, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1332, 11-12-1990; Ord. No. 1335, 11-12-1990; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999; Ord. No. 1840, 2-22-2010) 
Sec. 48-1143. - Bonds. 
(a)  Bond for public improvements. 
(1)  Prior to the issuance of building or development permits, there shall be executed by the owner or developer an agreement to construct required physical improvements located within public rights-of-way or easements connected to any public facility, together with a bond with surety or condition acceptable to the city in the amount of the estimated cost of the required physical improvement, as determined by the director of public works. 
(2)  The aforesaid agreement and bond or condition shall be provided to ensure completion of all work within the time to be determined by the director of public works, which time may be extended by the city manager upon written application by the owner or developer, signed, by all parties (including sureties) to the original agreement. The adequacy, conditions, and acceptability of any bond shall be determined by the city manager. In any case where the city manager has rejected any such agreement or bond, the owner or developer shall have the right to have such determination made by the city council; provided the owner or developer has paid to the city a fee for the examination and approval of site plans and inspection of all required improvements shown on such plans. Such fee shall be determined by the city council as provided in section 48-1150. 
(3)  Upon satisfactory completion of the installation of the required improvements, the owner shall receive a certificate of approval from the public works department upon application for such certificate. Such certificate of approval will authorize the release of any bond which may have been furnished for the guarantee of satisfactory installation of such improvements or parts thereof, provided that the as-built site plan required by section 48-1145 has been approved. 
(b)  Bond for landscape elements. There shall be a bond to ensure the planting and maintenance of all plants and trees shown on the plan for landscaping. Prior to the issuance of building or development permits, the owner or agent shall deposit a cash bond in an interest-bearing escrow account upon which the city may draw under the conditions set out in this section in an amount equal to the total replacement cost of all newly installed plants and trees. Deposit of such funds shall be in a qualified security or insured savings account and any interest earned shall be credited to the owner or his agent. 
(1)  Time, amount of bond fixed and standard for fixing amount. The replacement cost of the plants and trees shall be fixed as of the time the approved plan for landscaping is released by the city staff and shall be based upon the most current Guide for Establishing Values of Trees and Other Plants, prepared by the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers. 
(2)  Other forms of security allowed. In the event the amount of the bond is fixed in excess of $2,000.00, a surety bond, letter of credit, certified check or other similar form may be provided in lieu of cash bond for the amount in excess of $2,000.00, if the particular form is approved by the city attorney. 
(3)  Procedure for administration and term of bond. The owner or agent shall notify the city arborist three days prior to the installation of the plants and trees shown on the plan for landscape. The arborist shall inspect the plant and tree material and the method of installation. The arborist shall have the authority to require that healthy stock be planted and that the installation be done in a manner permitted by the most recent edition of American Standard for Nursery Stock, published by the American Association of Nurserymen. The arborist shall certify in writing when the installation of all new plants and trees shown on the plan for landscaping has been completed in an acceptable manner, based on the standards in this section. The bond for the site may be apportioned if the property is being developed in phases or discrete parts. The term of the bond shall be one year from the date on which the arborist certified that installation was complete. The arborist shall inspect the site during the one year period and, if the plants or trees are not in good health, the arborist may require corrective measures or replacement, if the plant or tree cannot be saved. At the end of the one-year period, the owner may apply to the arborist for a discharge of the unobligated or unexpended portion of the bond. Prior to such discharge the arborist shall make a final inspection and shall require the replacement of any plants or trees not in good health based upon the standards set out in the American Standard for Nursery Stock. The unobligated or unexpended portion of the bond shall be discharged upon the arborist's certification that the replacement has been made. 
(4)  Responsibilities of the owner. If the owner or his agent refuses to comply with the requirements of the arborist, the city may at its option, have the work performed by others or by its own forces. In either case all costs incurred by the city shall be reimbursed from the bond or other funds being held. In the event the owner or his agent has sold all or a portion of the real estate subject to the approved site plan, the original owner or agent shall continue to be responsible for plants and trees located in common areas and on individual fee-simple lots. If the new owner of a single-family residential property refuses to permit the original owner or the arborist to make the required inspection, repairs or replacements, the original owner shall be considered as having complied with this section. 
In addition to the requirements in this subsection (b) of this section, a tree preservation and maintenance agreement and bond shall also be required if the site plan shows any existing trees which are to be protected, in accordance with section chapter 44, article II, division 5, prior to the issuance of building or development permits. 
(Code 1973, § 81-56; Code 1982, § 38-29(j); Ord. No. 595; Ord. No. 640; Ord. No. 704; Ord. No. 881; Ord. No. 1042, 3-28-1983; Ord. No. 1058, 8-8-1983; Ord. No. 1072, 5-29-1984; Ord. No. 1118, 9-9-1985; Ord. No. 1237, 9-12-1988; Ord. No. 1263, 5-22-1989; Ord. No. 1277, § 5, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1332, 11-12-1990; Ord. No. 1335, 11-12-1990; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999) 
Sec. 48-1144. - Inspection and supervision during installation. 
(a)  Unless specified elsewhere in this chapter, the construction standards for all off-site improvements and on-site improvements required by this article shall conform to the city design and construction standards. The public works department shall approve the plans and specification for all required improvements, and shall inspect the construction of such improvements to ensure conformity. 
(b)  Inspections during the installation of the off-site improvements and required on-site improvements shall be made by the department responsible for such improvements, as required to certify compliance with the approved site plan and applicable city standards. 
(c)  The owner shall notify the director of public works in writing three days prior to the beginning of all street or storm sewer work shown to be constructed on the site plan. 
(d)  The owner shall provide adequate supervision on-site during the installation of all required improvements and have a responsible superintendent or foreman together with one set of approved plans, profiles and specifications available at the site at all times when work is being performed. 
(e)  The installation of improvements as required in this article shall in no case serve to bind the city to accept such improvements for the maintenance, repair or operation, but such acceptance shall be subject to the existing regulations concerning the acceptance of each type of improvement. 
(f)  Any proposed changes or revisions during the execution of or subsequent to implementation of an existing previously approved site plan shall be subject to additional review and approval. 
(Code 1973, § 81-56; Code 1982, § 38-29(k); Ord. No. 595; Ord. No. 640; Ord. No. 704; Ord. No. 881; Ord. No. 1042, 3-28-1983; Ord. No. 1058, 8-8-1983; Ord. No. 1072, 5-29-1984; Ord. No. 1118, 9-9-1985; Ord. No. 1237, 9-12-1988; Ord. No. 1263, 5-22-1989; Ord. No. 1277, § 5, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1332, 11-12-1990; Ord. No. 1335, 11-12-1990; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999) 
Sec. 48-1145. - As-built site plans. 
(a)  Prior to occupancy of any building and upon satisfactory completion of all structures and required improvements, the developer shall submit to the department of public works the required number of copies of an as-built site plan certified by an engineer or surveyor. An as-built site plan may be submitted for a portion of a site, provided it constitutes a logical entity. 
(b)  The reviewing department (planning, public works, and public utilities) shall review and approve the as-built site plan as being in conformance with the approved site plan. If an owner's association is involved as described by section 48-1147, the city attorney shall certify to the acceptability of the covenants prior to final approval of the as-built site plan. 
(Code 1973, § 81-56; Code 1982, § 38-29(l); Ord. No. 595; Ord. No. 640; Ord. No. 704; Ord. No. 881; Ord. No. 1042, 3-28-1983; Ord. No. 1058, 8-8-1983; Ord. No. 1072, 5-29-1984; Ord. No. 1118, 9-9-1985; Ord. No. 1237, 9-12-1988; Ord. No. 1263, 5-22-1989; Ord. No. 1277, § 5, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1332, 11-12-1990; Ord. No. 1335, 11-12-1990; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999) 
Sec. 48-1146. - Compliance with site prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
    A certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a completed structure if the development conforms in all respects to the site plan, as demonstrated by an approved as-built site plan. The public works department shall not issue any occupancy permit until the appropriate as-built site plan has been approved, except as set forth as follows: 
(1)  If a structure or several structures on a site have been given final approval by the building inspector, a certificate of occupancy may be granted for such structure or structures prior to completion of all site work; provided that the incomplete elements of the site work do not constitute a hazard or inconvenience to the city, the adjacent properties or the occupants and users of the site or structure, and provided that the floor area to be occupied does not constitute more than 80 percent of the floor area shown on the site plan. 
(2)  A certificate of occupancy may be granted for 100 percent occupancy under the conditions set forth in subsection (1) of this section, provided a cash completion bond acceptable to the director of public works is submitted and approved in an amount sufficient to cover the costs of completing the site work in accordance with the approved site plan. 
(Code 1973, § 81-56; Code 1982, § 38-29(m); Ord. No. 595; Ord. No. 640; Ord. No. 704; Ord. No. 881; Ord. No. 1042, 3-28-1983; Ord. No. 1058, 8-8-1983; Ord. No. 1072, 5-29-1984; Ord. No. 1118, 9-9-1985; Ord. No. 1237, 9-12-1988; Ord. No. 1263, 5-22-1989; Ord. No. 1277, § 5, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1332, 11-12-1990; Ord. No. 1335, 11-12-1990; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999) 
Sec. 48-1147. - Owner's associations. 
    In the instance where development involves condominiums and cooperatives or other similar forms of ownership, either through conversion of an existing structure or through new construction, provision shall be made for the preservation and continuity of all common areas as follows: 
(1)  Adequate measures as certified in form and content by the city attorney must be provided, through deed restrictions or other legally binding arrangements; that ownership of the common area shall be vested in an association of all of the owners; that it shall remain as common areas in perpetuity, with suitable restrictions upon its use; and that the necessary funds shall continue to be provided by the owners in perpetuity to cover suitable maintenance of the lawns, trees, shrubs, pools, parking area, roads and lighting and for the collection of garbage and other trash. 
(2)  The scheme of general development detailed on the approved site plan shall be protected by covenants running with the land as certified in form and content by the city attorney. Such covenants shall vest in the first grantee and inure to the benefit of his heirs, successors or assigns, each of whom shall be specifically eligible to membership in an association of all the owners. Such association should address and control matters of common interest including aesthetics and integrity of the common scheme, provided: 
a.  It is not intended, however, that the creation of such association shall provide a means of overriding the desire of any unit owner to insist upon perpetuation of the scheme of general development. 
b.  Such scheme of general development may be modified by decree of a court where such modification is consonant with modifications in the provisions of this section. 
(3)  It is specifically intended that such covenants are for the benefit not only of the owners but for the city as well, and the city may bring suit to enforce such covenants to maintain and perpetuate the common scheme as depicted on the approved site plan. 
(Code 1973, § 81-56; Code 1982, § 38-29(n); Ord. No. 595; Ord. No. 640; Ord. No. 704; Ord. No. 881; Ord. No. 1042, 3-28-1983; Ord. No. 1058, 8-8-1983; Ord. No. 1072, 5-29-1984; Ord. No. 1118, 9-9-1985; Ord. No. 1237, 9-12-1988; Ord. No. 1263, 5-22-1989; Ord. No. 1277, § 5, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1332, 11-12-1990; Ord. No. 1335, 11-12-1990; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999) 
Sec. 48-1148. - Expiration of site plan approval. 
    Approval by the planning commission of a site plan submitted under the provisions of this division shall expire one year after the date of such approval, if building or other construction permits have not been obtained for construction in accordance therewith. A single one-year extension may be granted upon written request by the applicant prior to expiration. Extension shall require approval by both the planning director and director of public works and may involve changes based upon new requirements not in force when the plan was first approved. Action by the planning director and director of public works shall be taken no later than 30 days after the expiration date. If, at any time following this validity period, the required building or other construction permits lapse or become void, the site plan shall be null and void. If, in the case of phased development, no building or other construction permit has been obtained for a second or subsequent phase within one year after approval of the as-built plan for the previous phase, or if such permits lapse or become void, the site plan for the remaining phases shall become null and void. 
(Code 1973, § 81-56; Code 1982, § 38-29(o); Ord. No. 595; Ord. No. 640; Ord. No. 704; Ord. No. 881; Ord. No. 1042, 3-28-1983; Ord. No. 1058, 8-8-1983; Ord. No. 1072, 5-29-1984; Ord. No. 1118, 9-9-1985; Ord. No. 1237, 9-12-1988; Ord. No. 1263, 5-22-1989; Ord. No. 1277, § 5, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1332, 11-12-1990; Ord. No. 1335, 11-12-1990; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999) 
Sec. 48-1149. - Maintenance of landscaped areas. 
    The owner, tenant and their agent, if any, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of all landscaped areas not in the public right-of-way. Such areas shall be maintained in accordance with the approved site plan and so as to present a healthy and orderly appearance free from refuse and debris. Changes to the approved landscape plan shall require the approval of the city arborist. All plant life shall be replaced if, in the opinion of the city arborist, it dies or is seriously damaged or is removed. If the owner, tenant and/or agent, if any, fails to maintain landscaped areas as required, the city may, after due notice, enter upon the property and perform the required maintenance, the costs of which shall be charged to the owner. Payment for such costs may be accomplished by means of a lien on the property or by utilizing bonds, notes and/or cash held by the city for such purposes, as well as by any other legal or equitable remedy; provided this section does not apply to the type of plantings in private yards maintained and utilized by single families. In residential areas, this section applies to common open space. 
(Code 1973, § 81-56; Code 1982, § 38-29(p); Ord. No. 595; Ord. No. 640; Ord. No. 704; Ord. No. 881; Ord. No. 1042, 3-28-1983; Ord. No. 1058, 8-8-1983; Ord. No. 1072, 5-29-1984; Ord. No. 1118, 9-9-1985; Ord. No. 1237, 9-12-1988; Ord. No. 1263, 5-22-1989; Ord. No. 1277, § 5, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1332, 11-12-1990; Ord. No. 1335, 11-12-1990; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999) 
Sec. 48-1150. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  The planning director shall see that all reviews are completed on time and that action is taken by the approving authority on the site plan within 45 days from the receipt thereof in his office, except under abnormal circumstances. 
(b)  The city council, by resolution, shall establish, and change from time to time, a schedule of fees for the examination and approval of site plans and for inspection of all required improvements included in such plans. Such fee shall be payable to the city treasurer. 
(c)  The planning commission shall establish reasonable procedures relating to the processing of site plans, adequate provisions for public review and comment, requirements as to the number of copies of plans needed for review, and other matters of a procedural nature. 
(Code 1973, § 81-56; Code 1982, § 38-29(q); Ord. No. 595; Ord. No. 640; Ord. No. 704; Ord. No. 881; Ord. No. 1042, 3-28-1983; Ord. No. 1058, 8-8-1983; Ord. No. 1072, 5-29-1984; Ord. No. 1118, 9-9-1985; Ord. No. 1237, 9-12-1988; Ord. No. 1263, 5-22-1989; Ord. No. 1277, § 5, 10-10-1989; Ord. No. 1332, 11-12-1990; Ord. No. 1335, 11-12-1990; Ord. No. 1636, 3-8-1999) 
Secs. 48-1151-48-1178. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - LANDSCAPING 

Sec. 48-1179. - Intent and objectives. 
    The intent of this division is to preserve existing healthy vegetation and create new landscaping areas in areas that are being developed or redeveloped in commercial and residential areas. Natural vegetation and landscape plantings are an important community asset as they provide environmental benefits, enhance community character, and add to property values. Definitions within this section shall be consistent with article IV, division 16 of this chapter, pertaining to the Chesapeake Bay preservation area. The objectives set forth in this division include the following: 
(1)  Preserve and enhance the longevity of vegetation in residential and commercial areas throughout the city; 
(2)  Reduce soil erosion and stormwater runoff and protect water quality by minimizing removal of existing vegetation; 
(3)  Enhance the appearance and preserve the character of the surrounding properties and public rights-of-way; 
(4)  Improve the environment for pedestrians along streets and within parking lots and other pedestrian areas; 
(5)  Conserve energy and moderate solar radiation through the use of shade tree plantings in parking lots and streets; 
(6)  Visually integrate developments into the existing landscape and minimize potential conflicts between abutting developments, and ensure that a natural vegetative area of appropriate size and density is located between zoning districts; and 
(7)  Improve the quality of vegetation selection through the implementation of landscape standards and specifications. 
(Code 1982, § 38-30(a); Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004) 
Sec. 48-1180. - Tree canopy coverage required for single-family residential development. 
(a)  It is the intent of this section to regulate existing and replacement trees and/or shrubs to provide tree canopy coverage on developing and/or redeveloping residential lots zoned R1-A, low density residential and R1-B, medium density residential. 
(b)  Trees designated by the city as historic, specimen, street, park, memorial and other public trees shall be regulated pursuant to chapter 44, article II, pertaining to trees and shrubs. 
(c)  All developments, redevelopments, and/or land disturbing activities that are located in R1-A and R1-B zones that will disturb greater than or equal to 2,500 square feet of land shall provide for the preservation and/or planting of trees on the lot to the extent that, at a maturity of ten years, the minimum lot coverage of the tree canopy shall be 20 percent. 
(d)  Tree canopy coverage includes all areas within a lot's property lines beneath the dripline of vegetation. Calculation of the tree canopy coverage shall be the sum total of the existing vegetation and replacement vegetation. 
(1)  Preserved tree canopy coverage vegetation shall include the dripline beneath trees that measure no less than two inches in diameter at breast height (DBH) six inches above ground level and shrubs that measure no less than five feet in height. 
(2)  Replacement tree canopy coverage shall be as calculated by the most recent standards for tree canopy coverage by the Virginia Nursery and Landscape Association. Vegetation that is not included in this list may be substituted for vegetation of similar growth rate, type and form. 
(e)  Existing vegetation that shall be credited towards the required tree canopy coverage includes: 
(1)  Existing or relocated trees and/or shrubs that have been preserved in accordance with a landscape conservation plan, pursuant to article IV, division 16 of this chapter, pertaining to Chesapeake Bay preservation area overlay district. 
(2)  Canopy coverage from existing trees and/or shrubs shall be multiplied by 1.25 to determine the total tree canopy from preserved trees and shrubs. This is to encourage the preservation of existing vegetation and to recognize the additional environmental benefits that mature trees provide. 
(f)  Existing vegetation that shall not be credited towards the required tree canopy coverage include: 
(1)  Trees with a rating of fair to poor and with a life expectancy less than ten years, as calculated by the city arborist using the most recent edition of the Guide for Plant Appraisal, published by the International Society of Arboriculture. 
(2)  Undesirable and/or invasive vegetation, as published by the Virginia Department of Conservation and Recreation (DCR) and the Virginia Native Plant Society (VNPS). 
(g)  Replacement vegetation is required on lots that do not meet the minimum tree canopy coverage requirements either through the preservation of existing vegetation or due to the absence of tree canopy coverage present at the time of development or redevelopment. 
(1)  Replacement vegetation should be chosen from the Recommended List of Trees and Shrubs to Plant in the City of Falls Church. 
(2)  Substitute vegetation may be considered, provided it does not negatively impact native plant communities, cause damage to nearby structures and infrastructure, or possess inherent physiological traits that cause such trees to structurally fail. 
(3)  Size, planting and installation specifications of the required replacement vegetation shall be pursuant to this section. 
(h)  In addition to the quantity of the replacement vegetation, its quality shall be encouraged through providing tree canopy coverage credit. Credit shall be given for the following types of vegetation that are selected and planted on the lot so that it improves the overall health and condition of the urban tree canopy and provides for additional environmental benefits. 
(1)  A best management practice (BMP) credit of 25 percent of the tree canopy of the individual tree shall be given for those trees that are used in rain gardens, bio-retention areas or other vegetative best management practices. 
(2)  An energy conservation credit of 25 percent of the tree canopy of the individual tree shall be given for those types of trees that are an approved species for energy conservation. Trees shall be located 20 to 35 feet from the edge of a building and shade its western, southwestern or northern exposure from 2:30 p.m. to 7:30 p.m. from May through September. 
(3)  A species diversity credit of an additional ten percent shall be given for the use of not more than 20 percent of the trees to be of the same species. 
(4)  A utility line compatibility credit of the average of the listed shade trees shall be given for trees that are an approved species that do not conflict with overhead utility lines. This credit applies when site constraints do not allow for the planting of shade trees elsewhere on the lot. 
(i)  Installation and bonding requirements of replacement vegetation shall be regulated pursuant to article V, division 7 of this chapter, pertaining to site plans. 
(j)  Where areas to be preserved (as designated on an approved landscape conservation plan) are encroached upon, the city arborist may require the replacement of any vegetation damaged or destroyed. The size, species and quantity of these replacements shall be determined by the city arborist based on the value of the vegetation removed as calculated by the latest formula published by the International Society of Arboriculture. 
(k)  Modifications to the tree canopy coverage requirement in this section may be permitted when in the professional opinion of the city arborist, a lot's unique physical constraints will not allow for the planting of the replacement vegetation. Only in these cases, the city arborist may allow a cash contribution to the tree canopy coverage fund or off-site mitigation fund whereby a portion of a lot's tree canopy coverage requirements may be met from off-site mitigation planting or replanting at locations at the direction of the city arborist. 
(l)  The tree canopy coverage fund or off-site mitigation fund shall be established for the deposit of cash contributions and mitigation fees, when necessary, and administered by the city arborist. This fund shall be utilized to plant trees on public and/or private properties within the city boundaries. 
(1)  Cash contribution shall be based upon the replacement cost of the vegetation. The replacement cost shall be the sum total of all costs to purchase, transport, plant and guarantee the tree for one year from the date of planting. 
(2)  Requests for tree plantings on private property shall be prioritized based on the lot's location in the sub watershed, existing tree canopy coverage and other site conditions that would improve the urban tree canopy. The commitment of the homeowner to provide longterm care for the planting shall be required. 
(3)  Tree plantings shall be contracted out yearly and documentation provided to the tree commission and/or other interested parties as to the fund's administration, and the locations and types of trees planted. 
(Code 1982, § 38-30(b); Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004) 
Sec. 48-1181. - Commercial, multifamily and mixed-use development perimeter parking lot landscaping. 
    The perimeter around off-street parking lots, newly constructed and/or existing, shall be landscaped in accordance with this section whenever a site plan is required for the property upon which it is located. The area shall be landscaped with a combination of trees, shrubs, fences, and walls and/or berms of sufficient height and density. The purpose of the landscaping is to screen the parking or other vehicular use area from public streets and/or abutting properties; to provide street and/or shade trees; and to provide an attractive appearance in keeping with the city's character. 
(1)  Perimeter parking lot landscaping adjacent to public streets. 
a.  Perimeter parking lot landscaping shall be provided between an off-street parking area or other vehicular use area and any adjacent public street. If the area is screened by an intervening structure such as a building, screening is not required. 
b.  A solid landscaped planting strip that is at least 31/2 feet in height and ten feet in width shall be provided. This strip shall contain a minimum of 25 small shrubs and four canopy trees per 100 linear feet. See table 4 in section 48-1185 for minimum vegetation size requirements. 
c.  In cases where substantial grading results in a parking lot lower in elevation than the adjacent right-of-way, the resulting embankment should be planted with the required vegetation. 
(2)  Perimeter parking lot landscaping adjacent to abutting properties. 
a.  Nonresidential zoned properties. 
1.  A solid landscaped planting strip that is at least 31/2 feet in height and at least ten feet in width shall be provided. This strip shall contain a minimum of 25 small shrubs and four canopy trees per 100 linear feet. See table 4 in section 48-1185 for minimum vegetation size requirements. 
2.  Where the required landscaped strip abuts an existing hedge, wall or other durable barrier on the abutting property, the existing barrier may partially satisfy the landscape requirements of this subsection, provided that the existing hedge, wall or other durable barrier meets the screening height is attractive in appearance and the required trees have adequate space to grow. 
b.  Residential zoned properties. A solid landscaped planting strip at least that is five feet in height and at least ten feet in width shall be provided. This strip shall contain a minimum of 25 large shrubs and four canopy trees per 100 linear feet. See table 4 in section 48-1185 for minimum vegetation size requirements. 
(Code 1982, § 38-30(c); Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004) 
Sec. 48-1182. - Commercial, multifamily and mixed-use development interior parking lot landscaping. 
(a)  Interior parking lot landscaping shall apply to all parking lots that are 3,420 square feet in size and/or whenever a site plan is required for the property upon which it is located. Interior parking lot areas shall be located and landscaped in such a manner as to divide and break up the expanse of pavement and to provide for safe movement of vehicles and pedestrians. Furthermore, parking lots shall be adequately constructed to support shade trees, which reduce the negative environmental impacts of impervious surface area and improve the aesthetics of parking lots. 
(b)  Parking lot areas shall contain a minimum of five percent interior landscaping in addition to any required perimeter landscaping. Trees located in a required perimeter landscape planting strip shall not be credited toward the interior parking lot landscaping requirements. The five percent interior parking lot landscaping requirement calculations shall be clearly labeled and vegetation included in the calculations shown on the landscape plan. 
(1)  One planting island of a minimum area of 162 square feet shall be provided for every 3,240 square feet of parking lot area. Each planting island shall contain a minimum of one shade tree per 162 square feet, shrubs and/or groundcover throughout the entire area of the planting island. 
(2)  Required trees shall be located in islands or medians, between rows of parking spaces, and/or at the end of parking bays. Every parking space shall be located no more than 90 feet from an interior parking lot tree. 
(3)  Planting islands shall be a minimum inside dimension of nine feet by 18 feet in area, underlain by soil (not base course material) prepared to a minimum depth of 24 inches. Alternatively, structural soil or irrigation may be used to aid in the sustainability of the vegetation. 
(Code 1982, § 38-30(d); Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004) 
Sec. 48-1183. - Required buffer strips between zoning districts. 
    Buffers between different adjacent zoning districts shall apply to all sites whenever a site plan is required for the property upon which it is located. These requirements do not apply to perimeter boundaries that are within the same zoning district. The purpose of the buffer is to visually integrate developments into the existing landscape, buffer lower density districts, and buffer and screen commercial uses, and ensure that a vegetative area of appropriate size and density is located between zoning districts. 
(1)  Buffers shall be continuous pervious planting areas with adequate space to support vegetation both above and below ground. No parking, drive aisles, and utilities shall be permitted in the buffer. 
(2)  The five buffer types are described in this subsection and are summarized in table 1. The matrix to determine the appropriate category to use, depending on the property's zoning district and the surrounding property's zoning district, follows in table 2. A property may abut more than one zoning district; in that case, a different requirement would apply to each side of the property. 
a.  Buffer A: A ten-foot-wide landscape planting strip with a minimum of 25 small shrubs and four canopy trees per 100 linear feet. 
b.  Buffer B: A ten-foot-wide landscape planting strip with a minimum of 25 small shrubs and four canopy trees per 100 linear feet. In addition to this vegetation, a screening element at least six feet in height must be created to consist of either a masonry wall, a combined three-foot-high earthen berm with the required landscaping located atop the berm, or a solid wood fence. 
c.  Buffer C: A seven-foot-wide landscape planting strip with a minimum of 12 evergreen trees per 100 linear feet. In addition to this vegetation, a screening element at least six feet in height must be created to consist of either a masonry wall or a solid wood fence. 
d.  Buffer D: A 20-foot-wide landscape planting strip with a minimum of 25 small shrubs, 25 large shrubs, 12 evergreen trees and four canopy trees per 100 linear feet. 
e.  Buffer E: A 15-foot-wide landscape planting strip with a minimum of 25 large shrubs and four canopy trees per 100 linear feet. In addition to this vegetation, a screening element at least six feet in height must be created to consist of either a masonry wall, a combined three-foot-high earthen berm with the required landscaping located atop the berm, or a solid wood fence. 
Table 1. Buffer Type and Vegetation Planting Density 
Buffer Type Minimum Width *Shade Tree Evergreen Tree Small Shrub Large Shrub Screening Element A 10' 4/100' 25/100' No B 10' 4/100' 25/100' Yes C 7' 12 /100' Yes D 20' 4/100' 12/100' 25/100' 25/100' No E 15' 4/100' 25/100' Yes *In the case of overhead utility lines, six understory trees per 100 feet shall be substituted for shade trees.  
(3)  Buffers A, B, C, D, and E are minimum standards for the size and density of the vegetation in the buffer areas. The developer may substitute a more intense buffer type, for example, requirement B being higher than A. In certain situations, as shown in the Table 2, choices for buffer types are given. 
(4)  Existing topographic conditions, such as embankments or berms, may be substituted for part or all of the required buffer area at the discretion of the city arborist. The minimum visual effect shall be equal to or exceed that of the required buffer. The height of the berm shall be measured from the grade of the adjacent property. 
(5)  Existing trees and other vegetation may be used for buffers if they are healthy and are approved as part of the landscaping plan by the city arborist. The minimum quantities and/or visual effect of the existing vegetation shall be equal to or exceed that of the required landscape planting strip. 
Table 2. Required Buffer Category by Proposed and Adjacent Zoning Districts* 
Zoning district 
(proposed development) Zoning district(adjacent property) R-1A R-1B R-C R-TH R-M O-D R-C** A A N/A A A A R-TH A A A N/A A A R-M B or C B or C B or C B or C N/A B or C O-D N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A T-1 A A A A A A T-2 A A A A A A B-1 D or E D or E D or E D or E D or E D or E B-2 D or E D or E D or E D or E D or E D or E B-3 D or E D or E D or E D or E D or E D or E M-1 D D D D D D *More than one requirement may apply to a proposed development if it is adjacent to more than one zoning district. 
  
**Buffer is required along the side and rear boundaries of the development abutting business districts. B-1, B-2 and B-3 districts were not included in chart as it only applied to R-C category.  
(Code 1982, § 38-30(e); Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004) 
Sec. 48-1184. - Design criteria. 
(a)  Preparation. Landscape plans shall be prepared by a landscape architect, landscape designer, certified arborist or Virginia Certified Nurseryman (VCN). 
(1)  Vegetation should be chosen from the Recommended List of Trees and Shrubs to Plant in the City of Falls Church. The applicant may propose the use of vegetation or designs that fulfill the intent of this section, with the approval of the city arborist. 
(2)  Required vegetation in screening landscape planting strips, landscaping in interior parking lot areas and buffers shall be distributed over their entire lengths and widths. 
(3)  Vegetation may be arranged symmetrically (formal) or asymmetrically (informal) and shall be grouped to form plant clusters. Informal groupings that reflect the natural character of the region are encouraged. 
(b)  Diversity and variety. To increase the diversity of the age and species in the urban forest, consideration shall be given to save mature trees and to plant trees on sites where the tree population is over maturing. Also, to allow for a variety of interest in form, color and height to reduce the opportunity for pest and disease population increase, the following chart shall be used to select the appropriate number of species: 
Table 3. Plant Diversity Chart 
Number of Plant 
Materials Minimum Number of Species Maximum of any one Species 
(in percent) 0-5 1 100 6-15 2 50 16-30 3 40 31-50 4 30 50 + 6 20  
(c)  Location, dimension and spacing. The location, dimension and spacing of required plantings shall be adequate for their proper growth and maintenance, taking into consideration the sizes of such plantings at maturity and the present and future environmental requirements, such as wind, soil, moisture and sunlight. 
(d)  City parkland or other ecologically sensitive areas. Where the required plantings abut city parkland or other ecologically sensitive areas, vegetation shall be noninvasive and be selected from indigenous trees, shrubs and perennials. This is to restrict the introduction of invasive plant species; vegetation shall be determined by the city arborist. 
(e)  Foundation plantings. To soften the edge of the building in the landscape, a five-foot-wide planting area may be required in instances where the proposed building is not abutting the public right-of-way, sidewalks or parking lot. Vegetation should achieve a minimum of 31/2 feet to five feet in height. 
(f)  Street trees. Street trees shall be required when they abut or lie within a proposed subdivision or development and/or redevelopment along all proposed public and private streets. 
(1)  Where there is no public right-of-way, a perpetual easement for street tree planting and maintenance may be requested of the developer and recorded on the development plan. 
(2)  Trees placed in the public right-of-way shall become the responsibility of the city to maintain and replace. 
(3)  Tree canopy coverage provided by street trees planted in conjunction with residentially zoned R1-A or R1-B lots may be credited towards the lot's minimum canopy coverage requirements. 
(g)  Off-street parking structures. Off-street parking structures shall conform to all applicable provisions of article V, division 6 of this chapter, pertaining to yard requirements. Landscaping shall be provided and maintained in all yards. Suitable facades shall be provided as part of the structure. Landscaping requirements shall not apply to parking spaces within such structures. A wall at least 31/2 feet in height shall surround any parking which is on top of a structure, and suitable plantings shall be provided to buffer the view of such parking from nearby properties and rights-of-way. 
(h)  Landscape borders. All landscaped areas adjacent to any vehicular travel way, parking space or other vehicular use area shall be bordered by a six-inch concrete header curb. Wheel stops or other appropriate devices may be substituted when the department of public works determines that such alternative devices are needed for drainage purposes. 
(i)  Sight distance for landscaping adjacent to points of access. Plantings shall be selected and located so they do not contribute to conditions that may be hazardous to public safety. Such locations include, but are not limited to, public street rights-of-way, underground and aboveground utilities. 
(j)  Accessway interacting with public right-of way. When an accessway intersects a public right-of-way, all landscaping within the triangular areas described in this subsection shall provide unobstructed horizontal visibility between three feet and six feet above pavement level. Tree trunks may be permitted in these areas provided they do not constitute a traffic hazard. The triangular areas referred to in this subsection are formed by each side of the accessway and public right-of-way line, with each side being ten feet in length from the point of intersection, and the third side being a line connecting the ends of the two other sides. 
(k)  Landscaping adjustments after installation. In the event that the landscaping materials approved by the planning commission cannot be installed due to unavailability, or if the installed varieties fail, substitute materials may be installed, provided they are approved by the city arborist. 
(l)  Exceptions. The planning commission may waive or modify the requirements of this section where adjacent properties are developed under a unified site plan or where the strict interpretation of these provisions would reduce the usable area of a site to a point that would preclude a reasonable use. In such instances, special landscaping and/or architectural techniques may be required in lieu of the requirements of this subsection. The planning commission may also attach conditions to any such waiver or modification to ensure that the results of the waiver of modification shall be in accord with the purposes and intent of this subsection. 
(Code 1982, § 38-30(f); Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004) 
Sec. 48-1185. - Bonding, installation, specifications and maintenance of vegetation. 
    The following shall apply to all vegetation or transplanted vegetation as required under this section. All vegetation shall meet the minimum standards for health, form, and root condition, as outlined in the latest edition of American Standard for Nursery Stock, published by the American Association of Nurserymen (AAN). 
(1)  Installation under inspection of city arborist. Installation and bonding requirements of vegetation shall be regulated pursuant to section 48-1143. All installation of the vegetation shall be carried out under the inspection of the city arborist. Installation may be spot checked by the city arborist. 
Table 4. Vegetation and Minimum Size Chart 
Type of Vegetation Minimum Size at Planting Size at Maturity Shade tree 2 - 2 1/2" caliper ;gt;40' Understory tree 2 - 2 1/2" caliper ;lt;40' Evergreen tree 6' 12 - 20' Large shrub 24" ;gt;5' Small shrub 24" ;gt;3 1/2'  
(2)  Vegetation substitutions. Due to seasonal planting issues or a lack of plant availability, approved landscape plans may require minor revisions. Minor revisions to planting plans may be approved by the city arborist, if there is no reduction in the quantity or significant change in size or location of vegetation and the new vegetation has the same general design characteristics (approved species, mature height, crown spread) as the vegetation being replaced. 
(3)  Responsibility of property owner for maintenance. It shall be the ultimate responsibility of successive property owners to ensure that the required vegetation is properly maintained in compliance with the approved site plan in perpetuity. Dead or diseased plant material shall be removed or treated promptly by the property owner and replaced within 180 days. 
(4)  Maintenance guidelines. Maintenance guidelines for the plantings are encouraged, to be published by the planting plan designer, to be used by grounds maintenance personnel to ensure that the design's buffering and screening concepts are continued. The City of Falls Church Landscape Maintenance Guidelines shall be adhered to at a minimum and shall be shown on all landscape plans. 
(5)  Safety. All sight triangles shall remain clear, and any plant material that could endanger safety, such as, unstable limbs shall be removed and the plant material replaced, if necessary. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to maintain all plantings and architectural elements to ensure a safe environment. 
(6)  Plan approval. Plans submitted only for landscaping additions or deductions shall be considered by the planning commission following recommendations from the city arborist and the architectural advisory board, as part of the site plan process. Applicants are required to consult with the city arborist in advance of plan preparation in order to determine what trees, shrubs and other landscape materials are preferred. 
(7)  Review of landscaping guidelines, planting design, materials. Specific landscaping guidelines, planting design, and materials shall be reviewed by the city arborist and by the planning commission during the site plan review process and shall be in accordance with the guidelines established by the city. 
(8)  Vegetation installed prior to occupancy; exception. All vegetation required by this section, except vegetation on single-family residential lots as detailed in section 48-1180, must be installed prior to the occupancy of the site. Where compliance with this regulation is not possible because of seasonal planting limitations, the city arborist shall grant an appropriate delay. 
(Code 1982, § 38-30(g); Ord. No. 1766, 9-13-2004) 
Secs. 48-1186-48-1203. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - ANTENNAS 

Sec. 48-1204. - Application. 
(a)  This division shall govern the erection or construction of all conventional television and radio antennas and satellite television antennas. 
(b)  Whenever the height or other restrictions of this division conflict with other restrictions of this Code, as applied to a particular antenna, the restrictions set out in this division shall control as to that particular antenna. 
(Code 1982, § 38-40(a); Ord. No. 1138, 5-12-1986) 
Sec. 48-1205. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this division is to further the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. More specifically, the council finds that the uncontrolled proliferation of certain receive-only antennas is likely and this will adversely affect the health, safety, general welfare and aesthetic concerns of the city. Among other things, reasonable controls contribute to the good appearance of the city, stabilize and even increase property values, ensure the safety of the owner and others, and, in general, contribute to the preservation of a pleasant community in which to work and live. This division is intended to comply fully with the Report and Order of the Federal Communications Commission, released January 14, 1986 (FCC 86-28), to the extent that the Report and Order validly preempts local zoning regulations deemed unduly restrictive with respect to satellite television receiving antennas. The city hereby determines that the bulk and visual impact of such antennas create aesthetic problems making it appropriate to have some special limitations as to size and placement. However, this division shall be construed and administered so as not unduly to hamper reasonably satisfactory reception of satellite television signals. 
(Code 1982, § 38-40(b); Ord. No. 1138, 5-12-1986) 
Sec. 48-1206. - Location. 
(a)  No conventional or satellite television or radio antenna may be placed in the front yard of any lot in the city. 
(b)  A ground-mounted conventional television or radio antenna may be placed on a lot only in the rear yard. 
(c)  A satellite television antenna may be placed on a lot only in the rear yard; provided, however, that on a convincing showing that a reasonably satisfactory television signal cannot be obtained from a rear yard location, the board of zoning appeals shall permit the antenna to be located in the side yard, and if such a signal cannot be obtained in either yard, the board of zoning appeals shall permit the antenna to be located on the roof of any main or accessory building on the lot. 
(d)  All ground-mounted television and radio receiving antennas and satellite television antennas shall be located no less than five feet from any lot line. 
(e)  No ground-mounted receiving antenna or satellite television antenna may be erected over a public utility easement. 
(Code 1982, § 38-40(c); Ord. No. 1138, 5-12-1986) 
Sec. 48-1207. - Size and number. 
(a)  No ground-mounted satellite television antenna may exceed ten feet in height, as measured from the ground to the highest point of the antenna. 
(b)  No roof-mounted satellite television antenna may extend above the roofline more than three feet, unless it is to be installed on multistory buildings of four or more stories, in which case the antenna may not exceed ten feet in height above the level of the roof upon which it is placed. 
(c)  The diameter of satellite television antennas shall not exceed 12 feet. 
(d)  No lot in an R district shall have, at any one time, more than one satellite television antenna. No lot in any other district shall have more than three satellite television antennas. 
(Code 1982, § 38-40(d); Ord. No. 1138, 5-12-1986) 
Sec. 48-1208. - Special use permit required. 
    No satellite television antenna or ground-mounted conventional television or radio antenna may be erected on any lot without obtaining a special use permit. 
(Code 1982, § 38-40(e); Ord. No. 1138, 5-12-1986) 
Sec. 48-1209. - Color, landscaping, etc. 
(a)  The color of any ground-mounted satellite television antenna shall be dark brown, black or forest green. Any other satellite television antenna shall be of a color that blends into its surroundings. The board of zoning appeals may require that an antenna be of the mesh design. 
(b)  All ground-mounted conventional television and radio antennas and satellite television antennas shall be landscaped so as to screen them from ground level view of persons on streets and surrounding lots. Said screening is not required to be so complete that it interferes with the reception of the antenna. The screening materials shall be of the evergreen type. The screening shall be planted as required by the special use permit within 30 days of the placement of the antenna on the lot. 
(c)  All roof-mounted satellite television antennas exceeding three feet above the roofline shall be concealed from ground level view either by a parapet wall or by exterior architectural material of the same type and quality as that used in the exterior walls of the building. 
(d)  All television and radio antennas shall be grounded against direct lightning strike. 
(e)  All television and radio antennas shall be erected in a secure, wind-resistant manner. 
(f)  All wiring necessary for the use of the antenna between any ground-mounted antenna and a building or between the buildings on which the antenna is located and any other building on the lot shall be buried underground. 
(Code 1982, § 38-40(f); Ord. No. 1138, 5-12-1986) 
DIVISION 10. - ADULT USES 

Sec. 48-1210. - Declaration of policy. 
    Within the city, it is acknowledged that there are some uses, often referred to as adult uses, which because of their nature can have a negative impact on nearby property, particularly when several of them are concentrated under certain circumstances or located in direct proximity to a residential neighborhood, thereby having a deleterious effect upon the adjacent areas. Special regulation of these uses is necessary to insure that these adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhoods. These special regulations are itemized in this division. The primary control or regulation is for the purpose of preventing the concentration or location of adult uses in a manner that would create such adverse effects. The definition of adult uses is found in section 8-702. 
(Ord. No. 1846, 6-28-2010) 
Sec. 48-1211. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this division, certain words and phrases shall have the meanings assigned to them in section 8-702 of this Code, except in those situations where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The term "person" shall mean any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, or joint stock association. 
(Ord. No. 1846, 6-28-2010) 
Sec. 48-1212. - Special use permit required for adult uses. 
    A special use permit is necessary for the establishment of an adult use, as defined in section 8-702, in any of the zoning districts where the use is permitted. Special use permits required for adult uses may be approved only by the city council. A special use permit for an adult use may by issued by the city council after finding that the location, size, design, and operating characteristics of the proposed adult use will be compatible with and will not adversely affect or be materially detrimental to the neighboring uses. 
(Ord. No. 1846, 6-28-2010) 
Sec. 48-1213. - Location and extent of adult uses. 
    The following restrictions apply to the location and extent of adult uses in the city: 
(1)  Except pursuant to subsection (5) below, no special use permit shall authorize an adult use less than 500 feet from any residential district or planned development district boundary. 
(2)  Except pursuant to subsection (5) below, no special use permit shall authorize an adult use less than 500 feet from any single- or multiple-family dwelling; church or other place of worship; public park; public or private elementary, intermediate, or high school; public library; day care center; nursing home; hotel or motel. 
(3)  Except pursuant to subsection (5) below, all off-street parking spaces serving such adult uses shall be located at least 500 feet from the nearest residential district boundary; any single- or multiple-family dwelling; church or other place of worship; public park; public or private elementary, intermediate, or high school; public library; day care center; or nursing home. 
(4)  Except pursuant to subsection (5) below, no two such adult uses shall be located within 1,000 feet of each other. 
(5)  City council may waive the locational provisions in subsections (1), (2), (3) and (4) above under certain circumstances, if the following findings are made: 
a.  That the proposed use will not be contrary to the public interest or be injurious to nearby properties, and that the spirit and intent of this division will be observed; 
b.  That the establishment of an additional adult use in the area will not conflict with any council adopted objectives, plans or programs for the area; 
c.  That the establishment of an additional adult use will not be contrary or detrimental to any program of neighborhood conservation or renewal in adjacent residential areas; and 
d.  That all applicable regulations of the ordinance and special conditions attached to the special use permit will be observed. 
For the purposes of subsections (1) through (4) above, distances shall be measured on a straight line: (1) from the structure containing the adult use to the nearest point of property named in subsections (1) through (4) above; or (2) between the structure containing the adult use and the structure containing any other adult use. 
(Ord. No. 1846, 6-28-2010) 
Sec. 48-1214. - Signage. 
    Signs or attention-getting devices for the business shall not contain any words or graphics depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined in subsections 8-702 of this Code. The signage shall otherwise comply with the provisions set forth in article VI, Signs, of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1846, 6-28-2010) 
Sec. 48-1215. - Hours of operation. 
    Adult uses shall not begin service to the public or any outside activity before 6:00 a.m. Hours of operation for any adult movie theater, adult entertainment establishment, or adult nightclub shall not extend after 2:00 a.m. Hours of operation for any adult bookstore, adult video store, or adult store shall not extend after 12:00 midnight. 
(Ord. No. 1846, 6-28-2010) 
Sec. 48-1216. - Location of adult merchandise within the adult use. 
    Adult merchandise shall be located in a separate room or other area inaccessible to persons under 18 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 1846, 6-28-2010) 
Sec. 48-1217. - Laws and ordinances governing obscenity applicable. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to permit uses in violation of the laws governing obscenity and public nudity found in the City Code, Code of Virginia and United States Code. 
(Ord. No. 1846, 6-28-2010) 
Sec. 48-1218. - Severability and conflict. 
(a)  Should any portion or portions of this division be declared unconstitutional or invalid by a valid decree or order of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the validity of this division in its entirety or of any part thereof other than that portion or portions of the division declared to be invalid. 
(b)  To the extent any provision of this division may conflict with any other provision in the Code of the City of Falls Church, Virginia, existing on the effective date of the ordinance establishing this division [June 28, 2010], then this division shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 1846, 6-28-2010) 
Secs. 48-1219-48-1236. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SIGNS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 48-1237. - Intent. 
(a)  The intent of this article is to control all signs within the city, to ensure that they are appropriate for their respective principal uses and in keeping with the appearance of the affected property and surrounding environment, and to protect the public health, safety, morals and general welfare. In addition, the intent of this article is: 
(1)  To encourage good design in the context of the overall image and visual environment of the city. 
(2)  To protect property values, to enhance the appearance of the business community and to stimulate the economic vitality of the city. 
(3)  To ensure that signs are adequate, but not excessive, for the intended purpose of identification or advertisement. 
(4)  To prohibit the erection of signs in such numbers, sizes, designs and locations as may create danger to the public by obscuring road signs or by diverting the attention of motorists. 
(5)  To prohibit signs which are likely to create unsafe conditions because of unsound structures or unsuitable locations. 
(6)  To avoid excessive competition for signs, so that permitted signs provide identification and direction while minimizing clutter and unsightliness. 
(b)  The general premise for the control of signs includes legibility, the effective display of information, the safety of passing traffic, and the coordination of signs with buildings, landscaping and other elements of the visual environment. In particular, signs should be designed and constructed as follows: 
(1)  For maximum legibility, signs should be designed appropriate to the legal speed of passing traffic. 
(2)  For size and dimensions, signs should be related to the frontage and setback of the building. 
(3)  The setback and size of signs should give a fair exposure to all commercial buildings in a given area. 
(4)  Signs should be integrated with the architecture of the buildings to which they relate, and with the nearby landscaping. 
(c)  It is further the premise of this article that too many signs and too much information on signs create confusion, contribute to unsafe driving conditions, distract drivers and conflict with the intent of the section by creating visual clutter and unsightliness. This article seeks to encourage signs which avoid excessive information and which significantly contribute to the quality of their surrounding environment. 
(Code 1973, § 81-66; Code 1982, § 38-35(art. I(a)); Ord. No. 627; Ord. No. 763; Ord. No. 838; Ord. No. 1115, 7-22-1985; Ord. No. 1185, 5-11-1987; Ord. No. 1401, 5-26-1992; Ord. No. 1501, 2-27-1995; Ord. No. 1565, 1-13-1997; Ord. No. 1633, 2-22-1999; Ord. No. 1691, 11-27-2000) 
Sec. 48-1238. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Awning or canopy means a structure made of cloth or metal or plastic on a frame attached to a building and projecting therefrom, and possibly carried by frames supported at grade level. 
    Flap means the vertical lower part of an awning which hangs loose. For the purposes of this article, where there is no flap, the lower vertical face up to 15 inches may be considered a flap. 
    Frontage means the line which separates a property from a street or other public right-of-way. For the purposes of this article, a single-frontage lot lies adjacent to only one street and a double-frontage or multifrontage lot lies adjacent to two or more streets. A lot which fronts on a street which curves 90 degrees or more along the lot's frontage shall be deemed a double-frontage lot. 
    Mansard wall means the lower slope of a mansard roof. 
    Marquee means any permanent, roofed structure projecting from a building facade when such structure is supported by the building, and which partially or fully covers a sidewalk, public entrance, or other pedestrian way. Signage on such structures will typically utilize changeable letters and numbers. 
    Multiple-tenancy structure means any commercial or office building containing two or more businesses, establishments, facilities, offices, or residences. 
    Parapet wall means any protective wall or barrier at the edge of, or projecting above, any balcony or roof. 
    Shopping center means a ground-level commercial development of eight or more retail sales and service establishments on one acre or more of land in a single parcel of common ownership, providing common parking facilities for all establishments, having multiple-tenancy of a single or several large common structures, and being of a single development or of several phases of a single comprehensive development. 
    Show window display means displays of merchandise, pictures, posters, prices, promotional statements, etc., designed and intended to be viewed by pedestrians standing in front of the show window. 
    Sign means any object, letter, figure, design, symbol, artistic display, trademark, flag, or other device intended to call attention to identify, advertise, or otherwise make known any place, subject, person, firm, business, public performance, article, machine or merchandise. The term "sign" shall not be deemed to include the term "building" or "landscaping" or any architectural embellishment of a building not intended to communicate information, or decorative lighting or strings of lights used to decorate trees, outdoor cafes and similar outdoor spaces, but not including merchandise sales areas. 
    Sign area means the entire area within a continuous perimeter formed by straight lines joined at right angles, which encloses the extreme limits of writing, background, representation and other sign information. Such perimeter shall not include any structural elements, other than the background, which are not an integral part of the display. For the purpose of computing the allowable sign area of a double-faced sign, only one face shall be considered. 
    Sign height means the difference in height between the elevation of the established or proposed grade level beneath the sign and the elevation of the uppermost extremity of the sign structure. 
    Sign information item means any datum which is transmitted by words, syllables, letters, numbers, designs, shapes, colors or symbols to convey a message. 
    Sign maintenance means the renewal, painting, repair or cleaning or an existing sign which retains the same sign information items, colors, composition, location and structure as the original. 
    Sign structure means any assembly of materials which supports a sign and which is not an integral element of a wall or building. 
    Unified facade means the fronts of any shopping center, multiple-tenancy structure or group of two or more adjacent buildings under one ownership or joint control, which have a consistent appearance in terms of design, color scheme, illumination, materials and areas designed for signs. 
(Code 1973, § 81-66; Code 1982, § 38-35(art. I(b)); Ord. No. 627; Ord. No. 763; Ord. No. 838; Ord. No. 1115, 7-22-1985; Ord. No. 1185, 5-11-1987; Ord. No. 1401, 5-26-1992; Ord. No. 1501, 2-27-1995; Ord. No. 1565, 1-13-1997; Ord. No. 1633, 2-22-1999; Ord. No. 1691, 11-27-2000; Ord. No. 1947, 2-8-2016) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 48-1239. - Types of signs. 
    Signs in this article are classified as the following types: 
(1)  Arcade. Advertising which is suspended underneath an awning, canopy, marquee, overhand or other structural element of a building which forms a covered passageway for pedestrians. 
(2)  Banner. A temporary sign consisting of lightweight, flexible material, which is supported by a frame, ropes, cables, wires or other anchoring devices. 
(3)  Building directory. A wall sign which lists the names, times, uses and locations of various services, offices or activities within a building, and which is intended to be read at close proximity. 
(4)  Double-faced. A freestanding, projecting or arcade sign with two faces which are back-to-back and not more than 18 inches apart. 
(5)  Freestanding. Any sign supported by one or more uprights, braces or poles, or placed directly on the ground or on a foundation on the ground and not attached to a building. 
(6)  Nonconforming. Any sign or sign structure which existed on the effective date of the most recent ordinance amending this article, which has a valid permit issued in accordance with previous regulations, but which would not now be permitted. 
(7)  Plaque. A wall sign which is a thin flat plate or tablet, used for building and/or occupant identification and which contains no advertising. A plaque may be for identification of a building, a building's occupant or a building's historic significance. 
(8)  Projecting. Any sign which is attached in a plane approximately perpendicular to the surface of a building or other structure. 
(9)  Sandwich. Any sign which is constructed of durable materials, which has two identical, flat faces, and which is designed to be displayed on the ground. For the purposes of this section, a sandwich sign shall not be considered a portable sign or a temporary sign. 
(10)  Sidewalk sign. Any sign which is constructed of durable materials, which has one or two flat faces, and which is designed to be displayed on the ground. For the purpose of this section, a sidewalk sign shall not be considered a temporary sign. 
(11)  Subdivision/apartment identification. A sign located at the entrance to a residential subdivision or apartment project, which bears any one or all of the following: the logo, the name of the subdivision or apartment project and the street number. 
(12)  Temporary. Any sign intended to be used up to 60 days. 
(13)  Time-temperature display. A sign which displays time/date/temperature for the convenience of the public. 
(14)  Wall. Any sign which is affixed directly to or suspended from a wall, marquee, mansard wall or parapet wall of a building, with the exposed face of the sign in a plan approximately parallel to the face of the wall and extending from it less than 12 inches. A wall sign may be either of one-piece construction or of individual letters or symbols. A wall sign may also be inscribed on or attached to the vertical or nearly vertical surface of an awning or canopy which is permanently affixed to a building. 
(15)  Window. Any permanent or temporary sign which can be read from a public street or parking lot, and which is placed on the outside or inside face of a glass window, or within a distance of two feet inside the window. Show-window displays are not included. 
(Code 1973, § 81-66; Code 1982, § 38-35(art. I(c)); Ord. No. 627; Ord. No. 763; Ord. No. 838; Ord. No. 1115, 7-22-1985; Ord. No. 1185, 5-11-1987; Ord. No. 1401, 5-26-1992; Ord. No. 1501, 2-27-1995; Ord. No. 1565, 1-13-1997; Ord. No. 1633, 2-22-1999; Ord. No. 1691, 11-27-2000) 
Sec. 48-1240. - Permits. 
    Permits for signs or sign structures are required under this article for the following: 
(1)  Except for exempt or nonconforming signs, all new or refurbished signs or sign structures shall require a permit in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(2)  A sign or sign structure which is replaced to show a new trade name, a new design, different color or other changes in shape, location or size shall require a new permit. 
(3)  A sign or sign structure which is temporarily removed for not more than six months, or which is replaced or refurbished with the text and design, shall not require a new permit. 
(4)  The changing of sign information items shall not be considered a new sign and shall not require a new sign permit, provided that the original permit clearly stipulates the nature of the changeable information items that are to be used in such sign. 
(Code 1973, § 81-66; Code 1982, § 38-35(art. I(d)); Ord. No. 627; Ord. No. 763; Ord. No. 838; Ord. No. 1115, 7-22-1985; Ord. No. 1185, 5-11-1987; Ord. No. 1401, 5-26-1992; Ord. No. 1501, 2-27-1995; Ord. No. 1565, 1-13-1997; Ord. No. 1633, 2-22-1999; Ord. No. 1691, 11-27-2000) 
Sec. 48-1241. - Exempt signs. 
(a)  Certain signs and sign structures are allowed without a permit as set forth in subsection (b) of this section, provided they comply with the structural requirements of section 48-1243. Such signs shall not count toward the allowable maximum sign area. No exempt sign shall be located closer than five feet of a property line or within a public right-of-way, except a sign erected by, authorized by or required by the city. The height of an exempt sign shall not exceed ten feet, except where greater heights are specified. No exempt sign shall be located where it impedes use of any door, window, fire escape, sidewalk, walkway, driveway or other vehicle use area. 
(b)  Exempt signs shall include: 
(1)  Artwork, including sculptures, murals, and the like, which is designed or intended primarily as a decorative feature. 
(2)  Street addresses, not to exceed 11/2 square feet in area. 
(3)  One residential identification plaque, not to exceed 11/2 square feet in area for each residential structure. 
(4)  One professional or commercial identification plaque not exceeding 11/2 square feet in area. 
(5)  One building identification sign for each multistory building in the T, B, M, O-D districts, not exceeding ten square feet in area, designating only the structure or development name and/or address, and located in accordance with requirements for wall signs. 
(6)  One "Private Property," "No Trespassing" or "Beware of Dog" sign, not exceeding 11/2 square feet in area. 
(7)  One temporary sale, rent, lease, build-to-suit sign, or sign announcing future construction, not exceeding six square feet in area in any R district, or 16 square feet in area in any other district. Such sign shall be removed within one week of occupancy of the property. One additional sign designated "Open" shall be permitted during the period that such premises are actually open for viewing by the buying public. No such sign shall exceed six feet in height. 
(8)  One exterior building directory, not exceeding six square feet in area, attached to a multiple-tenancy structure. 
(9)  Up to three noncommercial temporary signs, not exceeding four feet in height nor four square feet in area for each sign, which signs shall be posted for no longer than 60 days in a calendar year. Yard sale signs shall not be considered commercial signs. 
(10)  Signs erected by or required by the city for pedestrian safety, vehicular movement or to announce events sponsored by the city. 
(11)  Signs regulating parking and vehicular movement, not exceeding five feet in height nor two square feet in area for each sign, and placed only where necessary. Signs required by chapter 26, article V may exceed two square feet but shall not exceed four square feet. 
(12)  Up to three flags, on poles not to exceed 60 feet in height, representing any government or governmental agency or any charitable, civic, fraternal, patriotic, religious or similar organization. 
(13)  Historic markers, in accordance with Code of Virginia, § 42-66. 
(14)  Warning signs warning the public of danger, of such size as may be necessary. 
(15)  Up to four "For Sale" or "For Rent" directional signs, which give directions to a property which is for sale or rent. Each such sign shall not exceed six square feet in area nor three feet in height and shall be made of weatherproof materials and shall be displayed only on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. 
(16)  Gasoline stations. 
a.  Signs on vending machines. 
b.  Wall signs, not exceeding six square feet in area for each sign, identifying the special functions of various service bays in the building facade, and located above the doorways to the bays. 
c.  Signs on pump islands relating to self-service or full-service locations, prices, promotions, displays, fuel availability, and so forth; provided no such sign shall be located on or above any canopy that extends over the pump islands. 
d.  One state inspection sign and one emission inspection sign on each frontage, provided no single sign exceeds six square feet in area. 
e.  One sign stating hours of operation, in the form of a wall sign or window sign, not exceeding four square feet in area. 
f.  Fuel price information signs, totaling up to 12 square feet in area, when integrated into a permitted freestanding sign or when attached to a permitted freestanding sign structure. 
g.  A single wall sign not exceeding 21/2 square feet, identifying the owner or manager, the address of the property and the telephone number. 
(17)  Temporary window signs. Signs made of paper, cardboard, cloth or similar material may be displayed in the ground floor windows of buildings in the B, M, and O-D districts, provided: 
a.  The area of all such signs affixed to any one pane of glass shall not exceed 25 percent of the area of transparent glass on that pane. 
b.  The total area of such signs shall not exceed 50 percent of the maximum permitted wall sign area for that business. 
(18)  Temporary development signs. Signs announcing the owner, occupant, developer, architect, contractor and other persons or firms involved in the construction of the premises, provided: 
a.  Such signs shall not exceed ten feet in height. 
b.  The total area of such signs shall not exceed 16 square feet in R districts nor 32 square feet in other districts. 
c.  Such signs shall not be installed prior to approval of a site plan or receipt of a building permit and shall be removed as soon as construction is completed. 
(19)  Other similar signs, as determined by the zoning administrator. 
(20)  Flaps with lettering, logos, symbols or words no greater than 13 inches in height and which may extend over the public right-of-way and up to 15 feet in height. 
(Code 1973, § 81-66; Code 1982, § 38-35(art. I(e)); Ord. No. 627; Ord. No. 763; Ord. No. 838; Ord. No. 1115, 7-22-1985; Ord. No. 1185, 5-11-1987; Ord. No. 1401, 5-26-1992; Ord. No. 1501, 2-27-1995; Ord. No. 1565, 1-13-1997; Ord. No. 1633, 2-22-1999; Ord. No. 1691, 11-27-2000) 
Sec. 48-1242. - Prohibited signs, sign structures and sign information. 
(a)  All signs or sign structures which are not specifically exempted or permitted as defined in this article are prohibited. Signs prohibited by this section include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Signs which are a public nuisance because of amplified sound, smoke, vapor, particle emission or objectionable odors. 
(2)  Signs and/or sign structures which violate the visibility provisions of chapter 48-1103. 
(3)  Signs and/or sign structures which are erected on any property without the express written permission of the property owner or his authorized agent. 
(4)  Signs attached partly or wholly to the pitched or flat roof of a building; or any sign which projects above any part of the wall, parapet wall, mansard wall, marquee or canopy to which it is attached. 
(5)  Signs painted on or attached to a vehicle or trailer, which is used primarily for advertising as opposed to transportation; provided, however, that this subsection shall not be interpreted to prohibit any sign information otherwise permitted to be mounted or painted on a vehicle or trailer, the primary use of which is transportation. 
(6)  Any pennant or piece of material of any kind or color which moves in the breeze, other than banners and flags permitted elsewhere in this section. 
(7)  Balloons and other devices, which are not specifically permitted elsewhere in this article, and which are designed to attract attention to goods or services available for sale. 
(8)  Signs bearing statements, words or pictures of an obscene nature, as defined by section 28-117. 
(9)  Signs having any moving or rotating parts or giving the illusion of motion or of flashing lights, except time, date, temperature displays. 
(10)  Signs using photographic projection. 
(11)  Signs using exposed light sources or mirrors or prisms that reflect a light source, and signs which violate the maximum permitted spillage and glare of light as specified in chapter 14, article IV, pertaining to outdoor lighting, except neon window signs and authentic reproduction neon signs for restoration of historic commercial structures on the inventory of the Official Register of Historic and Protected Structures and Sites. 
(12)  Signs bearing the words "Stop," "Go Slow," "Caution," "Danger," "Warning" or other similar words or symbols which imply official warning or command, except for signs which are erected for such purpose. 
(13)  Signs using traffic symbols of red, amber, and green in such combinations as to be confused with traffic control devices, or which have light sources so placed, designed, or used that the direct or reflected light creates a potential safety hazard to vehicles or pedestrians on a public right-of-way. 
(14)  Signs which obstruct or interfere with a required door opening, sidewalk, fire escape route, exitway or air vent. 
(15)  Signs which are placed less than six feet horizontally or 12 feet vertically from overhead wires. 
(16)  Signs which advertise a business or use that has been discontinued for a period of 30 days or more. 
(17)  Sign structures which no longer support a sign. 
(18)  All signs and sign structures which do not comply with the provisions of this article, except for nonconforming signs shall be deemed prohibited. 
(19)  Off-site signs, except as expressly permitted in this article. 
(20)  Signs or sign structures, the permits for which have been revoked. 
(b)  Prohibited signs shall not be permitted by variance. 
(Code 1973, § 81-66; Code 1982, § 38-35(art. I(f)); Ord. No. 627; Ord. No. 763; Ord. No. 838; Ord. No. 1115, 7-22-1985; Ord. No. 1185, 5-11-1987; Ord. No. 1401, 5-26-1992; Ord. No. 1501, 2-27-1995; Ord. No. 1565, 1-13-1997; Ord. No. 1633, 2-22-1999; Ord. No. 1691, 11-27-2000) 
Sec. 48-1243. - Structural requirements, maintenance and illumination. 
(a)  No sign or sign structure shall be erected unless it complies with the applicable requirements of the state building code and chapter 6. 
(b)  All signs and sign structures shall be maintained in good repair and in a safe and secure condition. A sign or sign structure found by the city to be unsafe or insecure may be deemed a public nuisance, subject to the removal provisions of this article. 
(c)  All signs and sign structures shall be such that each sign information item is clearly legible. A sign found by the city to show clear evidence of deterioration, including rust, faded colors, discoloration, holes and missing parts or information items, may be deemed a public nuisance, subject to the removal provisions of this division. 
(d)  All sign illumination shall be by means of internal light sources or by external, shielded light sources. No illuminated sign shall be located within or closer than 50 feet to a residential district, except a sign under 24 square feet in size which is illuminated by shielded, external white light sources. 
(Code 1973, § 81-66; Code 1982, § 38-35(art. I(g)); Ord. No. 627; Ord. No. 763; Ord. No. 838; Ord. No. 1115, 7-22-1985; Ord. No. 1185, 5-11-1987; Ord. No. 1401, 5-26-1992; Ord. No. 1501, 2-27-1995; Ord. No. 1565, 1-13-1997; Ord. No. 1633, 2-22-1999; Ord. No. 1691, 11-27-2000) 
Sec. 48-1244. - Nonconforming signs and sign structures. 
    Nonconforming signs may remain except as qualified, as follows: 
(1)  Other than sign maintenance, no nonconforming sign shall be reconstructed, remodeled, relocated, changed in size or content to show a new trade name, different words, letters or numbers, new design, different colors or different logo, unless such action will make the sign conforming in all respects. 
(2)  Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prevent keeping in good repair a nonconforming sign, and/or sign structure, including maintenance, repainting, and replacement of broken or deteriorated parts of the sign itself. Supporting structures for nonconforming signs shall not be replaced, unless such replacement will make the sign and sign structure conforming in all respects. 
(3)  A nonconforming sign or sign structure that is destroyed or damaged by any casualty may be restored within six months after such destruction or damage only after the owner has shown that the damage did not exceed 50 percent of the appraised value of the sign. If such sign or sign structure is destroyed or damaged to an extent exceeding 50 percent, it shall be removed and shall not be reconstructed or replaced unless such action makes the sign and sign structure conforming in all respects. 
(4)  A nonconforming sign or sign structure shall be removed if the building containing the use to which the sign is accessory is demolished or destroyed to an extent exceeding 50 percent of the building's appraised value. 
(5)  Any nonconforming sign for which a permit was issued prior to January 1, 1981, shall be deemed a public nuisance, subject to the removal provisions of this article. 
a.  If a nonconforming sign has more than one permit, the permit last issued shall be used to determine the date of removal. 
b.  Under all circumstances, the zoning administrator shall provide at least 180 days' written notice to the owner of a nonconforming sign, prior to the date on which the sign is to be removed. 
c.  Any pending appeal of the zoning administrator's notice shall delay the effective date of the notice until the appeal is decided. Any such appeal shall be filed within 30 days of delivery of the notice. 
(Code 1973, § 81-66; Code 1982, § 38-35(art. I(h)); Ord. No. 627; Ord. No. 763; Ord. No. 838; Ord. No. 1115, 7-22-1985; Ord. No. 1185, 5-11-1987; Ord. No. 1401, 5-26-1992; Ord. No. 1501, 2-27-1995; Ord. No. 1565, 1-13-1997; Ord. No. 1633, 2-22-1999; Ord. No. 1691, 11-27-2000) 
Sec. 48-1245. - Removal of signs. 
(a)  Responsibility. The responsibility for removal of any sign or sign structure shall rest jointly and severally with the sign permittee, the sign owner, the owner of the premises on which the sign is located, and the occupant of the premises on which the sign is located. 
(b)  Removal procedures. Any sign or sign structure which is or which becomes a prohibited sign or sign structure, the permit for which has been revoked, or which is otherwise found to be a public nuisance or in violation of the regulations of this article shall be subject to removal. The zoning administrator shall give written violation notice to the permittee or owner. Delivery of such notice to the place of business shall constitute constructive notice to the owner. If the permittee or owner fails to remove the sign or sign structure or to alter it to comply with the requirements of this article within 30 days for permanent signs or ten days for temporary signs from the delivery of the notification, such sign or sign structure may be removed by the city. The provisions of this subsection notwithstanding, the city may cause any such sign or sign structure which is located in a public right-of-way, or which, in its opinion, constitutes an immediate hazard or peril to persons or property, to be removed summarily and without prior notice. 
(c)  Charge by the city. The city manager or designee shall levy the cost of moving, removing, correcting, storing or doing work on a sign or sign structure against any one of the following, each of which shall be jointly and severally liable for said charges: the sign permittee, the sign owner, the owner of the premises on which the sign is located, the person responsible for its erection, and the occupant of the premises on which the sign is located. 
(d)  Removed signs to be stored. A sign or sign structure removed by the city shall be held no less than 30 days by the city during which period it may be recovered by the owner upon paying the city for cost of removal and storage, and upon payment of any imposed fine. If not recovered within the 30-day period, the sign or sign structure is hereby declared abandoned and title shall be vested in the city for disposal in any manner permitted by law. 
(e)  Special remedies. Every sign or sign structure declared to be a public nuisance may be abated, enjoined, restrained, or removed by the city in any available legal proceeding or court action in addition to the other remedies specified by this article. 
(f)  Liens. Whenever the city, in the enforcement of the provisions of this article, incurs any expense which cannot be collected through the provisions of this article, a lien may be placed upon the property on which the offending sign is or was located. Such lien shall be collected in the same manner as a tax lien. 
(Code 1973, § 81-66; Code 1982, § 38-35(art. I(i)); Ord. No. 627; Ord. No. 763; Ord. No. 838; Ord. No. 1115, 7-22-1985; Ord. No. 1185, 5-11-1987; Ord. No. 1401, 5-26-1992; Ord. No. 1501, 2-27-1995; Ord. No. 1565, 1-13-1997; Ord. No. 1633, 2-22-1999; Ord. No. 1691, 11-27-2000) 
Secs. 48-1246-48-1263. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITTED SIGNS BY USE AND DISTRICT 

Sec. 48-1264. - Residential districts, R-1A, R-1B, R-TH, R-C and R-M. 
(a)  Signs permitted in R districts. The following signs shall be permitted in all R districts. See section 48-1269 for maximum permitted number of sign information items for each sign. 
(1)  Signs for a public, charitable, or institutional use. Not more than two signs with a total area not exceeding 24 square feet shall be permitted. 
(2)  Subdivision/apartment identification signs. At each street or driveway entrance to a residential subdivision or apartment project, a single identification sign shall be permitted. The area of each sign shall not exceed 15 square feet. 
(3)  Multifamily rental office sign. One sign with a maximum area of three square feet shall be permitted. 
(4)  Advertising sign for a tourist home, boardinghouse and/or roominghouse. One sign not exceeding three square feet shall be permitted. 
(5)  Advertising signs for commercial uses permitted as accessory uses in a multifamily development. Advertising signs shall be permitted in accordance with the conditions set forth in the special use permit granted for that use. 
(b)  Other regulations for freestanding signs. No permitted freestanding sign in a residential district shall be closer than five feet to a public right-of-way or closer than ten feet to an adjacent property line. Such signs shall have a maximum height of eight feet. The vision clearance requirements of article V, division 6 of this chapter shall apply. 
(c)  Other regulations for wall signs. Sign height shall not exceed 15 feet. 
(Code 1973, § 81-66; Code 1982, § 38-35(art. II(j)); Ord. No. 627; Ord. No. 763; Ord. No. 838; Ord. No. 1115, 7-22-1985; Ord. No. 1185, 5-11-1987; Ord. No. 1401, 5-26-1992; Ord. No. 1501, 2-27-1995; Ord. No. 1565, 1-13-1997; Ord. No. 1633, 2-22-1999; Ord. No. 1691, 11-27-2000) 
Sec. 48-1265. - B-1, B-2, B-3 and M districts. 
    Signs permitted in R districts shall also be permitted. See section 48-1269 for maximum permitted aggregate sign area, and special provisions for increased sign area and maximum permitted number of sign information items for each sign. 
(1)  Wall signs. Up to two wall signs shall be permitted for each ground floor business which has frontage on a street. In a multistory structure, no business other than a ground floor or second story business shall have a wall sign, except that the owner of the structure may provide that businesses on other floors may utilize one of the signs and a portion of the sign area otherwise provided herein for a ground floor or second story business. 
a.  Sign area. The total area of the wall signs for each business shall not exceed one square foot per linear foot of building frontage occupied by the business up to a maximum of 50 square feet. For businesses which have frontage on more than one street, the size of each wall sign on any one street shall be limited by the amount of building frontage that the business occupies on that street. 
b.  Location. On single-story buildings, no wall sign shall be higher than 20 feet above grade, nor shall such sign project above the wall, parapet wall, mansard wall or canopy to which it is attached. Such height shall be the minimum required to ensure visibility and shall in no case be higher than one foot below the top of the wall. On buildings with two stories or fewer, no wall sign shall be located higher than one foot below the top of the wall or cornice. On buildings with more than two stories, no wall sign shall be located higher than the bottom of the third floor windows. No wall sign shall obscure any part of a cornice, window or other architectural opening (whether used or not), nor the sill, frame, or headstone of such openings. 
c.  Business in a shopping center, when street setback exceeds 70 feet. Each wall sign for each business shall not exceed two square feet per linear foot of the building frontage occupied by the business, up to a maximum of 40 square feet, plus one square foot per each additional two linear feet of building frontage up to a maximum sign area of 60 square feet. Total sign area for each such business shall not exceed the aggregate sign area permitted by section 48-1269. 
(2)  Projecting signs. One projecting sign is permitted for each ground floor business, as follows. 
a.  Area. Ten square feet shall be the maximum per business. 
b.  Location. On a single-story building, no projecting sign shall be higher than 15 feet, nor shall such sign project above the cornice line of its supporting building or above the parapet wall or mansard wall to which it is attached. On a multistory building, no projecting sign shall extend above the lower sill line of the second floor windows. No projecting sign shall interfere with any part of a window or other architectural opening. 
No projecting sign shall extend more than four feet from the wall of its supporting structure. Such sign may extend over a public or private sidewalk, but shall have not less than ten feet of clearance below the sign. 
(3)  Freestanding signs. One freestanding sign shall be permitted for each commercial structure, shopping center, multi-tenancy structure, office complex, mixed-use development, or group of contiguous buildings under one ownership or control. A shopping center shall be permitted two freestanding signs, if the frontage of the property exceeds a total of 400 feet on one street. A freestanding sign shall contain only the name of the development and/or the names of no more than three businesses. A freestanding sign serving three or less businesses shall not be counted in the aggregate number of signs permitted for each business. 
a.  Area. Only one street frontage shall be used for calculating sign area. The area of a freestanding sign shall not exceed one square foot for every four feet of street frontage, up to a maximum of 40 square feet. For shopping centers with more than 400 feet of frontage on a single street, the freestanding sign may be increased to 60 square feet in area, or alternatively, a second freestanding sign shall be permitted, with a maximum of 40 square feet. The area of the second freestanding sign shall not be counted toward the aggregate sign area for any business. 
b.  Location. A freestanding sign shall be located along the street frontage used for calculating the sign's area. The minimum distance from an existing right-of-way line shall be five feet for any sign up to 30 square feet in area, eight feet for a sign over 30 and up to 50 square feet in area, and 12 feet for a larger sign; provided, however, if such sign is located within a planned right-of-way, the owner shall agree to relocate such sign at his own expense when the right-of-way is acquired by a public agency. No part of a freestanding sign shall be located closer than: five feet from a side lot line of a property not served by the sign; five feet to any building or other structure; or three feet to any vehicular use area, unless it is protected from damage by vehicles. No part of any freestanding sign shall be located so as to block the view of drivers entering or leaving the public right-of-way as defined in article V, division 6 of this chapter. No part of any freestanding sign shall be located within 30 feet of a residential district except signs which meet the size requirements of signs in the transitional district. 
c.  Height. Maximum permitted sign height shall vary in accordance with sign area, as follows: 
Sign Area 
(in square feet) Maximum Permitted 
Height (in feet) Up to 10 8 Over 10 and up to 20 10 Over 20 and up to 30 12 Over 30 and up to 40 14 Over 40 16  
(4)  Window signs, permanent. One permanent window sign shall be permitted on each side of a building on which a ground floor business has street frontage. 
a.  Area. No window sign shall exceed 25 percent of the total area of the window pane on which, or behind which it is located. In addition, sign area per business shall not exceed ten square feet on any street frontage. A single sign shall be permitted to extend over more than one pane of glass. 
b.  Location. No permitted window sign shall be located in a window above the ground floor. 
(5)  Arcade signs. One permanent arcade sign shall be permitted for each ground floor business that has an entrance onto an arcade. Such sign shall not exceed five square feet in area. 
(6)  Sandwich signs. One sandwich sign shall be permitted for each ground floor business for which a freestanding sign is not permitted. Each sign shall be professionally designed and constructed and continually maintained. 
a.  Area and dimensions. The area of each face of the sign shall not exceed ten square feet. The dimensions of each face shall not exceed 21/2 feet in width or four feet in height. No extensions or projections shall be permitted. 
b.  Location. The location of a sandwich sign shall be designated in the permit. Such sign may be located no less than five feet from a side lot line and 15 feet from the front of the building. Such sign may be located in a public right-of-way, provided at least four feet of clear sidewalk width is maintained. No such signs shall be located in a vehicle use area or in a vision clearance area. 
c.  Sign information items. Sign information items shall be permanently inscribed on both faces of the sign and shall not be changed unless provided for in the permit. 
d.  Hours of display. A sandwich sign shall be displayed only when the business is open. 
e.  Stability. A sandwich sign shall be weighted or otherwise secured to reduce susceptibility to winds. 
f.  Permits subject to revocation. In addition to other applicable provisions concerning permit revocation, the permit for a sandwich sign located in a public right-of-way may be permanently or temporarily revoked without notice, if the city manager or designee finds that the sign is a public nuisance or if the sign is in the way of city operations or if the sign is not properly maintained. 
(7)  Temporary signs. All temporary signs other than exempt temporary signs shall require a permit. Such signs shall be displayed for a period not to exceed 60 days in any one calendar year. One temporary sign, not to exceed 20 square feet, shall be permitted. 
(8)  Large helium or hot air balloons. Such balloons shall be at least ten feet in diameter, shall be no higher than 100 feet from the roof to which it is attached, shall require a permit, and shall be permitted for a period not to exceed three days and shall be used to advertise special events or promotions only. 
(9)  Pedestrian-oriented signs. One sign selected from the types set forth below shall be permitted for each business in a multiple-tenancy development or shopping center, provided such signs are oriented toward pedestrians on the premises and are not designed or located to be read from a public street: 
a.  A permanent wall sign for each exterior building entrance serving the public but not fronting on a street; provided the area of the sign does not exceed ten square feet; and provided the sign is located over or beside the entrance and meets the location criteria for permitted wall signs; 
b.  A permanent window sign for each ground floor business where such window does not front on a street; provided the area of the sign does not exceed six square feet or 25 percent of the area of the window to which it is affixed, whichever is less; and provided the sign meets the location criteria for permitted window signs; 
c.  A permanent projecting sign for each exterior building entrance serving the public but not fronting on a street; provided the area of the sign does not exceed three square feet; and provided the sign meets the location criteria for permitted projecting signs; 
d.  A permanent arcade sign for each exterior building entrance serving the public but not fronting on a street; provided the area of the sign does not exceed three square feet; or 
e.  A permanent freestanding sign not readable from a street; provided the area of the sign does not exceed six square feet and the height does not exceed three feet. 
The area of such pedestrian-oriented signs shall not be counted in the aggregate permitted sign area for any business, and the signs shall not be counted in the maximum number of permitted signs for any business. 
(10)  Building identification signs for buildings over four stories. One building identification sign of a horizontal orientation, up to a maximum of 80 square feet in area, designating only the name of the building or one corporate identity; shall be located between one to eight feet below the top of the cornice on one side of the building which faces a street front. Building identification signs shall be composed of individual stylized letters and shall not count toward the number of permitted signs and the total permitted aggregate sign area. The sign area will be calculated on the same ratio as wall signs per zoning districts up to a maximum of 80 square feet in area. 
(Code 1973, § 81-66; Code 1982, § 38-35(art. II(k)); Ord. No. 627; Ord. No. 763; Ord. No. 838; Ord. No. 1115, 7-22-1985; Ord. No. 1185, 5-11-1987; Ord. No. 1401, 5-26-1992; Ord. No. 1501, 2-27-1995; Ord. No. 1565, 1-13-1997; Ord. No. 1633, 2-22-1999; Ord. No. 1691, 11-27-2000; Ord. No. 1947, 2-8-2016) 
Sec. 48-1266. - Transitional districts, T-1 and T-2. 
    All signs permitted in R districts shall be permitted. See section 48-1269 for permitted aggregate sign area. 
(1)  Wall sign. One wall sign shall be permitted for each ground floor business, subject to the same conditions set forth in section 48-1265, except that the maximum sign area shall not exceed ten square feet. In the event a ground floor business chooses not to utilize a freestanding sign, projecting sign, window sign or arcade sign, the maximum area of the wall sign shall not exceed 15 square feet. 
(2)  Projecting sign. One projecting sign shall be permitted for each business, subject to the same conditions as set forth in section 48-1265. 
(3)  Freestanding sign. One freestanding sign shall be permitted for each building, subject to the same conditions as set forth in section 48-1265, except that the maximum sign area shall not exceed ten square feet and the sign height shall not exceed eight feet. 
(4)  Window sign. One permanent window sign shall be permitted for each business, subject to the same conditions as set forth in section 48-1265, except that the maximum sign area shall not exceed ten square feet. 
(5)  Arcade sign. One arcade sign shall be permitted for each business, subject to the same conditions as set forth in section 48-1265. 
(6)  Temporary signs. Temporary signs other than exempt temporary window signs shall be permitted, subject to the same conditions as set forth in section 48-1265, except that no permitted temporary sign shall exceed ten square feet in area. 
(7)  Pedestrian-oriented signs. Pedestrian-oriented signs shall be permitted, subject to the same conditions as set forth in section 48-1265. 
(Code 1973, § 81-66; Code 1982, § 38-35(art. II(l)); Ord. No. 627; Ord. No. 763; Ord. No. 838; Ord. No. 1115, 7-22-1985; Ord. No. 1185, 5-11-1987; Ord. No. 1401, 5-26-1992; Ord. No. 1501, 2-27-1995; Ord. No. 1565, 1-13-1997; Ord. No. 1633, 2-22-1999; Ord. No. 1691, 11-27-2000) 
Sec. 48-1267. - Official design O-D district. 
    Sign regulations shall depend upon and be appropriate to the uses allowed in the municipal center area in subsection 48-586(1) and in the principal uses allowed in the historic area in subsection 48-586(2). 
(Code 1973, § 81-66; Code 1982, § 38-35(art. II(m)); Ord. No. 627; Ord. No. 763; Ord. No. 838; Ord. No. 1115, 7-22-1985; Ord. No. 1185, 5-11-1987; Ord. No. 1401, 5-26-1992; Ord. No. 1501, 2-27-1995; Ord. No. 1565, 1-13-1997; Ord. No. 1633, 2-22-1999; Ord. No. 1691, 11-27-2000) 
Sec. 48-1268. - Special regulations for certain uses and signs. 
    The following provisions apply to certain uses which require special regulation, due to their unique advertising needs or to site development that does not provide an adequate basis for normal sign regulation. See section 48-1269 for overall maximum sign area permitted. 
(1)  Parking lots. 
a.  Permitted sign types and information. Where a commercial parking lot is the principal use of a site, it shall be permitted one freestanding sign for each entrance plus one window or wall sign. 
b.  Sign area. The total area of all signs on the lot shall not exceed 50 square feet. 
c.  Location, height, and other conditions. In all respects, other than the special provisions described in this section, signs shall comply with the provisions of the category of wall, window or freestanding signs within which they fall, as well as all other provisions of this article. 
(2)  Temporary stands or temporary outdoor display area. 
a.  Number of signs. When temporary stands or temporary outdoor display areas are permitted, pursuant to section 48-868, up to three temporary signs shall be permitted on the same site as the temporary stand or display area, in addition to any other permitted signs on the site to advertise the products to be sold. 
b.  Area. The total area of a single sign shall not exceed 32 square feet, and the total area of all such signs shall not exceed 50 square feet. The area of these temporary signs shall not be counted toward the area permitted for permanent signs. 
c.  Location, height and other conditions. In all respects other than area and number of signs, the permitted temporary signs shall comply with the requirements for location, height and other conditions provided for permanent signs in commercial districts. 
d.  Price tags. The presence of price tags or other small descriptive notices not exceeding one square foot per item, attached to each item offered for sale, and intended to give information regarding the specific item offered for sale, shall not be considered as advertisement. No other price tag or advertising media shall be permitted. 
e.  Time limit. Signs for temporary stands or temporary outdoor display areas shall be permitted to remain only for the duration of the permit for the stand or display area. 
(Code 1973, § 81-66; Code 1982, § 38-35(art. II(n)); Ord. No. 627; Ord. No. 763; Ord. No. 838; Ord. No. 1115, 7-22-1985; Ord. No. 1185, 5-11-1987; Ord. No. 1401, 5-26-1992; Ord. No. 1501, 2-27-1995; Ord. No. 1565, 1-13-1997; Ord. No. 1633, 2-22-1999; Ord. No. 1691, 11-27-2000) 
Sec. 48-1269. - Sign information items; aggregate permitted sign area and number of signs. 
(a)  Permitted number of sign information items. The amount of information displayed on a permitted sign shall be regulated by limiting the number of sign information items in accordance with the schedule set forth as follows: 
(1)  Sign information items shall be counted in accordance with the following: 
a.  A word or word segment, if the entire word is absent. 
b.  A single name. 
c.  An initial or a single letter. 
d.  A design or graphic logo customarily used by the business on other advertising materials, such as letterhead. 
e.  A symbol, including, but not limited to, an arrow, star, ampersand, profile, or other graphic or pictorial shape or outline. 
f.  An address, but counting each street number and name as a separate item. 
g.  Each color (including black and white) not counting the first two. 
h.  The shape of the sign, counting a circle, oval, triangle or quadrangle as one item and all other shapes as two items. 
i.  A frame or decorative border surrounding the basic design, such as a colored border or wrought iron ornamentation. 
j.  A price, including the dollar or cent sign. 
k.  A telephone number shall count as one information item. 
The structure supporting the sign shall not count as a sign information item, unless it contains advertising material or is multicolored. 
(2)  Sign information items shall be counted and totaled for each sign face. The permitted number of sign information items shall be as follows: 
a.  For a permitted sign area of five or less square feet: five items. 
b.  For a permitted sign area over five square feet: one item per square foot of sign, up to a maximum of 15 items. 
(3)  The requirements of this section shall not apply to the following signs: 
a.  Any sign with a permit issued prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which these regulations are derived. 
b.  Theater signs with changeable information. 
c.  Temporary signs. 
d.  Exempt signs. 
(b)  Aggregate permitted sign area and maximum number of permitted signs. Within each district, a variety of signs shall be permitted for each business. For each business, the aggregate area and maximum number of all permitted permanent signs of whatever type shall be restricted to an overall maximum permitted area and number, except that permitted freestanding signs serving more than two businesses, pedestrian oriented signs, temporary signs and exempt signs shall be excluded from the calculations of both aggregate permitted sign area and maximum number of signs. Subject to the requirements contained in sections 48-1264 through 48-1267, the aggregate permitted sign area and maximum number of signs per business shall be limited in accordance with the following table: 
Zoning District/Use Aggregate Permitted 
Sign Area 
(square feet) Maximum Number 
of Signs Residential districts (R-1A, R-1B, R-C, R-M): All uses 30 4 Commercial and industrial districts (B-1, B-2, B-3, M-1): Single frontage business 100 3 Multiple frontage business 125 4 Transitional districts (T-1, T-2): Single frontage business 30 3 Multiple frontage business 40 4  
(Code 1973, § 81-66; Code 1982, § 38-35(art. II(o)); Ord. No. 627; Ord. No. 763; Ord. No. 838; Ord. No. 1115, 7-22-1985; Ord. No. 1185, 5-11-1987; Ord. No. 1401, 5-26-1992; Ord. No. 1501, 2-27-1995; Ord. No. 1565, 1-13-1997; Ord. No. 1633, 2-22-1999; Ord. No. 1691, 11-27-2000) 
Secs. 48-1270-48-1296. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 48-1297. - Sign permit procedures. 
(a)  Application. Prior to the alteration or installation of a sign or sign structure that requires a permit, an application shall be submitted to the zoning administrator containing the following information: 
(1)  Drawings to scale, depicting the design of each sign face and sign structure, with dimensions, total area as defined by this article, sign height, color scheme, and details of structure, materials and lighting. 
(2)  A plan of the property, drawn to scale, depicting the proposed location of the sign and sign structure in relation to existing and proposed buildings, streets and signs. 
(3)  Samples or pictures of sign facing material and colors. 
(4)  Elevations of building facades, drawn to scale, showing the principal facade features and the proposed locations of any wall signs, window signs, projecting signs and arcade signs, or, alternatively, photographs showing the same information. 
(5)  Consent of the owner, or lessee (or authorized agent) of the building, structure or land to which or on which the structure is to be erected. 
(6)  Consent in writing that city officials may enter upon the premises to enforce the provisions of this article including inspection and that the city manager or designee may remove and dispose of any sign that violates the provisions of the article which is not removed by the permittee, owner or occupant of the premises, as required by this article. 
(7)  Consent in writing to indemnify and to hold the city harmless from any and all damages, liability, judgments, costs or expense which the city may insure or suffer as to such signs or advertising structures. A bond or liability and property damage insurance policy approved by the city manager or designee may be required. 
(8)  The license number of the contractor who will erect the sign. 
(b)  Fees. A fee shall accompany the application, in an amount to be determined from time to time by the city council. Such fee shall be nonrefundable, even if the permit is subsequently denied, continued, revoked or terminated for any reason. 
(c)  Application process. Upon receipt of a complete application for a sign permit, the zoning administrator shall schedule the application for review by the architectural advisory board, if required. Following any review, the zoning administrator shall forward the application to the division of inspections for review. If required, separate building, electrical or other permits shall be obtained prior to issuance of the sign permit by the zoning administrator. 
(d)  Architectural advisory board review. The architectural advisory board shall review all applications for permanent permitted signs. Such review shall consider the proposed sign information items, colors, design, location, lighting, materials, textures, and appropriateness of the proposed signs in relation to other signs and structures on the premises and nearby. The board shall recommend to the applicant and zoning administrator such modifications or adjustments it determines necessary to carry out the intent of this article; the architectural advisory board is advisory only. The applicant and zoning administrator shall consider these recommendations in the final disposition of an application. The zoning administrator shall place any applications for signs that comply with all requirements of this article, and which do not involve a variance on the board's consent calendar, thereby minimizing the board's review of complying signs and expediting the application process for the applicant. Any member may remove an application from the consent calendar for discussion. A majority vote shall be required either to recommend approval or to defer action on such application until the board's next meeting. 
(e)  Permit numbers. Each sign permit issued shall be numbered in a manner prescribed by the zoning administrator. The owner of the sign shall post the permit number on the sign or sign structure, in a location acceptable to the zoning administrator. 
(f)  Conditional variances. The board of zoning appeals, pursuant to the same powers and authority and in accordance with the same requirements and procedures of section 48-172(6) and (7) and section 48-173(a) and (c) may grant conditional variances; provided all variances granted shall be in harmony with the intent, spirit and purpose specified in this article. The architectural advisory board shall review all such applications for conditional variances prior to consideration by the board of zoning appeals and shall report in writing to the board of zoning appeals all recommendations, annotations and stipulations. In granting a variance, the board of zoning appeals may attach such conditions regarding the location, duration, character or other features of the sign as it may deem advisable to further the purpose of this chapter. 
(g)  Revocation of sign permit. The zoning administrator may revoke any permit issued under this article in any instance in which the sign or sign structure is found to be in violation of any provision of this article, unless the permittee promptly corrects such violation. If the work authorized under a sign permit has not been completed within six months for an existing business and 12 months for new construction or major renovation after date of issuance, said permit shall be revoked. Any sign or sign structure, the permit for which has been revoked, shall be subject to the removal provisions of this article. 
(h)  Liability for damages. The provisions of this article or the issuance of any sign permit shall not be construed as relieving or limiting any liability of the person erecting, owning or maintaining any sign and/or advertising structure from personal injury or property damage; nor shall this article or the issuance of any sign or building permit impose upon the city or its officials or employees any responsibility or liability to any person. 
(Code 1973, § 81-66; Code 1982, § 38-35(art. III(p)); Ord. No. 627; Ord. No. 763; Ord. No. 838; Ord. No. 1115, 7-22-1985; Ord. No. 1185, 5-11-1987; Ord. No. 1401, 5-26-1992; Ord. No. 1501, 2-27-1995; Ord. No. 1565, 1-13-1997; Ord. No. 1633, 2-22-1999; Ord. No. 1691, 11-27-2000) 
Sec. 48-1298. - Right of entry for inspection. 
    The division of inspections and/or zoning administrator shall make inspections and tests necessary to obtain compliance with provisions of this article. The inspector shall always present proper identification to and request entry from the owner or occupants of the premises. If entry is refused, the inspector, showing reasonable cause to believe the existence of a violation, shall apply to the municipal court for a warrant authorizing entry. 
(Code 1973, § 81-66; Code 1982, § 38-35(art. III(q)); Ord. No. 627; Ord. No. 763; Ord. No. 838; Ord. No. 1115, 7-22-1985; Ord. No. 1185, 5-11-1987; Ord. No. 1401, 5-26-1992; Ord. No. 1501, 2-27-1995; Ord. No. 1565, 1-13-1997; Ord. No. 1633, 2-22-1999; Ord. No. 1691, 11-27-2000) 
Sec. 48-1299. - Delivery of notice and order. 
    The notice and order required by this article shall be given to the persons specified by this article and/or to the owner or occupant of the premises on which the sign is located as shown on the city tax assessment records or on the sign permit. Such notice, in writing, may be served in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(Code 1973, § 81-66; Code 1982, § 38-35(art. III(r)); Ord. No. 627; Ord. No. 763; Ord. No. 838; Ord. No. 1115, 7-22-1985; Ord. No. 1185, 5-11-1987; Ord. No. 1401, 5-26-1992; Ord. No. 1501, 2-27-1995; Ord. No. 1565, 1-13-1997; Ord. No. 1633, 2-22-1999; Ord. No. 1691, 11-27-2000) 
Sec. 48-1300. - Penalty. 
    Any violation of any provision or requirement of this article shall be subject to the penalty specified in this Code. A fine as required by law may be imposed in addition to the charge for cost of removing or storing signs and/or sign structures by the city. 
(Code 1973, § 81-66; Code 1982, § 38-35(art. III(s)); Ord. No. 627; Ord. No. 763; Ord. No. 838; Ord. No. 1115, 7-22-1985; Ord. No. 1185, 5-11-1987; Ord. No. 1401, 5-26-1992; Ord. No. 1501, 2-27-1995; Ord. No. 1565, 1-13-1997; Ord. No. 1633, 2-22-1999; Ord. No. 1691, 11-27-2000) 
Sec. 48-1301. - Rights of appeal to the board of zoning appeals. 
    Any person who has been ordered by the zoning administrator to incur an expense for the alteration or removal of a sign or sign structure or any person whose application for a permit for a sign has been refused or disapproved may appeal to the board of zoning appeals by serving written notice to the zoning administrator within 30 days of the issuance of the order complained of. Such appeal shall be transmitted to the board of zoning appeals as provided elsewhere in this chapter. Upon the filing of a notice of appeal, the zoning administrator shall take no further action with regard to the sign and/or sign structure involved until the final decision of the board of zoning appeals has been rendered. However, if the city finds that the sign and/or sign structure involved, by reason of condition, location or nature, presents an immediate and serious danger to the public, the city shall proceed immediately as provided in the section on removal of signs. 
(Code 1973, § 81-66; Code 1982, § 38-35(art. III(t)); Ord. No. 627; Ord. No. 763; Ord. No. 838; Ord. No. 1115, 7-22-1985; Ord. No. 1185, 5-11-1987; Ord. No. 1401, 5-26-1992; Ord. No. 1501, 2-27-1995; Ord. No. 1565, 1-13-1997; Ord. No. 1633, 2-22-1999; Ord. No. 1691, 11-27-2000) 
Sec. 48-1302. - Requirements for sign contractors. 
(a)  Sign contractors to be licensed. No person or corporation shall engage or continue in the principal business of erecting, maintaining or replacing any sign and/or advertising structure or perform any such acts for compensation without first having obtained a license for such work from the division of inspections. Such licenses shall be subject to renewal annually. However, nothing in this section shall require a sign contractor or sign maker to obtain a license prior to contracting for sign alteration, construction, erection, painting, renewal or repair where the total contract prices for all work done within the city in any calendar year is less than $1,000.00. 
(1)  An annual license fee in an amount determined from time to time by resolution of the city council shall be assessed for each license issued or renewed under the provisions of this article. 
(2)  The division of inspections shall determine prior to the issuance of the license required by this article, the general competence of each applicant by means of written examination. Such examination shall include questions relating to applicable city and state laws regulating signs and generally accepted construction procedures. 
(3)  Application for licenses or renewal of licenses shall be made on forms furnished by the division of inspections and shall contain such information as the division of inspections may require. 
(4)  The division of inspections shall have the right, after 30 days' notice in writing to the licensee, to revoke any license granted upon repayment of a proportionate part of the license fee where it shall find that application information is knowingly false or misleading or that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this section unless such licensee shall, before the expiration of such 30 days, correct such information and comply with the provisions of this article. 
(5)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to require the manufacturer, assembler or maker of prefabricated or preassembled sign parts, who does not make or store these parts or materials within the city, to be licensed; provided, however, that when such vendors perform operations other than sales within the city limits, they shall be licensed as required by this article. 
(b)  Bonds and insurance. Every applicant for a license required by this article shall, before such a license is granted, file with the division of inspections, a continuing bond in the total sum of $1,000.00 executed by the applicant and a surety company to be approved by the city manager or designee. Said bond shall ensure the faithful observance of the provisions of this article and all amendments, and of all state laws and this Code relating to signs and/or advertising structures, and shall indemnify and save harmless the city and its officials from any and all claims, damages, liabilities, losses, action suits or judgments which may be presented, sustained, brought or secured against the city or any of its officials by reason of the granting of said licensee or on account of the erection, maintenance alteration or removal of any sign or by reason of any accident caused by or resulting therefrom. 
(Code 1973, § 81-66; Code 1982, § 38-35(art. III(u)); Ord. No. 627; Ord. No. 763; Ord. No. 838; Ord. No. 1115, 7-22-1985; Ord. No. 1185, 5-11-1987; Ord. No. 1401, 5-26-1992; Ord. No. 1501, 2-27-1995; Ord. No. 1565, 1-13-1997; Ord. No. 1633, 2-22-1999; Ord. No. 1691, 11-27-2000) 
Secs. 48-1303-48-1332. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNIT PROGRAM[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Affordable housing, Code of Virginia, §§ 15.2-2201, 15.2-2223, 15.2-2224, 15.2-2283. 15.2-2286, 15.2-2303.2, 15.2-2304, 15.2-2305. 

Sec. 48-1333. - Purpose. 
    The affordable dwelling unit program is established to assist in the provision of housing to persons of low and moderate income by promoting: the development of a full range of housing choices; and the construction and continued existence of dwelling units which are affordable for purchase by households whose income is at least 50 percent and no more than 80 percent and affordable for rental by households whose income is no more than 60 percent of the median income for the Washington Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area (PMSA). The following preferences shall apply in establishing the order of priority for program participants: 
(1)  Seniors and persons with disabilities who live in the city; 
(2)  Nonseniors who live in the city; 
(3)  Seniors and persons with disabilities who work for the city or schools; 
(4)  Nonseniors who work for the city or schools; 
(5)  Seniors and persons with disabilities who work in the city; 
(6)  Nonseniors who work in the city; 
(7)  Seniors and persons with disabilities who do not live in the city; and 
(8)  Nonseniors who do not live in the city. 
Additional guidelines for the administration and regulation of this program are contained in the document titled, Affordable Dwelling Unit Program-Official Administrative Procedures and Regulations. 
(Code 1982, § 38-43(a); Ord. No. 1710, 10-22-2001) 
Sec. 48-1334. - Applicability. 
    The affordable dwelling unit program may apply to any site, or portion thereof, at one location which is the subject of an application for rezoning, special exception, site plan, or subdivision; which proposes the construction of residential dwelling units; and which is located in the R-C, R-M, R-TH, T-1, or M-1 zoning districts; in the B-1, B-2, and B-3 zoning districts only through the special exception process; and/or in any mixed-use redevelopment (MUR) designated areas. The following density bonus provision and/or fee deferral is applicable only once during the development process, for example, at the time of rezoning or special exception or site plan or subdivision. 
(Code 1982, § 38-43(b); Ord. No. 1710, 10-22-2001) 
Sec. 48-1335. - Affordable dwelling unit residential density bonuses, fee deferrals, and related requirements. 
    One or a combination of the following options, subsection (1) and/or (2) of this section, is available to applicants of residential development projects who choose to participate in the affordable dwelling unit program: 
(1)  Rezoning, special exception, site plan, or subdivision applicants may incorporate a maximum of a 20 percent increase in the allowed density of the residential component of a proposed project, including the required number of affordable dwelling units, in exchange for incorporating a minimum of 121/2 percent of the total proposed residential units as affordable dwelling units. Allowed density refers to that density that is defined within either the underlying zoning district regulations or within the mixed-use redevelopment (MUR) zoning option as defined by article V, division 5 of this chapter. This residential density bonus may also be applied at less than 20 percent in exchange for a lesser percentage of affordable dwelling units. See subsection (3)a of this section for the sliding scale. In addition to a residential density bonus, applicants who include the construction of affordable dwelling units in a project are eligible, on a sliding scale, for development fee deferrals for that project. See subsection (3)b of this section for this sliding scale. 
(2)  Rezoning, special exception, site plan, or subdivision applicants may incorporate a maximum of a 20 percent increase in the allowed density of the residential component of a proposed project, including the required number of affordable dwelling units, in exchange for a cash contribution to the city Affordable Housing Fund. In the event that the cash in lieu of units option is chosen by the applicant, the amount of such contribution shall be equal to 100 percent of the cost of land and the cost of constructing the total number of required affordable dwelling units, that are displayed in the sliding scale in subsection (3)a of this section. The decision to pay cash in lieu of providing the units shall be made at the time of approval of the rezoning, special exception, site plan, or preliminary subdivision (by right), as applicable. Such cash must be paid prior to the issuance of the first building permit. All cash shall be calculated in terms of current dollars, adjusted by the Consumer Price Index, at the time the actual contribution is officially transferred to the city. In the event that an applicant chooses to provide a combination of cash and affordable units to meet the requirements of this article, the cash contribution shall be equivalent to 100 percent of the cost of land and the cost of constructing the total number of required affordable dwelling units less the number of affordable units to be constructed on the applicable site. If an applicant chooses to provide any cash in lieu of constructing affordable units, that applicant shall not be eligible for the fee deferrals described in subsection (3) of this section. 
(3)  Sliding scale residential density bonus and development fee deferrals and the related requirements. The following table demonstrates the sliding scale percentage of affordable dwelling units required, depending on the percentage of residential density bonus or fee deferral sought. Only applicants who construct affordable dwelling units and offer no cash in lieu of construction shall be eligible for the fee deferrals described in the table in this subsection. Development fees may be deferred and shall be paid to the city before the first occupancy permit may be granted. Development fees that may be deferred include site plan, rezoning, lot consolidation, subdivision, or special exception applications fees and water and sewer hookup fees. All of these fees shall be calculated and a fee deferral form shall be signed by the applicant at the beginning of each phase of the development process, e.g. rezoning, special exception, site plan, building plans, etc. 
a.  Residential density bonus. 
Percentage Residential 
Density Bonus Percentage ADUs 
Required 0.00 0.000 1.00 0.625 2.00 1.250 3.00 1.875 4.00 2.500 5.00 3.125 6.00 3.750 7.00 4.375 8.00 5.000 9.00 5.625 10.00 6.250 11.00 6.875 12.00 7.500 13.00 8.125 14.00 8.750 15.00 9.375 16.00 10.000 17.00 10.625 18.00 11.250 19.00 11.875 20.00 12.500  
b.  Development fee deferrals. 
Percentage Fee 
Deferral Percentage ADUs 
Required 0.0 0.000 5.0 0.625 10.0 1.250 15.0 1.875 20.0 2.500 25.0 3.125 30.0 3.750 35.0 4.375 40.0 5.000 45.0 5.625 50.0 6.250 55.0 6.875 60.0 7.500 65.0 8.125 70.0 8.750 75.0 9.375 80.0 10.000 85.0 10.625 90.0 11.250 95.0 11.875 100.0 12.500  
Note- When the appropriate required percentage of affordable dwelling units produces a fractional number, the number shall be rounded to the next higher integer at or above 0.5 and shall be rounded to the next lower integer below 0.5. 
c.  When an applicant utilizes the mixed-use redevelopment (MUR) option, described in article V, division 5, with the affordable dwelling unit program described herein, and the maximum allowable floor area ratio (FAR) for the specific MUR area is achieved through the project, then an increase of ten percent to the maximum allowable FAR shall be permitted. This ten percent density bonus must be utilized in proportion to the required ratio of uses described in section 48-1081. 
(Code 1982, § 38-43(c); Ord. No. 1710, 10-22-2001) 
Sec. 48-1336. - Designation of affordable units on plats. 
(a)  Approved site plans and/or record subdivision plats shall identify the specific number of for-sale units and/or percentage of units for rent that are to be regulated as affordable units, pursuant to this section. 
(1)  All plans or plats for developments containing affordable dwelling for-sale units shall identify specific units that are for sale or the percentage of units for rent under the affordable guidelines in this article. 
(2)  All site plans for developments containing affordable dwelling rental units shall include information concerning the number of each type of unit, by bedroom count, which shall be maintained as affordable. 
(b)  Specifications regarding dwelling dimensions and the number of bedrooms in all affordable units shall meet the requirements established by the city council or its designee. In general, dwelling dimensions and the number of bedrooms in an affordable unit should be comparable to equivalent market rate units on the subject parcel. 
(c)  Affordable dwelling units shall be of a building type and of an architectural style compatible with residential units permitted within the zoning district in which they are located and interspersed among market rate units in the proposed development. 
(Code 1982, § 38-43(d); Ord. No. 1710, 10-22-2001) 
Sec. 48-1337. - Timing of construction/availability of affordable units. 
    In a development which contains single-family attached or multifamily units, occupancy permits for no more than 50 percent of the market rate dwelling units shall be issued prior to the issuance of occupancy permits for 50 percent of the affordable dwelling units. Occupancy permits for no more than 75 percent of the market rate dwelling units shall be issued until occupancy permits have been issued for 100 percent of the affordable dwelling units for the development. 
(Code 1982, § 38-43(e); Ord. No. 1710, 10-22-2001) 
Sec. 48-1338. - Administration and regulation of the affordable dwelling unit program. 
    The city council or its designee may from time to time adopt regulations by resolution for the administration and enforcement of this program. The official regulations for this program are included in the document titled Affordable Dwelling Unit Program-Official Administrative Procedures and Regulations. 
(Code 1982, § 38-43(f); Ord. No. 1710, 10-22-2001) 
Sec. 48-1339. - Violations and penalties. 
    The following provisions shall apply whenever any person, whether owner, lessee, principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violates any provision of this article or regulations adopted pursuant thereto, or permits any such violation, or fails to comply with any of the requirements hereof. These regulations are contained in the document titled Affordable Dwelling Unit Program-Official Administrative Procedures and Regulations. 
(1)  Owners of affordable dwelling units who shall fail to submit executed affidavits or certifications, shall be fined $50.00 per day per unit, up to a maximum of $3,000.00 per unit, until such affidavit or certificate is filed, but only after written notice and a ten-day compliance period is provided. Fines levied pursuant to this section shall become liens upon the real property and shall accumulate interest at the judgment rate of interest. 
(2)  Tenants of affordable dwelling units who shall fail to submit executed affidavits or certifications, shall be subject to lease termination and eviction procedures, as provided in the Code of Virginia. 
(3)  Owners and tenants of affordable dwelling units who shall falsely swear or who shall execute an affidavit or certification knowing the statements contained to be false shall be guilty of a class II misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine up to $1,000.00. 
a.  Fines levied against owners, pursuant to this section shall become liens upon the real property and shall accumulate interest at the judgment rate of interest. 
b.  Tenants of affordable dwelling units who shall falsely swear or who shall execute an affidavit or certification knowing the statements contained therein to be false shall also be subject to lease termination and eviction procedures, as provided in the Code of Virginia. 
c.  Owners of individual affordable dwelling units who shall falsely swear that they continue to occupy their respective affordable dwelling unit as their primary domicile shall be subject to injunction or other suit, action or proceeding to require such owner to either sell the unit to someone who meets the eligibility requirements or to occupy such affordable dwelling unit as a domicile. 
(Code 1982, § 38-43(g); Ord. No. 1710, 10-22-2001) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1973 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1973 Code, as updated, which are included herein. Sections of the 1973 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1973 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1-1-5 1-1-1-5 1-6 2-58 1-7 1-12 1-8 2-1 1-9 2-21 1-10-1-14 2-23-2-27 2-1 2-90-2-95 2-7-2-10 2-137-2-140 3-2 14-20 3-3 14-22 3-4, 3-5 14-24, 14-25 4-1 4-1 4-2-4-5 4-4-4-7 4-10-4-12 4-37-4-39 4-13, 4-14 4-56, 4-57 4-15 4-40, 4-41 4-16, 4-17 4-73, 4-74 4-18, 4-19 4-76, 4-77 4-20 4-93-4-101 4-21-4-27 4-125-4-131 6-6 6-21 9-1 16-1 9-2 16-161 16-8-16-12 22-52-22-56 16-12, 16-13 22-57, 22-58 17-1 24-1 21-3-21-5 26-2-26-4 21-6, 21-7 26-17, 26-18 21-8-21-10 26-7-26-9 21-12 26-10 21-14, 21-15 26-12, 26-13 21-19 26-6 21-49-21-51 26-68-26-70 24-2, 24-3 28-21 24-5, 24-6 28-46, 28-47 24-7-24-20 28-68-28-81 24-21-24-25 28-85-28-89 24-27 28-90 28-152 24-28 28-91 24-29, 24-30 28-115, 28-116 24-32-24-36 28-117-28-121 24-39-24-41 28-147-28-149 24-44, 24-45 28-150, 28-151 24-48 28-153 24-51 28-154 24-55 28-155 24-67, 24-68 28-157, 28-158 25-1-25-8 14-127-14-134 25-10-25-18 14-135-14-143 26-1-26-3 8-160-8-162 26-5-26-17 8-193-8-205 29-1, 29-2 32-4, 32-5 29-3-29-5 32-8-32-10 29-6, 29-7 32-6, 32-7 31-1, 31-2 42-1 31-4, 31-5 42-2, 42-3 31-6, 31-7 42-25, 42-26 31-8-31-10 42-26-42-28 31-12, 31-13 42-29 31-14, 31-15 42-30, 42-31 31-16-31-18 42-32 31-19-31-24 42-33-42-38 31-25 42-88-42-93 31-26, 31-27 42-171, 42-172 31-28-31-31 42-173 31-32, 31-33 42-174, 42-175 31-34 42-179 31-35-31-38 42-176-42-179 33-1-33-17 36-1-36-17 33-18-33-26 36-38-36-46 33-27-33-31 36-66-36-70 36-1 40-16 36-2 40-31 36-3 40-52 36-4, 36-5 40-69, 40-70 36-6-36-12 40-88-40-94 36-13, 36-14 40-133, 40-134 36-18, 36-19 40-137 36-19 40-138 36-20 40-136 39-1-39-6 42-231-42-236 40-1-40-15 28-187-28-201 81-1, 81-2 48-1, 48-2 81-4 48-3 81-6 48-85-48-91 81-8 48-111-48-113 81-10 48-140-48-143 81-12 48-56-48-63 81-20-81-22 48-170-48-172 81-24 48-173 81-26 48-174 81-28 48-175 81-30, 81-31 48-204, 48-205 81-32 48-234-48-240 81-34 48-259-48-265 81-35 48-294-48-298 81-38 48-361-48-367 81-50 48-546-48-553 81-52 48-585-48-589 81-54 48-1101- 
48-1105 81-56 48-1134- 
48-1150 81-60 48-898 48-930-48-941 48-971, 48-972 48-1003- 
48-1005 81-61 48-1024- 
48-1027 81-62 48-1053- 
48-1055 81-66 48-1237- 
48-1245 48-1264- 
48-1269 48-1297- 
48-1302 81-68 48-868  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1982 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1982 Code, as updated through October 2, 2007, which are included herein. Sections of the 1982 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1982 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1-1-5 1-1-1-5 1-6 2-58 1-7 1-12 1-8 2-1 1-9 2-21 1-9.1 2-22 1-10-1-14 2-23-2-27 1-15(a), 1-15(b) 16-130, 16-131 1-16 1-13 1-17 16-2 2-1 2-119 2-2(a)-2-2(f) 2-90-2-95 2-3-2-6 2-137-2-140 2-7 2-210 3-2-3-7 14-20-14-25 3-10-3-14 14-26-14-30 4-1 4-1 4-1.1, 4-1.2 4-2, 4-3 4-2-4-5 4-4-4-7 4-10-4-12 4-37-4-39 4-13, 4-14 4-56, 4-57 4-15 4-40, 4-41 4-16, 4-17 4-73, 4-74 4-18, 4-19 4-76, 4-77 4-20 4-94 4-20(a) 4-93 4-20(c)-4-20(f) 4-95-4-98 4-20(g), (h) 4-99 4-20(i) 4-100 4-20(j) 4-101 4-21-4-27 4-125-4-131 4-36-4-38 4-161-4-163 6-1.1 6-19 6-1.11 6-20 6-3 6-21 6-105(c)- 
6-105(e) 42-116-42-118 6-106-6-112 42-150-42-156 7-11-7-19 10-19-10-27 7-20-7-27 10-58-10-65 7-28 10-89 8-1-8-6 6-48-6-53 9-1-9-12 14-88-14-99 10-1 16-1 10-2 16-161 10-3 16-24 10-4 16-23 10-5-10-9 16-54-16-58 10-11 16-90 12.1-2-12.1-5 8-272-8-275 12.1-6-12.1-9 8-299-8-302 12.1-10-12.1-19 8-323-8-332 12.1-20 8-276 12.1-21(a)-12.1-21(c) 8-378-8-380 12.1-22, 12.1-23 8-404, 8-405 13-1-13-8 34-1-34-8 16-4-16-9 22-19-22-24 16-10-16-17 22-52-22-59 16-18-16-38 22-77-22-97 16-40 22-98 16-41-16-50 22-127-22-136 17-1-17-7 24-1-24-7 18-1 40-456, 40-457 18-2(a) 40-458 18-2(b)-(f) 40-459 18-3 40-460 18-3.5 40-461 18-4-18-18 40-462-40-476 18-19-18-28 40-491-40-500 18-30-18-39 40-501-40-510 19.1-2-19.1-4 8-20-8-22 19.1-5-19.1-11 8-74-8-80 19.1-12-19.1-17 8-104-8-109 19.1-18-19.1-24 8-132-8-138 19.1-25-19.1-27 8-48-8-50 20-1-20-4 26-1-26-4 20-5, 20-6 26-17, 26-18 20-7-20-10 26-7-26-10 20-11 26-10 20-12-20-16 26-12-26-16 20-17 26-6 20-19 26-20 20-41 26-44 20-43, 20-44 26-45, 26-46 20-45-20-49 26-68-26-72 20-51 26-73 20-52 26-105 20-54-20-59 26-106-26-111 20-60, 20-61 26-137, 26-138 20-62, 20-63 26-160, 26-161 20-64-20-66 26-191-26-193 21-1-21-9 14-49-14-57 22-1 28-1 22-2, 22-3 28-21 22-4, 22-5 28-46, 28-47 22-6-22-31 28-68-28-93 22-32-22-41 28-115-28-124 22-42-22-53 28-147-28-158 22-53.1 28-159 22-54-22-58 12-21-12-25 22-61 12-26 22-66, 22-67 12-27, 12-28 23-1-23-8 14-127-14-134 23-10-23-18 14-135-14-143 24-1-24-3 8-160-8-162 24-4-24-16 8-193-8-205 24-17-24-23 8-234-8-240 24-24 8-242 24-25, 24-26 8-246, 8-247 26-1-26-9 32-4-32-12 27.1-2- 
27.1-13 8-425-8-436 27.1-15, 
27.1-16 8-438, 8-439 27.1-17 8-437 27.1-17-27.1-22 8-440-8-445 27.1-26-27.1-52 8-474-8-500 27.1-52.1 8-501 27.1-53-27.1-67 8-526-8-540 27.1-68-27.1-86 8-559-8-577 27.1-87- 
27.1-101 8-603-8-617 27.1-102- 
27.1-111 8-638-8-647 28-1-28-23 8-678-8-700 29-1-29-3 42-1-42-3 29-4-29-17 42-25-42-38 29-18(a)- 
29-18(f) 42-88-42-93 29-19-29-27 42-171-42-179 29-28 42-196 31-1-31-5 38-1-38-5 31-6-31-11 38-29-38-34 31-12-31-14 38-57-38-59 31-15-31-27 38-77-38-89 32-1-32-17 36-1-36-17 32-18-32-26 36-38-36-46 32-27-32-31 36-66-36-70 32-32 36-99 32-33-32-47 36-127-36-141 32-48-32-52 36-166-36-170 32-53-32-56 36-194-36-197 33-1 40-16 33-2 40-31 33-3(a)- 
33-3(d) 40-32-40-35 33-4 40-52 33-5, 33-6 40-69, 40-70 33-7(a)-(c) 40-71 33-7(d) 40-72 33-8-33-22 40-88-40-102 33-23-33-29 40-133-40-139 33-30-33-35 40-162-40-167 33-36-33-45 40-181-40-190 33-46-33-48 40-212-40-214 33-49-33-60 40-224-40-235 33-61-33-69 40-264-40-272 33-70 40-283 33-71-33-76 40-294-40-299 33-76.1 40-300 33-77-33-81 40-319-40-323 33-83-33-91 40-352-40-360 33-92-33-95 40-379-40-382 33-101-33-104 40-408-40-411 33-111 40-436 34.1-1- 
34.1-18 46-1-46-18 34.1-19- 
34.1-28 46-40-46-49 34.1-29- 
34.1-42 46-72-46-85 35-1-35-3 44-20-44-22 35-4 14-164 35-5, 35-6 44-23, 44-24 35-7, 35-8 44-56, 44-57 35-9 44-90 35-10 44-25 35-11-35-14 44-108-44-111 35-15(a) 44-136 35-15(a)(1), 
35-15(a)(2) 44-137, 44-138 35-15(b)-(d) 44-139 35-15(e) 44-140 35-16-35-18 44-141-44-143 35-19 44-58 36-1-36-6 42-231-42-236 37-1-37-15 28-187-28-201 38-1-38-3 48-1-48-3 38-4(a)-38-4(g) 48-85-48-91 38-5(a)-38-5(c) 48-111-48-113 38-6(a)-38-6(d) 48-140-48-143 38-7(a)-38-7(h) 48-56-48-63 38-8-38-13 48-170-48-175 38-14, 38-15 48-204, 48-205 38-16(a)-38-16(d) 48-234-48-237 38-16(e)(1)-(5) 48-238 38-16(e)(6), 
38-16(e)(7) 48-239, 48-240 38-17(a)- 
38-17(d) 48-259-48-262 38-17(e)(1)-(5) 48-263 38-17(e)(6), 
38-17(e)(7) 48-264, 48-265 38-18(a)- 
38-18(e) 48-294-48-298 38-19(a)- 
38-19(g) 48-330-48-336 38-20(7) 48-366 38-20(a)- 
38-20(e) 48-361-48-365 38-20(f) 48-367 38-21(a)- 
38-21(e) 48-393-48-397 38-22(a)- 
38-22(e) 48-423-48-427 38-23(a)- 
38-23(f) 48-453-48-458 38-24(a)- 
38-24(g) 48-485-48-491 38-25(a)- 
38-25(f) 48-521-48-526 38-26(a)- 
38-26(d) 48-546-48-549 38-26(d)- 
38-26(g) 48-550-48-553 38-27 48-585 38-27(a)- 
38-27(d) 48-586-48-589 38-28(a)- 
38-28(e) 48-1101- 
48-1105 38-29(a)- 
38-29(q) 48-1134- 
48-1150 38-30(a)- 
38-30(g) 48-1179- 
48-1185 38-31(a) 48-898 38-31(b)(1)- 
38-31(b)(12) 48-930-48-941 38-31(c)(1), 
38-31(c)(2) 48-971, 48-972 38-31(d)(1), 
38-31(d)(2) 48-1003, 
48-1004 38-31(e) 48-1005 38-32(a) 48-1024 38-32(b), (c) 48-1025 38-32(d)-(f) 48-1026 38-32(g) 48-1027 38-32(h), (i) 48-1026 38-33(a), (c) 48-1053 38-33(b) 48-1054 38-33(d) 48-1055 38-34(a)(1), 
38-34(a)(2) 48-1079, 48-1080 38-34(b) 48-1081 38-35(art. I(a))- 
38-35(art. I(i)) 48-1237- 
48-1245 38-35(art. II(j))- 
38-35(art. II(o)) 48-1264- 
48-1269 38-35(art. III(p))- 
38-35(art. III(u)) 48-1297- 
48-1302 38-36 48-868 38-37 48-867 38-38(art. I(a))- 
38-38(art. I(f)) 48-612-48-617 38-38(art. II) 48-618 38-38(art. III(a)) 48-618 38-38(art. III(b))- 
38-38(art. III(d)) 48-641-48-643 38-38(art. IV(a)(1))- 
38-38(art. IV(a)(6)) 48-675-48-680 38-38(art. IV(b))- 
38-38(art. IV(d)) 48-681-48-683 38-38(art. V(a)(1))- 
38-38(art. V(a)(3)) 48-710-48-712 38-38(art. VI) 48-738-48-741 38-38(art. VII) 48-766 38-39(a)- 
38-39(o) 48-786-48-800 38-40(a)- 
38-40(f) 48-1204- 
48-1209 38-42(a)- 
38-42(t) 48-824-48-843 38-43(a)- 
38-43(g) 48-1333- 
48-1339 38-44 48-4 40-1-40-14 40-526-40-539  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1982 Code, as updated through October 2, 2007, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1982 Code, as supplemented. Ordinances adopted since October 2, 2007, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 178 14-92 586 48-294-48-298 48-1101- 
48-1105 589 26-70 595 48-1134- 
48-1150 599 36-99 602 22-52-22-59 26-73 40-133-40-139 40-162-40-167 609 48-2 610 48-294-48-298 613 14-20 14-22 14-24-14-28 14-30 3-3 14-21 3-3.2 14-23 3-11 14-29 618 36-166-36-170 619 48-898 48-930-48-941 48-971, 48-972 48-1003- 
48-1005 627 48-1237- 
48-1245 48-1264- 
48-1269 48-1297- 
48-1302 638 42-234 640 48-1134- 
48-1150 651 36-127-36-141 652 40-134 653 40-162 654 22-55 655 26-69-26-72 666 48-2 48-204 670 40-88-40-94 673 40-32-40-35 676 22-55 682 22-57 26-73 40-135 40-163 691 40-89 699 26-68 704 48-1134- 
48-1150 706 26-8 708 22-127-22-136 709 22-19-22-24 718 14-88-14-91 14-93-14-99 722 26-2 723 40-181-40-190 724 48-2 731 40-212-40-214 732 2-119 735 42-27 736 40-89 737 24-5 742 48-172 748 28-123 749 26-20 751 42-116-42-118 752 42-88-42-93 763 48-1237- 
48-1245 48-1264- 
48-1269 48-1297- 
48-1302 767 28-124 770 4-56 776 42-150-42-156 788 40-212-40-214 789 48-234-48-240 790 48-898 48-930-48-941 48-971, 48-972 48-1003- 
48-1005 796 48-85-48-91 800 24-1-24-7 801 22-53 22-55, 22-56 26-73 40-134, 40-135 40-162 40-164 804 48-2 48-898 48-930-48-941 48-971, 48-972 48-1003- 
48-1005 808 2-23-2-27 811 14-164 44-20-44-25 44-56, 44-57 44-90 44-108-44-111 44-136-44-143 48-898 48-930-48-941 48-971, 48-972 48-1003- 
48-1005 812 40-69, 40-70 816 40-133, 40-134 817 22-55 22-58 820 26.01-26.03 32-1-32-3 824 40-264-40-272 825 26-44-26-46 826 40-88-40-102 832 42-33 838 48-1237- 
48-1245 48-1264- 
48-1269 48-1297- 
48-1302 858 26-105-26-111 859 26-10 860 26-10 866 48-2 48-294-48-298 48-1101- 
48-1105 867 2-138 880 48-1101- 
48-1105 881 48-1134- 
48-1150 885 26-9 886 48-85-48-91 890 40-133-40-137 40-162, 40-163 40-167 892 22-55 22-57, 22-58 894 48-2 48-56-48-63 48-85-48-91 48-205 897 26-14 898 48-1101- 
48-1105 904 26-2 905 4-5, 4-6 4-38, 4-39 4-56, 4-57 4-77 4-129 4-131 908 48-2 48-234-48-240 48-1101- 
48-1105 918 40-69-40-72 920 42-27 924 48-898 48-930-48-941 48-971, 48-972 48-1003- 
48-1005 48-1101- 
48-1105 925 40-212, 40-213 926 40-32-40-35 929 12-21-12-28 937 22-55 22-58 938 40-134 40-136, 40-137 40-162 940 8-160-8-162 8-195 942 8-234-8-240 8-242 8-246, 8-247 946 8-160 8-196 8-204 948 28-1 28-21 28-46, 28-47 28-69, 28-70 28-74-28-93 28-115-28-122 28-147-28-155 28-157, 28-158 949 40-166 950 40-32-40-35 951 40-137 952 26-2, 26-3 26-6 26-8-26-10 26-15-26-17 26-46 26-70 26-105 26-111 953 44-136-44-140 956 10-19-10-27 958 8-234-8-240 8-242 8-246, 8-247 960  2-23-1981 48-898 48-930-48-941 48-971, 48-972 48-1003- 
48-1005 961  2-23-1981 38-1-38-5 38-29-38-34 38-57-38-59 38-77-38-89 962  3-23-1981 48-2 978  7-27-1981 22-58 982  9-14-1981 14-49-14-51 14-53-14-57 984 10-13-1981 10-58-10-65 987 11- 9-1981 48-2 48-234-48-240 48-259-48-265 48-294-48-298 48-361-48-367 48-867 48-1101- 
48-1105 988 11- 9-1981 10-24 989 11- 9-1981 26-73 40-32-40-35 40-162, 40-163 993  1-11-1982 48-2 994  1-11-1982 48-612-48-618 48-641-48-643 48-675-48-683 48-710-48-712 48-738-48-741 48-766 997  2- 8-1982 14-90, 14-91 14-93 14-97 998  2-22-1982 3 1-6 999  2-22-1982 10-24 10-58-10-65 22-58 26-73 38-1-38-5 38-29-38-34 38-57-38-59 38-77-38-89 40-32-40-35 40-162, 40-163 48-2 48-259-48-265 48-898 48-930-48-941 48-971, 48-972 48-1003- 
48-1005 48-1101- 
48-1105 1000  2-22-1982 8-234-8-240 8-242 8-246, 8-247 1001  3-22-1982 48-612-48-618 48-641-48-643 48-675-48-683 48-710-48-712 48-738-48-741 48-766 1011  6-14-1982 26-68 1015  7-12-1982 48-2 1019  8- 9-1982 22-55 22-58 1020  8- 9-1982 40-134 40-137 40-162 1021  8- 9-1982 48-898 48-930-48-941 48-971, 48-972 48-1003-48-1005 1023  9-13-1982 28-81 1026  9-27-1982 2-138 1027  9-27-1982 26-70, 26-71 1032 11-22-1982 40-32-40-35 1034  1-10-1983 4-161-4-163 1039  2-28-1983 48-2 48-234-48-240 48-259-48-265 48-898 48-930-48-941 48-971, 48-972 48-1003-48-1005 1041  3-28-1983 22-19 22-22 1042  3-28-1983 44-136-44-140 48-1134-48-1150 1044  4-11-1983 36-17 1045  5- 9-1983 40-283 1051  6-13-1983 48-898 48-930-48-941 48-971, 48-972 48-1003-48-1005 1053  6-13-1983 10-89 1057  7-25-1983 26-2 1058  8- 8-1983 48-1134- 
48-1150 1060 11-14-1983 40-32-40-35 1072  5-29-1984 48-786-48-800 48-1134- 
48-1150 1073  5-29-1984 22-58 1079  7- 9-1984 26-2 1081  9-10-1984 48-898 48-930-48-941 48-971, 48-972 48-1003- 
48-1005 48-1101- 
48-1105 1082  9-24-1984 40-88 40-91, 40-92 1083  9-24-1984 48-898 48-930-48-941 48-971, 48-972 48-1003- 
48-1005 1084 10- 9-1984 48-234-48-240 1089 11-26-1984 26-2 1090 11-26-1984 4-40, 4-41 1092  1-14-1985 48-85-48-91 48-173 1093  1-14-1985 6-48-6-53 1100  2-25-1985 4-37 4-40, 4-41 4-73 1107  5-28-1985 26-2 1108  6-10-1985 26-137 1114  7- 8-1985 48-868 1115  7-22-1985 48-1237- 
48-1245 48-1264- 
48-1269 48-1297- 
48-1302 1118  9- 9-1985 48-1134- 
48-1150 1127 12- 9-1985 48-546-48-553 48-585-48-589 1128  1-27-1986 42-196 1130  1-27-1986 48-546-48-553 48-585-48-589 1131  3-10-1986 48-2 48-585-48-589 1137  5-12-1986 26-160, 26-161 1138  5-12-1986 48-2 48-1204- 
48-1209 1139  5-27-1986 48-2 48-546-48-553 48-898 48-930-48-941 48-971, 48-972 48-1003- 
48-1005 1142  6-23-1986 48-234-48-240 48-294-48-298 48-546-48-553 48-585-48-589 1147  6-23-1986 26-2 1154  8-11-1986 48-2 48-1024- 
48-1027 1158 10-14-1986 40-32-40-35 1164 11-10-1986 6-19, 6-20 1166 11-24-1986 48-330-48-336 1167 11-24-1986 48-1101- 
48-1105 1170  1-12-1987 48-546-48-553 1175  3- 9-1987 38-80 1176  3- 9-1987 6-20 1178  4-27-1987 26-68 1185  5-11-1987 48-1237- 
48-1245 48-1264- 
48-1269 48-1297- 
48-1302 1186  5-11-1987 26-2 1188  5-26-1987 48-898 48-930-48-941 48-971, 48-972 48-1003- 
48-1005 1191  6-22-1987 48-140-48-143 48-172 1202  9-28-1987 26-7 1203 10-13-1987 48-2 48-898 48-930-48-941 48-971, 48-972 48-1003- 
48-1005 1209  1-25-1988 48-1101- 
48-1105 1224  6-13-1988 26-2 1225  6-13-1988 40-134 40-137 40-162 1226  6-13-1988 22-55 22-58 1227  6-13-1988 48-898 48-930-48-941 48-971, 48-972 48-1003- 
48-1005 1236  9-13-1988 44-109 44-136-44-140 1237  9-12-1988 48-1134- 
48-1150 1244 12-12-1988 48-1101- 
48-1105 1245 12-12-1988 22-52-22-59 1246 12-12-1988 26-73 1247 12-12-1988 40-133-40-139 40-162-40-167 1248  1- 9-1989 40-32-40-35 1250  2-27-1989 48-2 1254  4-10-1989 40-213 1261  4-25-1989 48-259-48-265 1263  5-22-1989 48-2 48-898 48-930-48-941 48-971, 48-972 48-1003- 
48-1005 48-1134- 
48-1150 1268  6-12-1989 14-51 14-53 1270  6-26-1989 26-2 1275  9-25-1989 26-2 1277 10-10-1989 1 48-2 2 48-294-48-298 3 48-330-48-336 4 48-1101- 
48-1105 5 48-1134- 
48-1150 6 48-898 48-930-48-941 48-971, 48-972 48-1003- 
48-1005 7 48-786-48-800 1278 10-10-1989 48-2 48-612-48-618 48-641-48-643 48-675-48-683 48-710-48-712 48-738-48-741 48-766 1279 12-11-1989 4-93-4-101 4-125 4-161 1283 11-27-1989 40-134 40-136, 40-137 40-162 40-167 1284 11-27-1989 22-55 22-58 1289 12-11-1989 40-526-40-539 1296  4-23-1990 40-182 1297  4-23-1990 40-89 1298  4-23-1990 40-16 1305  5-14-1990 2-210 1308  5-14-1990 4-37 4-40, 4-41 4-73 1310  5-29-1990 40-16 1312  6-11-1990 26-6 1313  6-11-1990 26-2 1315  6-11-1990 1-2 1326  8-27-1990 16-130, 16-131 1332 11-12-1990 48-85-48-91 48-1134-48-1150 1334 11-12-1990 38-30 1335 11-12-1990 48-824-48-843 48-1134- 
48-1150 1338 12-10-1990 48-2 48-234-48-240 1343  2-11-1991 28-154 1349  4- 9-1991 1-12 1350  4- 9-1991 28-1 1351  4- 9-1991 26-2 1352  4- 9-1991 26-191-26-193 1363  6-10-1991 40-134 1364  6-24-1991 26-2 1365  6-24-1991 48-172 1369  9- 9-1991 36-17 1379 10-15-1991 22-77-22-85 22-87-22-98 1380 11-11-1991 48-824-48-843 1381 11-25-1991 34-1-34-8 1382 11-25-1991 48-2 48-393-48-397 48-423-48-427 48-453-48-458 48-485-48-491 48-521-48-526 48-898 48-930-48-941 48-971, 48-972 48-1003- 
48-1005 48-1101- 
48-1105 1384 12- 9-1991 40-162 1385 12- 9-1991 40-134 40-137 1386 12- 9-1991 22-55 22-58 1388  2-10-1992 48-786-48-800 1398  4-27-1992 40-319-40-323 1400  5-11-1992 40-32-40-35 1401  5-26-1992 48-1237- 
48-1245 48-1264- 
48-1269 48-1297- 
48-1302 1407  6- 8-1992 26-2 1411  7-27-1992 16-130, 16-131 1412  9-14-1992 14-88-14-91 14-93-14-95 14-97, 14-98 1414 10-13-1992 40-181-40-190 1417 10-26-1992 40-283 1420 11- 9-1992 34-5 34-8 1423 12-16-1992 26-2 1426 12-16-1992 48-612-48-618 48-641-48-643 48-675-48-683 48-710-48-712 48-738-48-741 48-766 1427 12-16-1992 48-453-48-458 1428 12-16-1992 34-3 1429  2- 8-1993 48-1101- 
48-1105 1439  5-24-1993 48-453-48-458 48-485-48-491 48-521-48-526 1441  6-14-1993 26-2 1452  9-13-1993 1-13 1454 10-12-1993 26-107-26-109 26-111 1456 11- 8-1993 40-212 1457 12-13-1993 40-456-40-460 40-462-40-476 40-491-40-510 1458 12-13-1993 40-214 1460  2-14-1994 10-59-10-61 1462  2-28-1994 22-55-22-57 1463  2-28-1994 40-134, 40-135 40-162, 40-163 1464  2-28-1994 26-73 1465  2-28-1994 48-786-48-800 1466  2-28-1994 26-68, 26-69 26-72 1467  2-28-1994 40-32-40-35 1468  3-14-1994 48-85-48-91 1477  5- 9-1994 48-2 48-393-48-397 48-423-48-427 48-453-48-458 48-485-48-491 48-521-48-526 48-546-48-553 48-867 48-898 48-930-48-941 48-971, 48-972 48-1003- 
48-1005 48-1053- 
48-1055 1478  5-23-1994 26-72 1487  9-12-1994 28-150 1488  9-12-1994 8-193 8-247 1490  9-12-1994 26-2 1493 10-11-1994 2-119 1494 10-11-1994 16-2 1501  2-27-1995 48-1237- 
48-1245 48-1264- 
48-1269 48-1297- 
48-1302 1507  4-24-1995 40-320 1508  4-24-1995 40-89 1513  5-22-1995 14-164 1522  9-11-1995 26-2 1524  9-26-1995 16-23, 16-24 16-54-16-58 16-90 1525  9-26-1995 40-460 40-467 1526  9-26-1995 34-1 34-3 34-8 1527 10-10-1995 26-10 1530 11-27-1995 14-88-14-91 14-93-14-95 14-97 14-99 1531 12-11-1995 48-2 48-453-48-458 48-485-48-491 48-521-48-526 48-585-48-589 1532 12-11-1995 2-22 1535  2-12-1996 1 26-2 1536  2-26-1996 48-453-48-458 48-485-48-491 48-521-48-526 48-585-48-589 1537  2-26-1996 1 26-2 1538  2-26-1996 26-138 26-160, 26-161 26-191-26-193 1540  3-11-1996 32-11 1541  3-25-1996 48-2 48-453-48-458 48-485-48-491 48-521-48-526  3-26-1996 48-585-48-589 1542  4-22-1996 40-89 1552  7-22-1996 1 26-2 1557 10-15-1996 48-453-48-458 48-485-48-491 48-521-48-526 48-546-48-553 48-585-48-589 1559 11-25-1996 48-393-48-397 48-423-48-427 1560 11-25-1996 40-352-40-360 1561 12- 9-1996 48-453-48-458 48-485-48-491 48-521-48-526 48-585-48-589 1562 12- 9-1996 40-456-40-468 40-470-40-476 40-491-40-510 1563 12-23-1996 40-134 40-162 1564 12-23-1996 22-53 22-55 1565  1-13-1997 48-1237- 
48-1245 48-1264- 
48-1269 48-1297- 
48-1302 1567  2-10-1997 28-159 1578  5-12-1997 48-1101- 
48-1105 1580  6- 9-1997 1 26-2 1583  7-14-1997 48-2 48-453-48-458 48-485-48-491 48-521-48-526 1589  9- 8-1997 26-72 1590 10-14-1997 48-898 48-930-48-941 48-971, 48-972 48-1003- 
48-1005 1594 12-22-1997 40-379-40-382 40-408-40-411 40-436 1595  1-12-1998 4-1-4-7 4-37 4-56 4-93-4-101 1600  2- 9-1998 28-192 1606  5-26-1998 2 46-1-46-18 46-40-46-49 46-72-46-85 1610  5-26-1998 1 26-2 1612  6- 8-1998 3 8-272-8-276 8-299-8-302 8-323-8-332 8-378-8-380 1616  7-13-1998 48-85-48-91 1617  8-10-1998 36-194-36-197 1627  9-28-1998 48-2 48-453-48-458 1632  2- 8-1999 48-234-48-240 48-259-48-265 48-786-48-800 1633  2-22-1999 48-1237- 
48-1245 48-1264- 
48-1269 48-1297- 
48-1302 1636  3- 8-1999 48-2 48-361-48-367 48-393-48-397 48-423-48-427 48-453-48-458 48-485-48-491 48-521-48-526 48-546-48-553 48-898 48-930-48-941 48-971, 48-972 48-1003- 
48-1005 48-1079- 
48-1081 48-1101- 
48-1105 48-1134- 
48-1150 1649  6-14-1999 1 26-2 1659 10-25-1999 44-22 44-56 44-58 44-136-44-140 1660 11- 8-1999 4-1 4-5-4-7 4-37-4-41 4-93-4-101 4-131 1662  1-10-2000 40-185 1664  1-24-2000 40-135 40-163 1665  1-24-2000 22-57 1667  2-14-2000 34-7, 34-8 1670  3-13-2000 48-1079- 
48-1081 1671  4-10-2000 48-1079- 
48-1081 1681  5-22-2000 26-6 1682  5-22-2000 26-2 1683  6-12-2000 26-6 1684  6-26-2000 40-224-40-235 1685  7-10-2000 26-6 1686  8-14-2000 48-140-48-143 48-172 1689 10-30-2000 40-508 1690 10-30-2000 40-294-40-299 1691 11-27-2000 48-1237- 
48-1245 48-1264- 
48-1269 48-1297- 
48-1302 1693 12-11-2000 40-297 1694  2-26-2001 26-2 1695  3-26-2001 48-85-48-91 48-453-48-458 48-485-48-491 48-521-48-526 48-1101- 
48-1105 1703  5-14-2001 40-461, 40-462 40-469 40-492 40-494-40-496 1704  5-14-2001 44-21 44-25 44-90 1705  6-11-2001 26-2 1706  6-25-2001 32-12 1708  7-23-2001 8-678-8-700 1710 10-22-2001 48-2 48-1333- 
48-1339 1712 11-26-2001 8-425-8-445 8-474-8-500 8-526-8-540 8-559-8-577 8-603-8-617 8-638-8-647 1713 12-10-2001 8-273-8-275 8-323, 8-324 8-404, 8-405 1714 12-10-2001 22-53 22-55 22-58 1715 12-10-2001 40-134 40-137 1721  6-10-2002 48-2 48-234-48-240 1722  7- 8-2002 26-2 1723  7-22-2002 16-130, 16-131 1726 12- 9-2002 8-20-8-22 8-48-8-50 8-74-8-80 8-104-8-109 8-132-8-138 1727  3-24-2003 34-1-34-3 1728  4-14-2003 22-20 1734  5-12-2003 48-2 48-85-48-91 48-453-48-458 48-485-48-491 48-521-48-526 1738  6-23-2003 48-4 1739  7-14-2003 26-2 1742  8-11-2003 40-212 1744  9- 8-2003 26-138 1746 11-24-2003 22-55 22-57 40-134, 40-135 40-137 40-162 1748  2- 9-2004 48-824-48-843 1750  3- 8-2004 26-68-26-73 1752  3- 8-2004 40-214 1753  3- 9-2004 40-32-40-35 1754  3-22-2004 40-494 1756  4-12-2004 40-214 1761  5-24-2004 2-22 1762  5-24-2004 40-89 1763  6-28-2004 48-612-48-618 48-641-48-643 48-675-48-683 48-710-48-712 48-738-48-741 48-766 1764  6-28-2004 26-2 1765  7-26-2004 26-6 1766  9-13-2004 48-234-48-240 48-259-48-265 48-294-48-298 48-453-48-458 48-485-48-491 48-521-48-526 48-546-48-553 48-824-48-843 48-898 48-930-48-941 48-971, 48-972 48-1003- 
48-1005 48-1101- 
48-1105 48-1179- 
48-1185 1768  9-27-2004 4-2 4-37 4-93-4-101 1775  7- 1-2005 40-89 1777  6-27-2005 8-425-8-445 8-474-8-501 8-526-8-540 8-559, 8-560 8-562-8-577 8-603-8-617 8-638-8-647 1780  9-26-2005 40-300 1781 11-28-2005 40-133, 40-134 1782  1- 9-2006 40-88-40-102 1783  1-23-2006 10-90 1787  5- 8-2006 42-197 1791  6-26-2006 46-85 1792  8-14-2006 31-11 38-34 38-2 48-2 38-16 48-234-48-240 38-17 48-259-48-265 1793  8-14-2006 29-30-29-32 42-211-42-213 1796 11-13-2006 12.1-2-12.1-5 8-272-8-275 12.1-6-12.1-9 8-299-8-302 12.1-10-12.1-19 8-323-8-332 12.1-20 8-276 12.1-21(a)-12.1-21(c) 8-378-8-380 12.1-22, 12.1-23 8-404, 8-405 1797 11-27-2006 20-60-20-62 26-136-26-138 20-63, 20-64 26-160, 26-161 20-65-20-67 26-191-26-193 1798 11-27-2006 10-10 16-25 10-11 16-90 1799 12-12-2006 48-1101- 
48-1105 1802  3-12-2007 25-1-25-4 30-1-30-4 25-5-25-15 30-54-30-64 25-16-25-22 30-87-30-93 25-23-25-33 30-115-30-125 1806  7- 1-2007 40-89 1807  5-29-2007 26-138 1808  6-25-2007 16-130, 16-131 1810 10-22-2007 40-134 1811 20-41-20-43 26-44-26-46 1819  4-28-2008 29-20 42-172 1822  8-11-2008 48-90 1826 11-10-2008 38-2 48-521 38-25 48-522 38-26 48-547 1828 2-9-2009 26-19 1831  5-26-2009 48-175 1834 9-30-2009 28-70(a)       Added 28-94 1835  9-30-2009       Added Adopt. ord. 1836 11-23-2009 8-323, 8-327       Added 8-327.1 8-380, 8-404       Added 8-404.1, 8-404.2 8-429-8-431 8-441, 8-444 1837  1-11-2010       Added 2-28 1839  1-25-2010 28-190, 28-191 1840  2-22-2010       Added 48-1142(f) 1841  3- 8-2010 26-136, 26-138 1846  6-28-2010       Added 8-701-8-713 48-2 48-454(3) 48-487(2) 48-522(2)       Added 48-1210-48-1218 1847  7-26-2010 26-19(g), (h), (n)       Added 26-19(o) 1849  9-27-2010 26-6(8), (13) 26-7(c) 26-16(a)       Added 26-21 1850 11- 8-2010       Rpld 2-28 1853  2-28-2011 42-172(c)(2)       Added 42-172(c)(3) 1855  3-14-2011 2-210 1856  4-11-2011       Dltd 18-1       Added 18-1-18-19 1858  4-25-2011 4)       Added Ch. 15, §§ 15-1-15-47 1859  4-25-2011 26-70 1863  5- 9-2011 48-175 1865  8- 8-2011 48-172(5)a. 48-867       Added 48-1134(a)(6) 1870 12-12-2011       Dltd 2-21-2-27       Added 2-21-2-25 1871  3-12-2012 18-19 1872  3-12-2012       Added 6-23       Dltd 14-164       Added Ch. 33, §§ 33-1-33-10 48-60 48-62       Dltd 48-1024-48-1027 48-1102(h) 1873  4-9-2012 42-172(c)(2) 1879  8-13-2012 26-111 1880  8-13-2012 26-109(14) 1881  8-13-2012 8-236(c), (d) 8-239(b) 1883  9-24-2012       Dltd 34-1-34-8       Added 34-1-34-9 1887  1-28-2013       Added 26-20       Rnbd 26-20, 26-21       as 26-21, 26-22 1889  2-11-2013       Added 48-801, 48-802 1890  2-25-2013       Dltd 8-678-8-700       Added 8-678-8-700 1892  4-22-2013       Added 42-241-42-249 1895  4-22-2013 42-172(c)(2) 42-172(d)-(h) 42-173 1896  4-22-2013       Added 28-202 1901  7-22-2013 15-20 15-27 15-29 15-36, 15-37 1902  7-22-2013 48-1102(b)(1) 1903  8-12-2013 30-115, 30-116 1906 10-15-2013 40-182 1908 10-28-2013       Dltd 48-453(16)       Rnbd 48-453(17)       as 48-453(16)       Added 48-454(12) 48-867 1909 10-28-2013 48-1101 1911 11-25-2013 48-235 1912 12- 9-2013       Added 48-869 1913 12- 9-2013       Added 15-2 1914  1-13-2014 40-214 40-283 1915  3-24-2014       Dltd 14-88-14-99       Added Ch. 35, §§ 35-1-35-23 48-2       Added 48-238(6)       Added 48-263(6)       Dltd 48-824-48-843 1920  4-28-2014 40-133-40-137 1922  4-28-2014       Dltd 15-2 15-20-15-29 1923  4-28-2014 42-172(c) 1928  9- 8-2014 35-1(b) 35-2 35-4-35-6 35-7(a)(2) 35-8(a) 35-9(a) 35-10(e)(4)c. 35-14(g), (h) 35-15(a) 35-18(d) 35-20(d) 35-22(b) 35-23(b)(3) 35-23(b)(6) 1932  2-23-2015 40-214(c) 1937  4-27-2015 42-172(c)(2), (3) 1939  7-27-2015       Rpld 10-89 1941 10-13-2015 8-687(2)bb 8-692(b)(3) 8-694(b) 8-696(r)(1) 1943 12-14-2015       Added 15-20(16) 1945  1-11-2016 40-16 1946  2- 8-2016 48-898 48-932, 48-933 48-936, 48-937 48-940(c) 48-941       Added 48-969, 48-970 48-971 48-972(b)(2) 48-1003-48-1005 1947  2- 8-2016 48-1238 48-1265(1) 1948  2- 8-2016 14-132(2) 1949  3-28-2016 26-44(b) 1954  4-25-2016 40-89 1955  4-25-2016 42-172(c) 1958  6-13-2016 15-20(15)       Added 15-20(16)       Rnbd 15-20(16)       as 15-20(17) 15-21       Added 15-35 15-36, 15-37 1959  6-27-2016 8-692(5) 8-695(1) 8-696(g) 1961  8- 8-2016 16-2       Added 16-3, 16-4 40-16(c) 40-35 1962  8- 8-2016 26-138(f)(4)d 26-138(n) 1964 11-28-2016 40-353-40-355 40-356(d) 40-357, 40-358 1965 11-28-2016 40-380(a) 40-381, 40-382 40-408-40-410 40-436 1966  2-13-2017 48-2 48-90       Added 48-241 1973  4-24-2017 1 40-182 1981  1- 8-2018       Added 26-74 1988  6-11-2018 1 8-678 8-692(a), (b) 8-694(b) 1989  8-13-2018 48-486 48-488 1991 12-18-2018 22-82(c) 40-497(4) 48-2 48-235(6) 48-393(9) 48-423(8) 48-453(12) 48-486(a)(10) 48-521(12) 1993  1-28-2019       Rpld 28-188-28-201       Added 28-190.1       Added 28-201  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Code of Virginia. 
Code of Virginia 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1 1-2 1-21 1-2 1-200 et seq. 1-2 1-210 1-2 1-216 1-2 1-217 1-5 1-220 1-13 26-2 1-223 1-2 1-227 1-2 1-228 1-2 1-230 1-2 1-243 1-4 1-308 28-93 2.1-360 Char. § 8.02 2.2-614.1 16-2 2.2-1112 28-155 2.2-3700 et seq. 2-119 35-3 2.2-4000 et seq. Ch. 16 2.2-4300 et seq. Ch. 16 Ch. 16, Art. II 2.2-4301 16-23 2.2-4304 Ch. 16, Art. II, 
Div. 3 16-90 2.2-4600 et seq. Ch. 16 2.2-4900 et seq. Ch. 16 2.2-5000 et seq. Ch. 16 3.2-5100 et seq. Ch. 8, Art. IV 3.2-5106 et seq. Ch. 8, Art. IV 3.2-5120 et seq. Ch. 8, Art. IV 3.2-6440 4-101 3.2-6500 et seq. Ch. 4, Art. II 3.2-6503 4-75 3.2-6521 Ch. 4, Art. II, 
Div. 5 Ch. 4, Art. III 4-125 3.2-6521 4-125 3.2-6521- 
3.2-6526 Ch. 4, Art. II, 
Div. 5 Ch. 4, Art. III 3.2-6522 4-76 3.2-6524- 
3.2-6531 Ch. 4, Art. II, 
Div. 2 3.2-6525 4-130 3.2-6526B 4-125 3.2-6529 4-129 3.2-6530 Ch. 40 3.2-6538 4-40, 4-41 3.2-6540 Ch. 4, Art. II, 
Div. 4 4-37 4-93-4-97 3.2-6542 4-93-4-97 4-99 4-101 3.2-6543 Ch. 4 4-1 4-4 3.2-6546 4-5 4-73-4-75 4-77 3.2-6554 4-7 3.2-6557 4-38 4-75 3.2-6562 4-93 3.2-6569 4-1 4-73 3.2-6570 4-1 3.2.6500 et seq. Ch. 4 4.1-100 et seq. 40-491 4.1-210 28-21 4.1-233 Ch. 40 5.1-157 Ch. 14, Art. III 6.1-44.1 et seq. 40-69 6.1-44.15 et seq. 40-69 6.2-301.A 42-248 6.1-330.26 10-62 8-71, 8-72 Char. § 18.03 8-76 Char. § 18.03 8-746 Char. § 18.05 8-767 Char. § 18.05 8.01-226.9 28-85 8.01-316, 
8.01-317 Char. § 18.03 8.01-319 Char. § 18.03 8.01-602, 
8.01-603 Char. § 18.05 9.1-101 28-202 9.1-500 et seq. 30-54 9.1-901, 9.1-902 8-678 10.1-560 et seq. Ch. 35 10.1-562 15-36 10.1-600 et seq. Ch. 35 10.1-603.1 et seq. 42-241 10.1-603.2 et seq. Ch. 35 42-244 10.1-1127.1 44-21 44-90 10.1-1300 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. II 10.1-1321 14-20 10.1-1400 et seq. Ch. 34 10.1-1411 34-5 10.1-2100 et seq. 48-675 13.1-312 et seq. 40-461 15.1-239 et seq. 36-7 15.1-364 Char. § 17.33 15.1-503.2 48-788 48-795 15.1-899 Char. § 18.03 15.2-100 Char. Chs. 1-21 15.2-105 16-3 15.2-106 16-2 15.2-200 et seq. Char. Chs. 1-21 15.2-204 Char. Ch. 2 15.2-207 Char. § 1.02 15.2-900 Ch. 6 15.2-901 33-10 15.2-906 Ch. 6 15.2-908, 
15.2-909 Ch. 6 15.2-911 Ch. 12, Art. II 15.2-912.3 28-21 15.2-915 Ch. 28, Art. VII 15.2-915.2 28-190.1 15.2-917 Ch. 14, Art. III 15.2-919 
15.2-920 Ch. 14, Art. III 
Ch. 14, Art. IV 15.2-923 Ch. 42, Art. II, 
Div. 2 15.2-927, 
15.2-928 Ch. 34 15.2-933 34-2 15.2-960 Ch. 44 15.2-967 Ch. 36 15.2-1100 et seq. Char. Ch. 2 Char. § 2.01 15.2-1102 Ch. 6 15.2-1104 Char. § 2.02 Ch. 16 Ch. 40 Ch. 40, Art. XI 15.2-1105 Char. § 2.02 Ch. 16 15.2-1106 Char. § 2.02 Ch. 16 15.2-1107 Ch. 2, Art. III, Ch. 2, Art. IV 15.2-1109 Ch. 8, Art. IV 15.2-1112 Char. § 2.02 15.2-1113 Ch. 28, Art. VII 15.2-1114 Ch. 8, Art. III 15.2-1115 Ch. 6 15.2-1117 Ch. 6 Ch. 22 15.2-1123 Char. § 2.03 15.2-1124 32-7 15.2-1125 Char. § 2.07 15.2-1129 Char. § 2.03 15.2-1300 8-690 40-95 15.2-1401 1-12 15.2-1429 1-12 Char. § 2.06 15.2-1430 1-12 15.2-1432 1-12 15.2-1433 1-1 1-11 15.2-1506 Ch. 30 15.2-1507 30-57 15.2-1701 et seq. Ch. 32 15.2-1717.1 32-12 15.2-1719 28-201 32-4 15.2-1720 Ch. 26, Art. IV 15.2-1721 28-201 32-4 15.2-1800 42-247 15.2-1812 28-70 15.2-2000 et seq. Ch. 36 15.2-2013 Ch. 26 15.2-2015 Ch. 46 15.2-2021 48-938 15.2-2024 Ch. 6 15.2-2029 Ch. 26 15.2-2100 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. III 15.2-2108 10-90 15.2-2108 et seq. Ch. 10 15.2-2108.1:1 Ch. 10 Ch. 10, Art. III 15.2-2108.20 Ch. 10, Art. III 15.2-2109 et seq. Ch. 42 Ch. 42, Art. II 15.2-2114 42-241 42-244 15.2-2114.D 42-246 15.2-2114.E 42-246 15.2-2114.G 42-248 15.2-2201 Ch. 48, Art. VII 15.2-2204 35-11 48-841 15.2-2204- 
15.2-2207 48-85-48-91 15.2-2209 48-56 15.2-2210 48-56 15.2-2223, 
15.2-2224 Ch. 48, Art. VII 15.2-2240 et seq. Ch. 38 38-2 15.2-2280 Ch. 48, Art. IV 15.2-2280 et seq. Ch. 48 48-1 15.2-2283 Ch. 48, Art. VII 15.2-2286 Ch. 48, Art. IV, 
Div. 4 Ch. 48, Art. VII 48-56 48-88 15.2-2286.1 Ch. 48, Art. IV, 
Div. 4 15.2-2287 48-4 15.2-2288.1 Ch. 48, Art. IV, 
Div. 4 48-235, 48-236 15.2-2289 48-4 15.2-2291 48-235, 48-236 15.2-2292 48-56 48-235, 48-236 15.2-2295 Ch. 14, Art. III 15.2-2299- 
15.2-2310 48-56 15.2-2303.2 Ch. 48, Art. VII 15.2-2304, 
15.2-2305 Ch. 48, Art. VII 15.2-2308 48-170 15.2-2308- 
15.2-2314 Ch. 48, Art. III 15.2-2309, 
15.2-2310 48-172, 48-173 15.2-2311 48-56 15.2-2311- 
15.2-2313 48-173 15.2-2314 48-56 48-174 15.2-2404 Ch. 40 15.2-2500 16-1 15.2-2500 et seq. Ch. 16 15.2-2600 et seq. Ch. 16 15.2.1125 Ch. 40, Art. XVIII 16.1-69.40:1 26-111 16.1-69.40:1.B 26-20 16.1-228 28-115 16.1-253 28-73 16.1-253-16.1-253.4 28-678 16.1-253.1 28-73 16.1-253.4 28-73 16.1-278 et seq. 26-2 16.1-278.2- 
16.1-278.6 28-73 16.1-278.8 28-73 16.1-278.14 28-73 16.1-278.15 28-73 16.1-279.1 28-73 17.1-281 Ch. 16, Art. III, 
Div. 2 16-130 18.2-1 et seq. Ch. 28 18.2-8 et seq. 1-12 18.2-11 Adopt. ord. Char. § 2.06 1-12 28-1 18.2-18 28-115 18.2-19 28-115 18.2-31 8-678 18.2-32 8-678 18.2-32.1 8-678 18.2-32.2 8-678 18.2-33 8-678 18.2-35 8-678 18.2-36 8-678 18.2-36.1 8-678 18.2-36.2 8-678 18.2-41 8-678 18.2-42 8-678 18.2-46.2 8-678 18.2-46.3 8-678 18.2-46.3:1 8-678 18.2-46.3:3 8-678 18.2-46.5 8-678 18.2-46.6 8-678 18.2-46.7 8-678 18.2-47-18.2-51 8-678 18.2-51.1-18.2-51.6 8-678 18.2-52 8-678 18.2-52.1 8-678 18.2-53 8-678 18.2-54.1, 18.2-54.2 8-678 18.2-55 8-678 18.2-55.1 8-678 18.2-56 8-678 18.2-56.1, 18.2-56.2 8-678 18.2-57 28-46 18.2-57.01 8-678 18.2-57.02 8-678 18.2-57.2 8-678 18.2-58 8-678 18.2-58.1 8-678 18.2-59 8-678 18.2-60 8-678 18.2-60.1 8-678 18.2-60.3 8-678 18.2-60.4 8-678 18.2-61 8-678 28-115 18.2-63 8-678 28-115 18.2-64.1, 18.2-64.2 8-678 18.2-66 28-115 18.2-67.1-18.2-67.4 8-678 18.2-67.4:1, 18.2-67.4:2 8-678 18.2-67.5 8-678 18.2-67.5:1-18.2-67.5:3 8-678 18.2-77 8-678 18.2-79-18.2-94 8-678 18.2-88 28-68 18.2-89 et seq. 8-678 18.2-95 28-77 18.2-96 28-77 18.2.103 28-81 18.2-104 28-82 18.2-104.1 28-84 18.2-105.1 28-83 18.2-106 28-86 18.2-119 28-73 18.2-121 28-69 18.2-128 28-74 18.2-130 28-47 18.2-132- 
18.2-136 28-73 18.2-137 28-70 18.2-139- 
18.2-141 Ch. 44 18.2-144.1 28-154 18.2-146, 
18.2-147 28-75, 28-76 18.2.152 28-80 18.2-162 42-38 18.2-165.1 Ch. 10 18.2-175 32-5 18.2-181 28-87 18.2-183 28-88 18.2-187.1 Ch. 10 18.2-188 28-78, 28-79 18.2-189 28-78, 28-79 18.2-212 28-153 18.2-248 8-678 18.2-248.01 8-678 18.2-248.02 8-678 18.2-248.1 8-678 18.2-248.2 48-2 18.2-248.5 8-678 18.2-250 8-678 18.2-251.2 8-678 18.2-251.3 8-678 18.2-255 8-678 18.2-255.2 8-678 18.2-258 8-678 18.2-258.02 8-678 18.2-258.1, 18.2-258.2 8-678 18.2-266 et seq. 26-2 18.2-278.1 26-191 18.2-279 8-678 18.2-280 8-678 Ch. 28, Art. VII 28-151 18.2-281 8-678 18.2-282 8-678 18.2-282.1 8-678 18.2-284 Ch. 28, Art. VII 18.2-286 Ch. 28, Art. VII 18.2-286.1 8-678 18.2-287.2 8-678 18.2-289, 
18.2-290 8-678 18.2-300 8-678 18.2-308 28-150 18.2-314 8-678 18.2-319 28-157 18.2-322 28-159 18.2-324 28-155 18.2-344 28-116 18.2-346 8-21 8-678 18.2-347 28-115 18.2-347- 
18.2-349 8-21 18.2-355 8-678 18.2-355- 
18.2-358 8-21 18.2-356, 18.2-357 8-678 18.2-357.1 8-678 18.2-361 8-21 8-678 18.2-365 28-116 18.2-366 8-678 18.2-368 8-21 18.2-369 8-678 18.2-370 8-21 8-678 18.2-370.1 8-21 18.2-370.1-18.2-370.6 8-678 18.2-371 8-21 8-678 28-115 18.2-372 28-117 18.2-373 28-119 18.2-374 8-678 28-118 18.2-374.1:1 8-678 18.2-374.3, 18.2-374.4 8-678 18.2-375 28-120 28-123 18.2-379 8-678 18.2-386.1 8-21 8-678 18.2-386.2 8-678 18.2-387 8-21 28-122 18.2-388 28-147 18.2-404 28-152 18.2-405 8-678 18.2-406 8-678 18.2-408 8-678 18.2-413 8-678 18.2-414 8-678 18.2-415 28-148, 28-149 18.2-416 28-148, 28-149 18.2-423 8-678 18.2-423.01 8-678 18.2-423.1, 18.2-423.2 8-678 18.2-433.2 8-678 18.2-472.1 8-678 18.2-474.1 8-678 18.2-477 8-678 18.2-477.1, 18.2-477.2 8-678 18.2-478-18.2-481 8-678 18.2-484, 18.2-485 8-678 19.2-52 et seq. 14-26 19.2-59 14-26 26-17 19.2-76 20-19 19.2-76.2 20-19 19.2-76.3 20-19 19.2-152.8- 
19.2-152.10 28-73 19.2-182.2 et seq. 8-678 19.2-392.02 8-678 20-103 28-73 22.1-254 8-695 24-46.1 et seq. Char. §§ 18.03, 18.04 24-141 Char. § 4.12 24-165 Char. § 4.12 24.1-222.1 Char. § 3.05 24.1-251 et seq. 10-65 24.1-521 Char. § 3.02 24.2-100 et seq. Char. Ch. 3 24.2-101 Ch. 2, Art. II Char. § 3.05 24.2-222 Char. § 3.01 24.2-226 Char. § 3.04 24.2-228 Char. § 3.04 24.2-304.1- 
24.2-309 Ch. 2, Art. II 24.2-306, 
24.2-307 Ch. 2, Art. II 25-12-25-21 Char. § 18.03 25-23-25-38 Char. § 18.03 25-46.4 Char. § 18.03 25-232.01 Char. § 18.03 25.1-407 6-53 25.1-415 6-53 tit. 27 18-5 18-18 27-1 et seq. 15-46 Ch. 18 27-34.2 18-5 27-34.2:1 18-5 27-36 18-18 27-97 18-19 27-98 18-18, 18-19 tit. 32.1 Ch. 20 32.1-1 et seq. Ch. 20, Art. II 32.1-46 8-697 32.1-163 et seq. Ch. 42, Art. III 32.1-167 et seq. 42-151 33.1-348 26-74 35.1-9 Ch. 8, Art. IV 35.1-14 Ch. 8, Art. IV 35.1-25 8-401.1 35.1-26 8-401.1 36-1 et seq. Ch. 22 36-96.1 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. IV 36-96.21 Ch. 22, Art. IV 36-97 et seq. Ch. 6 6-19 36-99.11 26-10 37.2-917 8-678 42-66 48-1241 42.1-1 et seq. Ch. 24 42.1-33 24-2 42.1-33 et seq. Ch. 24 42.1-35 24-3 24-6 42.1-36.1 24-6 43-32 28-79 43-33 28-79 44-146.16 10-64 tit. 45.1 35-4 46.2-100 26-1 26-21 28-74 28-156 40-526 46.2-100 et seq. Ch. 26 26-2 46.2-102 26-4 46.2-103 26-17 46.2-113 26-5, 26-6 46.2-208.B.21       26-19 46.2-310 Ch. 46 46.2-600 et seq. 26-20 46.2-662 et seq. 26-74 46.2-731 26-10 46.2-739 26-10 46.2-752 Ch. 26, Art. III 26-68 26-72, 26-73 Ch. 40 46.2-753 26-70 Ch. 40 46.2-755 26-68 26-72 46.2-800 Ch. 26, Art. IV 46.2-808 Ch. 26, Art. IV 46.2-811 28-158 46.2-833 20-19 46.2-835 20-19 46.2-836 20-19 46.2-844 26-20 46.2-844.B 26-20 46.2-847 Ch. 26, Art. IV 46.2-859 26-20 46.2-903 Ch. 26, Art. IV 46.2-904- 
46.2-906.1 Ch. 26, Art. IV 46.2-915.2 26-161 46.2-932 Ch. 26, Art. IV 28-156 28-158 46.2-1015 Ch. 26, Art. IV 46.2-1049 Ch. 14, Art. III 46.2-1081 Ch. 26, Art. IV 46.2-1090 26-20 26-70 46.2-1201 26-9 46.2-1213 26-16 46.2-1216 Ch. 26, Art. V 46.2-1220 26-3 46.2-1230 Ch. 26, Art. II 46.2-1231 26-138 46.2-1231- 
46.2-1233 Ch. 26, Art. V 46.2-1233 26-136 26-138 46.2-1240 et seq. 26-10 46.2-1300 et seq. Ch. 26 46.2-1301 26-3 46.2-1302 26-7 46.2-1308 26-20 46.2-1313 26-2 46.2-1554 26-74 46.2-1555 26-74 48.1-600 et seq. 40-526 tit. 51 30-115 51.5-98 40-226 40-461 53.1-29 28-150 53.1-120 Ch. 16, Art. III, 
Div. 2 16-131 53.1-203 8-678 54.1-605 Ch. 40 54.1-400 et seq. 35-2 35-5 35-13, 35-14 54.1-2900 40-495 54.1-3000 Ch. 8, Art. II 54.1-3005 8-74 54.1-3401 48-2 54.1-3446 48-2 54.1-3448 48-2 54.1-3450 48-2 54.1-3452 48-2 54.1-3454 48-2 54.1-4100 8-235 54.1-4100 et seq. Ch. 8, Art. III, 
Div. 3 8-235 54.1-4101 8-239 54.1-4101.1 8-245 54.1-4102 8-244 54.1-4103 8-240 54.1-4104 8-239 54.1-4104 8-241 54.1-4105 8-241 54.1-4106 8-242, 8-243 54.1-4107 8-242, 8-243 54.1-4107 8-246 54.1-4108 8-236, 8-237 54.1-4110 8-247 55-79.1 et seq. 26-4 55-79.39 et seq. Ch. 6, Art. II, 
Div. 2 6-49 26-4 55-79.43 Ch. 6, Art. II, 
Div. 2 55-79.89 6-51 55-79.94 6-51-6-53 55-79.94(e)-(g) Ch. 6, Art. II, 
Div. 2 55-248.2 et seq. 22-129 55-248.4, 
55-248.5 22-127, 22-128 55-528 42-245 56-468.1 36-194, 36-195 56-594 40-294 58-12 22-56 58.1-1 et seq. Ch. 16 Ch. 40 58.1-15 35-23 40-72 58.1-366 40-270 58.1-600 et seq. Ch. 40 Ch. 40, Art. IV 40-52 40-528 40-540 58.1-605 Ch. 40, Art. IV 40-52 40-527 58.1-609.1- 
58.1-609.11 40-540 58.1-609.10 40-528 58.1-615 40-540 58.1-635 40-540 58.1-636 40-540 58.1-1000 40-88 58.1-1000 et seq. Ch. 40, Art. VI 58.1-1200 et seq. Ch. 40, Art. V 40-71 40-461 58.1-1201 40-69 58.1-1205 40-69 58.1-1206 40-69 58.1-1206 40-71 58.1-1207 40-69 40-71 58.1-1208 40-70 58.1-1211 40-70, 40-71 58.1-1212 40-71 58.1-2500 et seq. 40-461 58.1-2690 40-460 58.1-2901 40-297, 40-298 58.1-3000 Ch. 40 58.1-3111 40-476 58.1-3200 et seq. Ch. 40 58.1-3210 et seq. Ch. 40, Art. VII 58.1-3211, 
58.1-3212 40-134 58.1-3213 40-135 58.1-3215 40-136 58.1-3217 40-135 58.1-3221 Ch. 40, Art. XVI 40-352 58.1-3245.12 Ch. 40, Art. XVII 58.1-3292 40-272 58.1-3500 et seq. Ch. 40 Ch. 40, Art. III Ch. 40, Art. VIII 58.1-3503 40-538 58.1-3504 40-31 58.1-3507 40-271 58.1-3510 40-507 40-526 58.1-3510.1 40-527, 40-528 40-532 40-534 58.1-3510.1 et seq. Ch. 40, Art. XIX 58.1-3510.2 40-529, 40-530 58.1-3510.3 40-540 58.1-3523 et seq. Ch. 40, Art. VIII 58.1-3650 et seq. 48-261 58.1-3661 Ch. 40, Art. XII 40-264, 40-265 40-271, 40-272 58.1-3700 et seq. Ch. 40 Ch. 40, Art. XVIII 40-457 58.1-3700- 
58.1-3732.2 40-510 58.1-3700.1 40-456 58.1-3701 40-456 40-459 58.1-3703 Ch. 8, Art. II 40-457 58.1-3703.1 40-457 40-459 40-472 58.1-3706 40-457 40-534 58.1-3710 40-491 58.1-3714 40-492 58.1-3715 40-456 40-459, 40-460 40-492 58.1-3717 40-498 58.1-3719 40-472 40-498 58.1-3722 40-501 58.1-3731 40-460, 40-461 58.1-3800 et seq. Ch. 40 58.1-3805 et seq. Ch. 40 58.1-3812 Ch. 40, Art. XIV 40-295 40-300 58.1-3812 et seq. Ch. 40 58.1-3813 40-320 58.1-3813.1 40-295 Ch. 40, Art. XV 58.1-3814 40-296-40-299 58.1-3817 Ch. 40, Art. II 58.1-3819 40-182 Ch. 40, Art. IX 58.1-3830- 
58.1-3832 Ch. 40, Art. VI 40-89 58.1-3832 40-91 58.1-3832.9 40-95 58.1-3833 40-234 58.1-3840 40-181 Ch. 40, Art. XI 40-228, 40-229 58.1-3850 Ch. 40, Art. XVII 40-379 58.1-3900 et seq. Ch. 40 58.1-3906 40-234, 40-235 58.1-3907 40-234 58.1-3913 16-4 58.1-3916 40-283 58.1-3930 Ch. 40 58.1-3986 40-459 58.1-3993 40-459 58.2-3510 40-534 62.1-44.2 et seq. 35-2 62.1-44.5 35-2 62.1-44.15:24 et seq. 35-1, 35-2 62.1-44.15:34.C.2 35-4 62.1-44.15:35 35-5, 35-6 62.1-44.15:40 35-20 62.1-44.15:51 et seq. 35-1, 35-2 62.1-44.15:52 35-14 62.1-44.15:55.E 35-14 62.1-44.15:67 et seq. Ch. 35 35-1, 35-2 62.1-44.15:74 35-2 62.1-44.19:7.B 35-6 62.5-800 et seq. 40-492 63.2-100 et seq. Ch. 8, Art. VI 63.2-802 22-53 63.2-1515 8-692 63.2-1701 8-678 63.2-1715-63.2-1717 8-678 88.1-3826 40-181  
