The Charter
Chapter C
CHARTER
C:1

ARTICLE I
Incorporation and Boundaries
§ C1.1. Incorporation.
The inhabitants of the territory comprised within the present limits of the
Town of Hillsville, as such limitations are now or may hereafter be altered
and established by law, shall constitute a body politic and corporate to
be known and designated as the "Town of Hillsville," and such shall have
perpetual succession, may sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded,
contract and be contracted with and may have a corporate Seal, which it
may alter, renew or amend at its pleasure by proper ordinance.
§ C1.2. Boundaries.
The territory embraced within the Town of Hillsville is that territory in
Carroll County, Virginia, as set forth in Book 38, Page 266 et seq., in the
Clerk's office for the Circuit Court of Carroll County, Virginia.
§ C1.1 CHARTER § C1.2
C:3

ARTICLE II
Powers
§ C2.1. Powers.
The Town of Hillsville shall have all powers that may be conferred upon or
delegated to towns under the Constitution and laws of the Commonwealth
of Virginia, including but not limited to those powers set forth in §§ 15.1-837
through 15.1-907 of the Code of Virginia.
§ C2.1 CHARTER § C2.1
C:5

ARTICLE III
Mayor and Council
§ C3.1. Election, qualification and terms of office.
A. The Town of Hillsville shall be governed by a Town Council composed of
a Mayor and four (4) members, all of whom shall be qualified voters of
the town.
B. The Council in office at the time of the passage of this act shall continue
until the expiration of the terms for which they were elected or until
their successors are duly elected and qualified.
C. The Council shall be elected in the manner provided by law, as follows:
At the regular municipal election to be held on the first Tuesday in May,
1992, four (4) members shall be elected. The two (2) members, one (1)
of which has received the most votes and one (1) of which shall have
received the fewest votes, of the newly elected Council shall serve as
members of Council for terms of four (4) years each. The remaining two
(2) members shall serve for terms of two (2) years each until the
election of the first Tuesday in May 1994, at which time, and every two
(2) years thereafter, two (2) Councilmen shall be elected each for terms
of four (4) years beginning on July 1 following their election. Each
Councilman elected as hereinabove provided shall serve for the term
stated or until his successor shall have been elected and qualified. The
Council by ordinance shall establish the salary of the Mayor and
Council in accordance with statute. The Council shall be a continuing
body, and no measure pending before such body shall abate or be
discontinued by reason of expiration of term of office or removal of any
of its members.
D. At the regular municipal election to be held on the first Tuesday in May
of 1992, and every two (2) years thereafter, the qualified voters shall
elect a Mayor to serve for a term of two (2) years or until his successor
shall have been elected and qualified. The Mayor shall preside at
meetings of the Council and shall be recognized as head of the town
government for ceremonial purposes and by the Governor for purposes
of military law. He shall have the same powers and duties as other
members of Council; however, the Mayor shall vote only in case of a tie
and shall have no veto powers.
E. The Mayor shall be elected by the legally qualified voters of the town at
large, and the four (4) members of the Council shall be elected as
follows: one (1) from that part of each of the four (4) magisterial
districts, Laurel Fork, Pipers Gap, Sulphur Springs and Pine Creek,
which lies within the corporate limits of the Town of Hillsville, by the
legally qualified voters of such parts, respectively.
§ C3.1 CHARTER § C3.2
C:7
§ C3.2. Vacancies.
Vacancies on the Council and in the office of Mayor shall be filled for the
unexpired term by a majority vote of the remaining members of the Council.
§ C3.3. Qualification of members.
Any person qualified to vote in the town shall be eligible for the office of
Councilman or Mayor.
§ C3.4. Powers of Council.
The Council, along with the Mayor, shall make such rules as are necessary
for the orderly conduct of its business not inconsistent with the laws of
Virginia and shall have the powers in their discretion to appoint a Vice
Mayor, Town Manager, Clerk, Treasurer, Town Attorney and a Chief of
Police, who shall have such duties as are prescribed by statute and
ordinance and shall serve at the pleasure of the Council and at such
compensation as the Council may determine, consistent with general law.
§ C3.2 HILLSVILLE CODE § C3.4
C:8
ARTICLE IV
Miscellaneous
§ C4.1. Eminent domain.
The powers of eminent domain as set forth in Title 15.1 and Title 25 of the
Code of Virginia are hereby conferred upon the Town of Hillsville.
§ C4.2. Fiscal year.
The fiscal year of the town shall begin on July 1 of each year and end on
June 30 of the following year.
§ C4.3. Ordinances continuing.
All ordinances now in force in the Town of Hillsville, not inconsistent with
this Charter, shall remain in force until altered, amended or repealed by the
Council.
§ C4.4. Legislative procedure.
§ C4.5. Office of Town Sergeant not to be created.
A. Except in dealing with parliamentary procedure, the Council shall act
only by ordinance or resolution and, with the exception of ordinances
making appropriations or authorizing the contracting of indebtedness,
shall be confined to one (1) general subject.
B. The Council may adopt such rules of procedure as it deems necessary to
administer its affairs that are not in conflict with statutory law.
A. In accordance with the provisions of § 15.1-796 of the Code of Virginia,
there shall not be created in the town the office of Town Sergeant.
B. Chapter 64 of the Acts of Assembly of 1940, as amended, is repealed.
C. An emergency exists and this act is in force from its passage.
§ C4.1 CHARTER § C4.5
C:9
The Code
Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ C4.5 HILLSVILLE CODE § C4.5
1:10
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 11-11-1996]
§ 1-1. Legislative intent.
In accordance with § 15.1-37.3 of the Code of Virginia, the ordinances and
certain resolutions of the Town of Hillsville as codified by General Code
Publishers Corp., and consisting of the Charter and Chapters 1 through
171, together with an Appendix, shall be known collectively as the "Code of
the Town of Hillsville," hereafter termed the "Code." Wherever reference
is made in any of the ordinances and resolutions contained in the "Code
of the Town of Hillsville" to any other ordinance or resolution appearing in
said Code, such reference shall be changed to the appropriate chapter title,
chapter number, Article number or section number appearing in the Code
as if such ordinance or resolution had been formally amended to so read.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of the Code by this ordinance, are intended as a continuation
of such ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the
prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued in
full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the
Town Council of the Town of Hillsville, and it is the intention of said Council
that each such provision contained within the Code is hereby reaffirmed
as it appears in said Code. Only such provisions of former ordinances as
are omitted from this Code shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by the
provisions of § 1-4 below.
§ 1-3. Definitions and rules of construction.
A. In the interpretation and construction of this Code and of all ordinances
and resolutions of the town, the following rules of construction and
definitions shall be observed, unless otherwise specifically provided or
unless they are inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council or
the context clearly requires otherwise:
(1) Following. The word "following," when used by way of reference to
any section, shall be construed to mean next following that in which
such reference is made.
(2) Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only may extend
and be applied to females and to corporations as well as males.
(3) In the town. The words "in the town" shall mean any territory,
jurisdiction of which for the exercise of its regulatory power has
been conferred on the town by public or private law.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:11
(4) May. The word "may" shall be permissive.
(5) Number. The word importing the singular number only may extend
and be applied to several persons or things, as well as to one (1)
person or thing; and a word importing the plural number only may
extend and be applied to one (1) person or thing, as well as to
several persons or things.
(6) Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation
in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for
any oath.
(7) Official time standard. Whenever particular hours are specified in
this Code relating to the time within which any act shall or shall not
be performed by any person, the time applicable shall be official
standard time or daylight saving time, whichever may be in current
use in the town.
(8) Preceding. The word "preceding," when used by way of reference
to any section, shall be construed to mean next preceding that in
which such reference is made.
(9) Shall. The word "shall" shall be mandatory.
(10) Swear or sworn. The word "swear" or "sworn" shall be equivalent
to the word "affirm" or "affirmed" in all cases in which by law an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath.
B. As used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOND — When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing with such
surety, if any, as the Council may direct shall be sufficient.
COMPUTATION OF TIME — The time within which an act is to be done
shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day, and
if the last day be Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded.
COUNCIL or THE COUNCIL — The Council of the Town of Hillsville,
Virginia.
COUNTY or THE COUNTY — The County of Carroll in the State of
Virginia.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT — The Carroll County Health Department.
HEALTH OFFICER — The Director of Public Health of Carroll County
or his authorized representative.
MONTH — A calendar month.
OCCUPANT or TENANT — Any person who holds a written or oral lease
of or actually occupied the whole or a part of such building or land,
either alone or with others.
§ 1-3 HILLSVILLE CODE § 1-3
1:12
§ 1-4. Repeal of enactments not included in Code.
§ 1-5. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of ordinances provided for in § 1-4 of this ordinance shall not
affect the following classes of ordinances, rights and obligations, which are
hereby expressly saved from repeal:
OWNER — Applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the
whole or a part of such building or land.
PERSON — Includes a firm, partnership, association of persons,
corporation, organization or any other group acting as a unit.
PROPERTY — Real, personal or mixed property.
PUBLIC PLACE — The parks and all public lands owned by the town,
and those parts of public places which do not form travelled parts of
streets as defined in this section.
SIDEWALK — Any portion of a street between the curbline, or the
lateral lines of a roadway where there is no curb, and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
SIGNATURE and SUBSCRIPTION — Include a mark when the person
cannot write, his name being written near it and being witnessed by a
person who writes his own name as a witness.
STATE or THE STATE — The State of Virginia.
STREET — Includes avenues, boulevards, highways, roads, alleys,
lanes, viaducts, bridges and the approaches thereto and all other public
thoroughfares in the town, and shall mean the entire width thereof
between abutting property lines. It shall be construed to include a
sidewalk or footpath, unless the contrary is expressed or unless such
construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the
Council.
TOWN or THE TOWN — The Town of Hillsville, in the County of Carroll
and the State of Virginia.
WRITTEN and IN WRITING — Include typewriting, printing on paper
and any other mode of representing words and letters.
A. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the Town of
Hillsville in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in such Code or recognized and continued in force by
reference therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date
of this ordinance.
B. When an ordinance or resolution which has repealed another shall itself
be repealed, the previous ordinance or resolution shall not be revived
without express words to that effect.
§ 1-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5
1:13
§ 1-6. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, Article, chapter or part of this
ordinance or of any ordinance or resolution included in this Code now
or through supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate
the remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation to the clause,
sentence, paragraph, section, Article, chapter or part thereof directly
A. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Town of Hillsville prior to the effective date
of this ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the
enforcement of such right or liability.
B. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Town of
Hillsville or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result
therefrom.
C. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Town of Hillsville.
D. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Town of Hillsville.
E. Any ordinance of the Town of Hillsville providing for the laying out,
opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing
grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any
right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or other public place
within the Town of Hillsville or any portion thereof.
F. Any ordinance of the Town of Hillsville appropriating money or
transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or
authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the Town of
Hillsville or other instruments or evidence of the town's indebtedness.
G. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract or obligation.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The annexation or dedication of property.
J. Any legislation relating to salaries.
K. Any ordinance amending the Zoning Map.
L. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
M. Any legislation adopted subsequent to June 10, 1996.
N. An ordinance adopted June 24, 1981, pertaining to reapportionment.
§ 1-5 HILLSVILLE CODE § 1-6
1:14
involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
§ 1-7. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the
Town Manager of the Town of Hillsville and shall remain there for use and
examination by the public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and,
if this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified by the Town
Manager of the Town of Hillsville by impressing thereon the Seal of the
town, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of said Town
Manager to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect. The enactment and publication
of this ordinance, coupled with the availability of a copy of the Code for
inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due
and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-8. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of
the ordinances and resolutions known collectively as the "Code of the
Town of Hillsville" or any new ordinances or resolutions, when enacted or
adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the Town Council to
be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such Code so
that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include
such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements. Whenever such
additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be
enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this ordinance
shall affect the status of any ordinance or resolution contained herein, and
such ordinances or resolutions may be amended, deleted or changed from
time to time as the Town Council deems desirable.
§ 1-9. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Town Manager to keep up-to-date the certified
copy of the book containing the Code of the Town of Hillsville required to be
filed in the office of the Town Manager for use by the public. All changes in
said Code and all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Town Council
subsequent to the enactment of this ordinance in such form as to indicate
the intention of said Council to be a part of said Code shall, when finally
enacted or adopted, be included therein by temporary attachment of copies
of such changes, ordinances or resolutions until such changes, ordinances
or resolutions are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which time
such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-10
1:15
§ 1-10. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code may be purchased from the Town Manager of the Town
of Hillsville upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Town
Council, which Council may also arrange by resolution for procedures for
the periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-11. Catchlines of sections.
The catchlines of the sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords
to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken
to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of any section, nor, unless
expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any section, including
its catchline, is amended or reenacted.
§ 1-12. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who, without authorization from the Town Manager, changes
or amends, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of
the Town of Hillsville or who alters or tampers with such Code in any
manner whatsoever which will cause the legislation of the Town of Hillsville
to be misrepresented thereby or who violates any other provision of this
ordinance shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to the penalty provided in § 1-13.
§ 1-13. General penalty.
Wherever in this Code, or in any ordinance or resolution of the town, or
rule or regulation or order promulgated by any officer or agency of the town
under authority duly vested in him, her or it, any act is prohibited or is
declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or the doing of
any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful
or an offense or a misdemeanor, and no specific penalty is provided for the
violation thereof, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such
ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order shall be punished as if guilty
of a Class 1 misdemeanor, as defined in § 18.2-11 of the Code of Virginia
(1950); provided, however, that such penalty shall not exceed the penalty
prescribed by the Code of Virginia for a like offense. Each day any violation
of this Code or any such ordinance, resolution, rule or order continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted legislation; new provisions.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances and resolutions for
publication as the Code of the Town of Hillsville, no changes in the
meaning or intent of such ordinances and resolutions have been made,
except as provided for in Subsection B hereof. In addition, certain
grammatical changes and other minor nonsubstantive changes were
made in one (1) or more of said pieces of legislation. It is the intention
of the Town Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the
§ 1-10 HILLSVILLE CODE § 1-14
1:16
§ 1-15. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this ordinance are hereby made Article I of Chapter 1 of
the Code of the Town of Hillsville, such ordinance to be entitled "General
Provisions, Article I, Adoption of Code," and the sections of this ordinance
shall be numbered §§ 1-1 to 1-16, inclusive.
§ 1-16. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect as provided by law.
Code as if the ordinances and resolutions had been previously formally
amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the certain amendments and/or additions are made
herewith and are hereby adopted by reference, to become effective
upon the effective date of this ordinance. The sections or chapters
which have been amended or added are noted using an Editor's Note
stating: "Amended (or added) at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I."
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:17
Chapter 3
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
CHARTER REFERENCES
Mayor and Council — See Art. III.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Complaint procedure — See Ch. 8.
Grievance procedure — See Ch. 15.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 22.
Personnel policy — See Ch. 26.
§ 1-16 HILLSVILLE CODE § 1-16
3:18
ARTICLE I
Town Manager
§ 3-1. Scope of powers; compensation. [Added 6-12-1991; amended
6-10-19961]
The Town Manager shall, under the control of the Council, have general
charge and management of the administrative affairs and work of the town.
The Town Manager shall, in conformity with the Town Charter, serve at
the pleasure of the Council and at such compensation as the Council may
determine.
§ 3-2. Powers and duties. [Added 6-12-1991]
The Town Manager shall:
A. See that within the town the laws, ordinances, resolutions and bylaws
are faithfully executed.
B. Attend all meetings of Council and recommend for adoption such
measures as he shall deem expedient.
C. Make reports to Council from time to time upon affairs of the town.
D. Keep Council fully advised of the town's financial condition and its
future financial needs.
E. Prepare and submit to Council a tentative budget for the next fiscal
year.
F. Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the Council, not in
conflict with the foregoing.
1. Editor's Note: Original Section 2.1, Powers of Town Council, as added 6-12-1991 and
amended 6-10-1996, which immediately preceded this section, was deleted at time of
adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 3-1 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 3-2
3:19

ARTICLE II
Town Council
§ 3-3. Order of business at regular meetings.
The order of business of Town Council at all regular meetings shall be as
follows:
§ 3-4. Time of regular meeting.
The regular Town Council meeting nights shall be second and fourth
Mondays at 7:00 p.m.
A. The Mayor shall call the meeting to order.
B. Invocation by minister or a member of the Council.
C. Reading of the minutes.
D. Citizens present to be heard.
E. Reports of Mayor and Council members.
F. Unfinished business.
G. New business.
H. Adjourn.
§ 3-3 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 3-4
3:21

ARTICLE III
Planning Commission
§ 3-5. Membership; appointment; removal; terms; compensation.
§ 3-6. Powers and duties.
The Planning Commission shall exercise such powers and shall perform
such duties as are conferred upon such bodies by state law.
§ 3-7. Organization; meetings; rules and regulations; records.
A. The Planning Commission shall consist of not fewer than five (5) nor
more than fifteen (15) members, appointed by the Town Council, all of
whom shall be residents of the town, qualified by knowledge and
experience to make decisions on questions of community growth and
development, provided that at least one-half ( 1/2) of the members so
appointed shall be freeholders. The Town Council may require each
member of the Commission to take an oath of office.
B. One (1) member of the Commission may be a member of the Town
Council and one (1) member may be a member of the administrative
branch of government of the town. The term of each of these two (2)
members shall be coextensive with the term of office to which he has
been elected or appointed, unless the Town Council, at the first regular
meeting each year, appoints others to serve as their representatives.
The remaining members of the Commission first appointed shall serve
respectively for terms of one (1) year, two (2) years, three (3) years and
four (4) years, divided equally or as nearly equal as possible between
the membership. Subsequent appointments shall be for terms of four
(4) years each. The Town Council may establish different terms of office
for initial and subsequent appointments. Vacancies shall be billed for
appointment for the unexpired term only. Members may be removed for
malfeasance in office.
C. 2The Town Council shall provide for:
(1) Reimbursement of actual expenses incurred by members of the
Commission; or
(2) Compensation to such members, or any of them, for their services;
or
(3) Both.
A. The Planning Commission shall elect its Chairman from among the
appointed members. The Commission may create and fill such other
offices as it may determine. The term of Chairman shall be for one (1)
year with eligibility for reelection.
2. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 3-5 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 3-7
3:23
§ 3-8. Employees; consultants; expenditures.
The Planning Commission may appoint such employees as it may deem
necessary for its work. The Commission may also contract with city
planners, engineers, architects and other consultants for such services as it
may require. The expenditures of the Commission, exclusive of gifts to the
Commission, shall be within the amount duly appropriated by the Council
for the purpose in its annual budget.
B. The Commission shall hold at least one (1) regular meeting every two
(2) months. It shall adopt rules and regulations for transaction of
business and shall keep records of its resolutions, transactions, findings
and determinations, which records shall be a public record, open to
public inspection.
§ 3-7 HILLSVILLE CODE § 3-8
3:24
ARTICLE IV
Enforcement of Health Laws
§ 3-9. Enforcement of health laws.
The Town Council is responsible for the enforcement of all health laws
applicable to the town and shall hire a Health Officer or contract with
other localities for the enforcement thereof; therefore, if the necessary
contractual arrangements shall be made, the county or other governmental
authority may enforce health laws within the town.
§ 3-9 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 3-9
3:25
Chapter 8
COMPLAINT PROCEDURE
CHARTER REFERENCES
Mayor and Council — See Art. III.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Grievance procedure — See Ch. 15.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 22.
Personnel policy — See Ch. 26.
§ 8-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide an orderly and fair procedure for
the handling of citizen complaints against town officers and employees.
§ 8-2. Initial procedure.
Citizen complaints against town employees shall be directed first to the
immediate supervisor of the employee. The supervisor shall listen to the
complaint, investigate the complaint and may, in his discretion, conduct an
informal hearing on the complaint with all interested parties present. Based
on his findings, the supervisor shall take any corrective measures that he
deems necessary and proper and that are within his lawful authority. The
supervisor shall furnish the complainant and the employee with a copy of
this chapter.
§ 8-3. Appeals to Mayor; hearing; report.
A citizen or employee has the right to appeal a decision of the supervisor.
The appeal shall be to the Mayor. The appeal shall be made within ten (10)
days of the supervisor's decision pursuant to § 8-2. The Mayor shall hold an
informal hearing with all interested parties present. The Mayor shall make
a decision on the disposition of the complaint within ten (10) days after the
appeal is noted. The Mayor shall make a full written report of the complaint
and the disposition thereof and shall furnish a copy to the parties involved.
§ 8-4. Appeals to Council; hearing.
A. A citizen or employee has the right to appeal the decision of the Mayor
to the Town Council. The appeal must be noted within ten (10) days of
the receipt of the Mayor's report and decision. The Town Council shall
conduct a formal hearing within ten (10) days after the appeal is noted.
At the hearing before the Town Council, the employee and/or the
complainant may appear with or without a representative including
legal counsel. Each party shall have the opportunity to present
§ 3-9 HILLSVILLE CODE § 8-4
8:26
§ 8-5. Time limits.
Time limitations contained in this chapter may be waived upon agreement
of all parties.
§ 8-6. Town grievance procedure.
This complaint procedure shall not prevent an employee from exercising his
rights under Chapter 15, Grievance Procedure.
§ 8-7. Complaints against officers.
Complaints against officers of the town shall be processed in accord with
this chapter, except that § 8-2 shall be eliminated. Officers of the town shall
include the following: Town Manager, Police Chief, Town Attorney, Town
Engineer, Superintendent of Public Works, etc. A citizen noting a complaint
against a town officer shall be furnished with a copy of this chapter by the
Mayor.
§ 8-8. Failure to comply with rules.
Complaints shall be processed under the rules contained in this chapter
unless all parties involved agree, in writing, to a different procedure for the
resolution of the complaint. Failure to comply with the rules in this chapter
shall result in a decision against the noncomplying party.
§ 8-9. Decisions of Council final.
The decision of the Town Council shall be final in all cases.
evidence, including the testimony of witnesses. Each party had a right
to hear the opposing evidence and to question the opposing witnesses.
The hearing shall be private unless both parties request a public
hearing. A transcript shall be made of these proceedings.
B. The Town Council shall base its findings on the evidence reviewed at
the hearing. The Town Council shall give the employee and the
complainant its written decision within ten (10) days after the hearing,
together with a copy of the transcript of the proceedings which shall be
furnished without cost. The written decision shall set forth the actions
taken or to be taken by the Town Council and the reasons therefore.
§ 8-4 COMPLAINT PROCEDURE § 8-9
8:27
Chapter 15
(RESERVED)
Chapter 22
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
CHARTER REFERENCES
Mayor and Council — See Art. III.
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 3.
Complaint procedure — See Ch. 8.
Grievance procedure — See Ch. 15.
Personnel policy — See Ch. 26.
§ 8-9 HILLSVILLE CODE § 8-9
8:28
ARTICLE I
Town Attorney
[Adopted 10-11-1978 as Ch. 14 of the 1978 Code]
§ 22-1. Office; term. [Amended 2-11-2002]
The office of the Town Attorney shall be held by an attorney licensed to
practice in the State of Virginia. The Town attorney shall, in conformity
with the Towns Charter, serve at the pleasure of the Council and at such
compensation as the Council may determine.
§ 22-2. Representation in criminal and civil matters.
The Town Attorney shall represent the Town in all legal matters, both
criminal and civil.
§ 22-3. Compensation; duties. [Added 7-25-1984]
A. The Town Attorney, in his representation of the Town, shall be paid a
salary in an amount as per agreement between the Council and the
Attorney, which salary shall be the compensation for those duties as set
forth in Subsection B below. For matters requiring the attention of the
Town Attorney which fall outside the duties as set forth in Subsection B,
the Attorney shall be paid upon the submission of a bill specifying the
work done and his fee in consideration thereof. Such fees shall be based
on a prearranged agreement between the Town Attorney and Town
Council, after the Town Attorney has been authorized to do work other
than that set forth in Subsection B.
B. The duties of the Town Attorney as prescribed above are as follows:
(1) To regularly attend the meetings of the Town Council in the
capacity of Town Attorney.
(2) To advise the Town Council in regards to legal questions pertaining
to the operation of the Town.
(3) To regularly attend executive sessions of the Town Council and to
limit such executive sessions to appropriate subject matter, unless
otherwise advised by Council. [Amended 5-8-2000]
(4) To review the ordinance book and to advise the Town regarding
proposed changes therein.
(5) To prosecute the Town's misdemeanor cases. [Amended
4-24-1985; 6-8-1992]
(6) To advise the Police Chief on criminal procedure.
§ 22-1 COMPLAINT PROCEDURE § 22-3
8:29

ARTICLE II
Town Treasurer
[Adopted 1-14-1981 (Ch. 25 of the 1978 Code)]
§ 22-4. Term; compensation. [Amended 7-26-1989; 2-11-2002]
The Treasurer shall, in conformity with the Town Charter, serve at the
pleasure of the Council and at such compensation as the Council may
determine.
§ 22-5. Oath of office.
The Treasurer shall be required to take an oath of office before entering
upon the discharge of his/her duties, which oath shall be subscribed by the
Mayor and shall be filed and preserved as an official record. The oath shall
be in the following form:
STATE OF VIRGINIA,
COUNTY OF CARROLL,
TOWN OF HILLSVILLE,
I, _______________________, do solemnly swear that I will support the
Constitution of the United States, the Constitution and laws of the State of
Virginia, and the Charter and ordinances of the Town of Hillsville, and that
I will, to the best of my ability, faithfully perform the duties of the office of
Treasurer during my continuance therein, so help me God.
SIGNED TREASURER
Subscribed and sworn to before me this day of , 19____.
MAYOR
§ 22-6. Bond. [Amended 7-26-1989]
The Treasurer, before taking office, shall give a good and sufficient surety
bond to the Town duly approved by the Mayor and conditioned upon the
faithful performance and discharge of his/her duties and for proper
application and payment of all money or property coming into his/her hands
by virtue of the office in an amount established by the Town Council at the
time of the appointment. The cost of said bond shall be paid by the Town.
§ 22-7. Powers and duties. [Amended 7-11-1984; 7-26-1989;
10-9-1991]
The Treasurer shall have the following duties:
A. To attend all Council meetings and give advice concerning any financial
matter when he deems it appropriate from an accounting and internal
control point of view.
§ 22-4 COMPLAINT PROCEDURE § 22-7
8:31
§ 22-8. Compensation. [Amended 10-9-1991]
The Treasurer shall be compensated in an amount established by a
resolution of the Town Council. Pay shall be based upon a basic monthly
fee. The Treasurer may bill periodically for additional services rendered for
services which are not included in the basic monthly fee. The Treasurer
shall be bound only to exercise reasonable care. All prevailing laws shall
apply.
B. To cosign all checks disbursing Town funds and any other documents
requiring the Treasurer's signature except that in the Treasurer's
absence, the Mayor and/or the Vice Mayor may cosign in his stead.
C. To review the annual Town budget with the Town Manager, making
appropriate suggestions or recommendations. The Treasurer shall also
participate in the budget review process with the Town Manager and
Council.
D. To offer advice and assistance to the Town Manager in the proper
recording and maintenance of all receipts and disbursements
concerning the financial records of the Town. Periodic review of proper
classifications of receipts and disbursements shall be included.
E. To make periodic unannounced counts of petty cash and funds on hand
at his/her discretion.
F. Such other duties as may be requested by Council, not in conflict with
state and federal law or local ordinance.
§ 22-7 HILLSVILLE CODE § 22-8
8:32
ARTICLE III
Police Chief and Patrolmen
[Adopted 10-11-1978 as Ch. 22 of the 1978 Code]
§ 22-9. Duties of the Chief of Police; term; compensation.
A. The Chief of Police, upon appointment by the Council, shall be the Chief
Executive Officer of the Department. He shall devote his entire time
and attention to the discharge of the duties of his office and give prompt
and efficient attention to all matters concerning the welfare of the
Department and the public. The Chief of Police shall, in conformity with
the Town Charter, serve at the pleasure of the Council and at such
compensation as the Council may determine. [Amended 7-12-1991;
2-11-2002]
B. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to direct the observance and
enforcement of all laws of the United States of America, laws of the
State of Virginia and the ordinances of the Town of Hillsville, and the
enforcement of or observance which devolves upon the Department of
Police, and he shall issue, at his discretion, such orders as may be
necessary to facilitate this duty.
C. All instructions to the Chief of Police shall come from the Council or
Town Manager. The Chief of Police shall report to the Town Manager.
All instructions to the Department shall be issued by the Chief of Police
and communicated to the members thereof through his subordinate
officers, recognizing rank whenever possible, or in such other manner
as circumstances and the efficiency of the service may require.
[Amended 7-12-1991; 3-13-2017]
D. He shall keep the Council fully acquainted concerning any and all
matters of police affairs and other information pertinent to his office.
[Amended 7-12-1991]
E. The Chief of Police shall have the control of the stationing and
transferring of all patrolmen and other officers and employees in the
Department.
F. He shall, upon receipt of reports from subordinate officers or the public
of any violation(s) of laws or ordinances, rules and regulations or orders
governing the Department, promptly investigate or cause to be
investigated such reports and follow them up with the necessary action.
G. He shall, immediately upon the receipt of reports of any negligence,
violation of law or any other matter which comes within the jurisdiction
of any other Town department, cause a report therefore to be made to
the proper official in charge of such department.
H. He shall, subject to the approval of the Council, establish and maintain
any division, bureau, police district or unit of service and regulate the
§ 22-9 COMPLAINT PROCEDURE § 22-9
8:33
§ 22-10. Duties of uniform patrolmen. [Amended 10-24-1984]
All members will become familiar with the rules and regulations as set forth
by the Chief of Police and will abide by the same.
duties and working hours thereof for the betterment of the Department
and the public. [Amended 7-12-1991]
I. He shall cause to be established and maintained such statistical
information and records as may be required or directed.
J. He shall, with the approval of the Council, during periods of emergency,
regulate the hours of employment which, in his judgment, shall be for
the best interests of the Department and public safety. [Amended
7-12-1991]
K. He shall immediately proceed to the scene of any riot or other unusual
occurrence where the services of large details of police are necessary
and take command of the force.
L. He shall maintain a proper discipline of subordinates under their
separate commands and see that no partiality, favoritism or undue
leniency is shown, nor any injustice done.
M. He shall, at all times, keep informed of the affairs of the Department
and be assured that the duties of his subordinates are properly
discharged.
N. He shall inspect or cause to be inspected at irregular and unannounced
times all sections of the Department to assure the efficiency of police
work; where conditions are found unsatisfactory, see that proper
corrections are made.
O. He shall require from all members of the Department their loyalty,
energy and obedience and take action in prosecuting any member
guilty of interfering with or in any manner obstructing or attempting to
obstruct the orderly and efficient operation and conduct of the
Department.
P. He shall maintain in his office a personal record of each member or
employee of the Department.
Q. The Chief of Police shall be responsible for promulgating rules and
regulations for the orderly and efficient operation of the Police
Department. [Amended 7-12-1991]
§ 22-9 HILLSVILLE CODE § 22-10
8:34
ARTICLE IV
Clerk
[Adopted 2-11-2002]
§ 22-11. Term; compensation.
The Clerk shall, in conformity with the Town Charter, serve at the pleasure
of Council and at such compensation as the Council may determine.
§ 22-11 COMPLAINT PROCEDURE § 22-11
8:35
Chapter 26
(RESERVED)
Chapter 34
(RESERVED)
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 38
AMUSEMENTS
§ 38-1. Presence of minors limited. [Amended 1-14-1987;
1-11-1989]
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of sixteen (16) years to
frequent a public poolroom, game room, arcade or combination thereof in
the town or be permitted by the proprietor thereof or his agent to frequent
any such public poolroom, game room, arcade or combination thereof,
unless accompanied by parent or legal guardian.
§ 38-2. Loitering unlawful.
No person shall loiter in or about a public poolroom, game room, arcade or
combination thereof in the town or be permitted by the proprietor thereof or
his agent to loiter in or about any such public poolroom, game room, arcade
or combination thereof.
§ 38-3. Violations and penalties.
Violation of this section shall be a Class 3 misdemeanor.
Chapter 42
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 97.
§ 42-1. Town-designated bird sanctuary.
A. There is hereby established within the town a bird sanctuary for the
protection and propagation of songbirds within the town.
§ 22-11 HILLSVILLE CODE § 42-1
34:36
§ 42-2. Keeping hogs or pigs.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep upon his premises any hog or
pig within two hundred (200) yards of a neighboring occupied dwelling or
building.
§ 42-3. Dogs running at large.3
It shall be unlawful for an owner or custodian of any dog to allow the dog to
run at large. A dog shall be deemed to be running at large while roaming,
running or self-hunting off the property of its owner or custodian and not
under its owner's or custodian's immediate control.
§ 42-4. Rabies inoculation of dogs.4
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep within the town any dog, male or
female, over four (4) months of age, without first having the dog inoculated
against rabies, in accordance with the standards and requirements of the
State Health Department, and to thereafter keep the dog without having the
animal reinoculated at the intervals established by the Health Department.
§ 42-5. Keeping animals in such manner as to cause a nuisance.
No person shall pen up or confine cows, horses, mules or other animals in
any place within the town that will cause it to be a nuisance.
§ 42-6. Allowing animals to run at large.
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any hog, pig, goat, ox, cow, calf,
horse, mule, colt or other animal likely to be a nuisance to run at large in
the town.
§ 42-7. Noisy animals and fowl.
No person shall have or keep any animal or fowl which, by making or
causing frequent or long continued and unreasonable noise, shall disturb
the comfort and repose of any person in the vicinity. Upon complaint being
made to the town police that the provisions of this section are being
violated, such officer may, after investigation, give notice of such complaint
B. In the protection of songbirds, it shall be unlawful for any person to
shoot, destroy or harm songbirds or their nesting places within the
town.
C. Appropriate signs shall be placed at the corporate limits of the town, on
the main highways entering the town, showing the establishment of a
bird sanctuary in the town, which signs shall hereafter be properly
maintained and so located as to be easily observed.
3. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
4. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 42-1 ANIMALS § 42-7
42:37
to the owner or person in charge of such animal or fowl and order the
discontinuance of the disturbance. It shall be unlawful to fail to comply with
such order.
§ 42-8. Disposition of dead animals and fowl.
If any animal or fowl dies in the town, the owner or person in charge of such
animal or fowl shall at once dispose of the same in a manner satisfactory to
the health officer. It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in charge of a
dead animal or fowl to fail to dispose of the same within five (5) hours after
notice to do so. When the owner or person in charge of a dead animal or
fowl is unknown, the dead animal or fowl shall be disposed of at the expense
of the town by the town.5
§ 42-9. Cruelty to animals.
No person shall override, overdrive, overload, torture, ill treat or cruelly or
unnecessarily beat, maim, mutilate or kill any animal, whether belonging to
himself or another, or deprive any animal of necessary sustenance, food or
drink or cause any of the above things or, being the owner of such animal,
permit such acts to be done by another or willfully set on foot, instigate,
engage or in any way further any act of cruelty to any animal or carry
or cause to be carried in or upon any vehicle or vessel or otherwise any
animal in a cruel, brutal or inhuman manner so as to produce torture or
unnecessary suffering; but nothing in this section shall be construed to
prohibit the dehorning of cattle. The word "animal," as used in this section,
shall be construed to include birds and fowl.
Chapter 48
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Drainage control — See Ch. 70.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 76.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 140.
Water and sewer — See Ch. 167.
Zoning — See Ch. 171.
§ 48-1. Adoption of standards. [Amended 5-10-1999; 8-14-2006;
5-14-2012; 9-24-2018]
There is hereby adopted by reference in the Town the Virginia Uniform
Statewide Building Code, including Part I, The Virginia Construction Code,
2015 edition; Part II, The Virginia Rehabilitation Code, 2015 edition; and
5. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 3-9, Slaughterhouses, rendering plants, etc., which
immediately followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 42-7 HILLSVILLE CODE § 48-1
42:38
Part III, The Virginia Maintenance Code, 2015 edition. The provisions of
which are adopted and shall control all matters concerning the design,
construction, alteration, addition, enlargement, repair, removal, demolition,
conversion, use, location, occupancy and maintenance of buildings and
all other functions which pertain to the installation of systems vital to
buildings and structures in their service equipment, as defined by the
Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, and shall apply to buildings or
other structures in the Town.
§ 48-2. Enforcement; building permits.
A. The Town Council is responsible for the enforcement of the Virginia
Uniform Statewide Building Code by hiring building officials or by
contracting with other localities for the enforcement thereof; therefore,
if the necessary contractual arrangements shall be made, the county
may enforce the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code in the Town.
B. The Building Official shall issue a building permit only upon receipt of
the following: [Amended 6-27-2016]
(1) A written certificate issued by the Town Council or its duly
appointed agent approving the building project.
(2) A written certificate issued by the Town Council or its duly
appointed agent stating that Town water and sewer service will or
will not be furnished to the proposed building project.
(3) A written statement from the Carroll County Health Department
stating that the subject property is suitable for the required septic
system and/or water system in cases where the Town Council or its
duly appointed agent has filed a certificate stating that water and/
or sewer service will not be furnished to the proposed building
project.
(4) A written certificate issued by the Town Treasurer stating that all
delinquent taxes have been satisfied, as provided in § 15.2-2286,
Code of Virginia.
C. The Building Official shall record and file all certificates mentioned in
Subsection B above.
D. The Building Official shall notify the Town Council or its duly appointed
agent, in writing, of the issuance of a building permit. [Amended
6-27-2016]
E. No certificate referred to in Subsection B above shall be issued by the
Town Council or its duly appointed agent until the applicant has paid a
fee as provided for in Subsection F below. [Amended 6-27-2016]
F. The Town Council shall establish a scheme of fees for the issuance of
building permits and certificates.6
G. A permit issued in violation of this section shall be void.
§ 48-1 ANIMALS § 48-3
42:39
§ 48-3. Dangerous buildings and structures. [Amended 11-11-1996]
§ 48-4. Property maintenance. [Added 5-10-1999; amended
8-14-2006; 5-14-2012]
A. The owners of property therein shall at such time as the Town Council
may prescribe, remove, repair or secure any building, wall or any other
structure which might endanger the public health or safety of other
residents of the Town.
B. The Town Council through its own agents or employees may remove,
repair or secure any building, wall or any other structure which might
endanger the public health or safety of other residents of the Town,
wherein the owner of such property after reasonable notice and a
reasonable time to do so has failed to remove, repair or secure such
building, wall or other structure. For purposes of this section,
reasonable notice shall include a written notice mailed by certified or
registered mail, return receipt requested, sent to the last known
address of the property owner and published in a newspaper having
general circulation in the Town in accordance with applicable
provisions of § 15.1-504, Code of Virginia. No action shall be taken by
the Town to remove, repair or secure any building, wall or other
structure for at least 30 days following the later of the return of the
receipt or the newspaper publication.
C. In the event that the Town Council through its own agents or employees
removes, repairs or secures any building, wall or any other structure
after complying with the notice provisions of this section, the cost of
expenses thereof shall be chargeable to and paid by the owner of such
property and may be collected by the Town as taxes and levies are
collected.
D. Every charge authorized by this section with which the owner of any
such property shall have been assessed and which remains unpaid shall
constitute a lien against such property, ranking on a parity with liens for
unpaid local taxes and enforceable in the same manner as provided in
Articles 3 (§ 58.1-3940 et seq) and 4 (§ 58.1-3965 et seq.) of Chapter 39
of Title 58.1.
A. The Uniform Statewide Building Code, Part III, The Virginia
Maintenance Code, 2015 Edition, is hereby adopted as the property
maintenance code of the Town of Hillsville, in the Commonwealth of
Virginia; for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided;
and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions
and terms of said property maintenance code are hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with
the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in
Subsection B of this section. [Amended 9-24-2018]
6. Editor's Note: Fees are on file and available for inspection in the office of the Town
Manager.
§ 48-3 HILLSVILLE CODE § 48-4
42:40
Chapter 52
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
§ 52-1. Building identification numbers required.
All residential, commercial, industrial and other types of occupied buildings
within the town shall each be assigned an identification number according
to a scheme of numbering adopted by the Town Council.
§ 52-2. Placement and size of numbers.
The owner of each building shall place the assigned number on his or
her building. The numbers placed on a building shall be legible and of a
sufficient size so as to be visible from the public street.
§ 52-3. Promotion of numbering system.
The Town Manager shall encourage local civic organizations to sell and
install identification numbers and the Town Manager shall otherwise
publicize and promote the implementation of the town building number
system.
Chapter 56
BURNING, OUTDOOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 76.
Solid waste — See Ch. 128.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 136.
B. Nothing in this section or in the property maintenance code hereby
adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending
in any court or any rights acquired or liability incurred or any cause or
causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance
hereby repealed as cited in Subsection B of this section; nor shall any
just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or
affected by this section.
C. The Town Manager shall certify to the adoption of this section, and
cause the same to be published as required by law; and this section
shall take effect and be in force from and after its approval as required
by law.
§ 48-4 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 56-1
52:41
§ 56-1. Burning of rubbish prohibited; exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn rubbish of any kind, other
than paper, paper goods, cardboard, leaves, weed cuttings, grass cuttings
or brush, anywhere in the town except in a stove, furnace, incinerator or
fireplace.
§ 56-2. Burning of leaves and brush.
Leaves, weed cuttings, grass cuttings and brush may be burned in the open
if properly piled fifteen (15) feet away from any structure and if attended;
and provided, further, that this may not be done on a windy day.
§ 56-3. Burning near woodlands and during fire season.
No burning is allowed within three hundred (300) feet of any woodland, nor
shall any burning be allowed during fire season as established by the State
Fire Warden, until after 4:00 p.m.
§ 56-4. Burning on streets or sidewalks prohibited.
No fire shall be built or allowed to burn on any street or sidewalk asphalt
pavement.
Chapter 60
CHECKS, RETURNED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water and sewer — See Ch. 167.
§ 60-1. Maximum statutory fee to be charged. [Amended
11-11-1996]
The town shall charge a fee for all returned checks due to insufficient funds
or closed accounts up to the maximum allowed by § 15.1-29.4, Code of
Virginia. This fee must be paid in addition to the amount of the check and
must be paid by cash, certified check or money order.
§ 60-2. Failure to pay amount of check and fee.
If the full amount of the check and the fee are not paid within five (5)
working days upon the town's receipt of such notification and notification
by the town to the person involved, one (1) of the following conditions shall
occur:
A. Water and/or sewer services will be terminated and a seventy-fivedollar
reconnection fee charged in addition to the bill and returned
check fee if the check was for payment of a water and/or sewer bill or a
§ 56-1 HILLSVILLE CODE § 60-2
56:42
§ 60-3. Establishment of fee by Town Council.
This fee shall be established and amended by the Hillsville Town Council.
Chapter 66
CURFEW
security deposit for a new water and/or sewer account; or [Amended
6-26-2000]
B. Appropriate legal action or criminal charges will be pursued if the
check was for payment of anything other than a water and/or sewer bill
or a security deposit for a new water and/or sewer account.
§ 60-2 CURFEW § 60-3
66:43

ARTICLE I
General Curfew
[Adopted 10-11-1978 as Sec. 10-3 of the 1978 Code]
§ 66-1. Curfew established. [Amended 6-13-1979]
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of sixteen (16) years
to be upon the public streets or alleys of the town or in any public place
within the town between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. unless
accompanied by the parent or guardian of such person or unless such
person has in his possession written permission from a parent or guardian
showing why such person is upon the street, alley or in such public place.
§ 66-2. Responsibility of parent or guardian.
It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian of such person to permit such
person to violate the provisions of this Article.
§ 66-1 CURFEW § 66-2
66:45

ARTICLE II
Halloween Curfew
[Adopted 10-11-1978 as Sec. 10-23 of the 1978 Code]
§ 66-3. Age restrictions for trick or treating.
It shall be unlawful for any person to appear on the streets, highways, public
places, public homes, private homes or any other public place to make trick
or treat visitations or solicitations, provided that this section shall not apply
to children twelve (12) years of age and under on Halloween night.
§ 66-4. Special hours.7
A special curfew of 10:00 p.m. on Halloween evening is hereby established
for trick or treat visitations permitted in this Article.
7. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 66-3 CURFEW § 66-4
66:47
Chapter 70
DRAINAGE CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 48.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 136.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 140.
Utilities — See Ch. 153.
Water and sewer — See Ch. 167.
Zoning — See Ch. 171.
§ 66-4 HILLSVILLE CODE § 66-4
70:48
ARTICLE I
Driveway Construction
[Adopted 5-9-1979 (Sec. 4-4 of the 1978 Code)]
§ 70-1. Culverts required beneath driveways.
§ 70-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating this Article shall be punished as provided in Chapter
1, General Provisions, Article I; provided, further, that in case of failure
to comply with a notice to abate issued by the Town Manager, the Town
Manager, after a period of thirty (30) days from the date the notice is
sent, may cause construction of the culvert to be made at the cost of the
town, and the cost thereof incurred by the town shall be charged to the
addressee of such notice, to be collected as town taxes or in any other
manner authorized by law.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct a driveway or private
roadway to a public street within the town without placing a culvert
beneath said driveway or roadway, sufficient to convey water runoff
flowing parallel to the public way.
B. Such culvert shall be of sufficient capacity (at least fifteen-inch metal or
concrete) to convey the water to be discharged by it and shall be built
and kept open and in good repair by the owner or occupant of the
premises upon which it is situated.
§ 70-1 DRAINAGE CONTROL § 70-2
70:49

ARTICLE II
Construction Projects
[Adopted 5-9-1979 (Sec. 4-5 of the 1978 Code)]
§ 70-3. Direction and channeling of runoff.
It shall be unlawful for any person to build, construct or grade in such
manner that there results any increase in surface water runoff without
directing and channeling such water runoff into a storm drain maintained by
the town, a creek, stream, branch or a drainage ditch used for the purpose
of conveying water runoff.
§ 70-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating this Article shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I, of the Code of the Town of Hillsville.
§ 70-3 DRAINAGE CONTROL § 70-4
70:51
Chapter 73
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 48.
Drainage control — See Ch. 70.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 140.
Zoning — See Ch. 171.
§ 73-1. Title, purpose, and authority.
Chapter 76
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 48.
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 56.
Nuisances — See Ch. 97.
§ 76-1. Fire-protection services.10
The town shall provide fire protection by contract with a fire company or by
the establishment of a town fire company.11
A. This chapter shall be known as the "Erosion and Sediment Control
Ordinance of Town of Hillsville." The purpose of this chapter is to
prevent degradation of properties, stream channels, waters and other
natural resources of the Town of Hillsville by establishing requirements
for the control of soil erosion, sediment deposition and nonagricultural
runoff and by establishing procedures whereby these requirements
shall be administered and enforced. The authority of this chapter is
under the Carroll County Erosion and Sediment Control Department.
[Amended 9-24-2018]
B. This chapter is authorized by the Code of Virginia, Title 10.1, Chapter 5,
Article 4 (§ 10.1-560 et seq.),8 known as the "Virginia Erosion and
Sediment Control Law."9
8. Editor's Note: Code of Virginia, § 10.1-560 et seq., was repealed by Acts 2013, cc. 756 and
793. See now Code of Virginia, § 62.1-44.15:15 et seq.
9. Editor's Note: Former § 73-2 through 73-8, as amended, which immediately followed this
subsection, were repealed 9-24-2018.
10.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
11.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 6-2, Authority to pull down buildings to prevent spread of fire,
and Sec. 6-3, Authority to enter building and break down doors, etc., during time of fire,
which immediately followed this section, were deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 70-4 HILLSVILLE CODE § 76-2
76:52
§ 76-2. Use of fire-fighting equipment outside of town.
Chapter 80
FRANCHISES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Franchises — See Ch. A180.
A. No equipment of any kind belonging to the town for the purpose of
fighting fires shall be at any time taken to any other town or locality,
even when requested by that other town or locality, except by the
express directions of the Fire Chief or some other person acting in his
stead.
B. Whenever any such equipment shall be taken to any other town or
locality by orders of the Fire Chief, it shall be the duty of a sufficient
number of firemen constituting the fire company to accompany the Fire
Chief for the purpose of returning or seeing that the equipment so
taken is returned.
§ 76-2 FIRE PREVENTION § 76-2
76:53

ARTICLE I
Public Service Corporations
[Adopted 6-27-201612]
§ 80-1. Authority to install utility poles.
All public service corporations possessing franchises from the Town for the
use of its streets and sidewalks may install such utility poles in the streets
as may be required for their purposes, subject to the approval of the Town
Manager or other authorized agent of the Town.
§ 80-2. Supervision of location or moving of utility poles.
All utility poles of any public service corporation possessing a franchise
from the Town for the use of its streets shall be located or moved under the
supervision and direction of the Town Manager or other authorized agent of
the Town.
§ 80-3. Joint use of utility poles.
All public service corporations using utility poles pursuant to franchises
granted by the Town shall be required, wherever possible, to jointly use the
same poles. Specific portions or parts of any such utility pole to be jointly
used shall be assigned for the use of each such company involved by the
Town Manager or other authorized agent of the Town.
§ 80-4. Abandonment of utility poles; leasing.
Any public service corporation possessing franchises from the Town which
owns utility poles within the Town and abandons any poles must remove
them at the discretion of the Town Manager or other authorized agent of
the Town. Poles are considered abandoned when the owner of the pole is
no longer providing permanent use for his or her utility and may not be
used solely for leasing to other utilities. Ownership of the poles cannot be
transferred nor leased without the consent of the Town Manager or other
authorized agent.
§ 80-5. Equipment not to interfere with waterlines, etc.
All pipes, lines, conduits and equipment of any public service corporation
operating under a franchise granted by the Town, including all necessary
parts of any gas system, natural or artificial, or mixed gas equipment, laid
or placed in the Town shall be located in the streets, alleys, and other
places in the Town so as not to obstruct or interfere with any water pipes,
sewer lines, installations, or other structures already installed or hereafter
to be installed. The company shall, when practicable, avoid the use of any
alley, street, highway or public way, where the paving or surface of the
street would be disturbed, and all installations, repairs and relocation shall
12.Editor's Note: This ordinance was originally adopted as Ch. 180, but was redesignated as
Ch. A180 already exists.
§ 80-1 FIRE PREVENTION § 80-5
76:55
be done in accordance with the ordinances of the Town pertaining to the
opening of streets, alleys or public ways.
§ 80-6. Sale or transfer of rights.
No public service corporation operating under a franchise granted by the
Town shall sell, transfer any rights under its franchise without the Town
Council's approval. No such sale or transfer shall be asked until the vendee,
assignee or lessee has filed with the Town Clerk an instrument duly
executed reciting the fact of such sale, assignment or lease, and acceptance
of all the terms of the franchise in force and agreeing to perform all the
conditions thereof.
§ 80-7. Revocation of franchise.
If any public service corporation, its vendee, lessee, assigns, or successors,
violate any of the provisions of this article, or any other ordinance
pertaining to its operation, or any rules or regulations incorporated herein,
or of other ordinances of the Town, or any material parts thereof, or shall
fail or refuse to promptly perform any of the provisions hereof, such failure
shall be sufficient cause for the Town to revoke all the rights granted
under their franchise after written notice to the corporation of its failure to
comply, and subsequent continuation of the violation, failure or default.
§ 80-5 HILLSVILLE CODE § 80-7
76:56
Chapter 88
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 97. Refuse and garbage collection — See Ch. 128,
Art. I.
§ 88-1. Legislative findings.
It is hereby declared and found that litter carelessly deposited in the Town
of Hillsville is the cause of civic disgrace; that litter is a health, fire and
safety hazard and pollutant; that an all-out litter control campaign can
result in substantial savings to the taxpayers of the Town of Hillsville; and
that litter is a matter affecting the public interest and consequently should
be subject to supervision and administrative control for the purpose of
safeguarding the public health, safety and general welfare of the people of
the Town of Hillsville.
§ 88-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. Word usage. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the
present tense include the future; words used in the plural number
include the singular number, and words used in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and
not merely directory.
B. For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein.
COMMERCIAL PLACE — Any store or building or group thereof,
including shopping centers, shopping plazas and other similar places,
where mercantile activities and services are offered to the public, and
shall include all parking areas thereat.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from
the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
HANDBILL — Any printed or written 'matter, any sample or device,
circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or
otherwise reproduced original or copy of any matter of literature which:
(1) Advertises for sale any merchandise, produce, commodity or thing.
Directs attention to any business, mercantile or commercial
establishment or other activity for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales.
(2)
§ 80-7 LITTERING § 88-2
88:57
LITTER — Garbage, refuse and rubbish, as defined herein, and all
other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited,
tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare or creates
unsightliness.
NEWSPAPER — Any newspaper of general circulation, as defined by
law; any newspaper duly entered with the United States Postal Service
in accordance with federal statute or regulation; and any newspaper
filed and recorded with any recording officer, as provided by law. In
addition thereto, it shall mean and include any periodical or current
magazine regularly published, with not less than four (4) issues per
year, and sold to the public.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter; any
sample or device, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine,
paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original
or originals or copies of any matter of literature no included in the
aforesaid definitions of a "commercial handbill" or "newspaper."
PARK — A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or
any other public area in the town owned or used by the town and
devoted to active or passive recreation.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any house, building or other structure designed
or used, either wholly or in part, for private residential purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or
vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch,
steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling,
house, building or other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys
or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces,
grounds and buildings.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except
body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead
animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial
wastes.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as yard clippings, leaves,
wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.
Directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind for which an
admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit.
(3)
While containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is
predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is distributed
or circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and
gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
(4)
§ 88-2 HILLSVILLE CODE § 88-2
88:58
§ 88-3. Litter in public places.
No person shall deposit or throw litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or
other public place within the town except in public receptacles or in private
receptacles for collection.
§ 88-4. Placing litter in receptacles.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in private receptacles shall do
so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the
elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private
property.
§ 88-5. Sweeping or depositing litter in gutters.
No person shall sweep or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place
within the town the accumulation of litter from any building or litter from
any public sidewalk or driveway.
§ 88-6. Littering from vehicles.
No person while a driver or passenger in a vehicle shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or public place within the town or upon private
property.
§ 88-7. Trucks causing litter.
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the town
unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load,
contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or
other public place; nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck
within the town, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any
street, alley or other public place mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or
foreign matter of any kind.
§ 88-8. Litter in parks.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the town except
in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented
from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park
or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are
not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the
person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere, as
provided herein.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
§ 88-2 LITTERING § 88-9
88:59
§ 88-9. Litter in public waters.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream,
bay or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the town.
§ 88-10. Handbills in public places.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbills in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the
town.
§ 88-11. Handbills on vehicles.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any vehicle; provided, however, that it shall not be
unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute, without
charge to the receiver thereof, a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of
a vehicle who is willing to accept it.
§ 88-12. Placing handbills on vacant premises.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or
continuously uninhabited or vacant.
§ 88-13. Distributing handbills on private premises.
§ 88-14. Litter on private and commercial premises.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property
or commercial place within the town, whether owned by such person or
not, except that the owner or person in control of such private property
or commercial place may maintain authorized private receptacles for
collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any street or other public place or upon
any private property.
A. No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are
inhabited except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly
to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or upon such
private premises.
B. Exemption for mail and newspapers. The provisions of this section shall
not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States nor to
newspapers (as defined herein), except that newspapers shall be placed
on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any street or other public place or
upon private property.
§ 88-9 HILLSVILLE CODE § 88-15
88:60
§ 88-15. Maintenance of commercial premises free of litter.
Each owner or person in control of any commercial place, including
shopping centers and delivery and parking areas thereat, shall keep said
places, parking fields, parking areas, delivery areas and other open areas
which are a part of such commercial place free from litter.
§ 88-16. Maintenance of private premises free of litter.
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this section
shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for
collection.
§ 88-17. Litter on vacant lots.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the town, whether owned by such person or not.
§ 88-18. Notice to remove litter.
The Building Inspector, Town Manager or any police officer is hereby
authorized and empowered to notify the owner of any open or vacant private
property or commercial place within the town, or the agent of such owner,
to properly dispose of litter located on such owner's property which is a
nuisance or dangerous to public health, safety or welfare. Such notice shall
be by certified mail and addressed to said owner at his last known address.
§ 88-19. Violations and penalties.
Any person committing an offense against this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article I.
Chapter 93
NUCLEAR WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 56.
Littering — See Ch. 88.
Solid waste — See Ch. 128.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 136.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 157.
Water and sewer — See Ch. 167.
Zoning — See Ch. 171.
§ 88-15 NUCLEAR WASTE § 93-1
93:61
§ 93-1. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
STORAGE — Includes, but is not be limited to, any placement within the
Town of Hillsville which is of a duration longer than twelve (12) hours.
§ 93-2. Storage, processing and disposal of nuclear waste.
It shall hereafter be unlawful, within the Town of Hillsville, to store, process
or dispose of low-level or high-level nuclear waste not generated within the
boundaries of the Town of Hillsville.
§ 93-3. Storage, processing and disposal of hazardous toxic waste.
It shall be unlawful within the boundaries of the Town of Hillsville to
store, process or dispose of hazardous toxic waste not generated within the
boundaries of the Town of Hillsville.
§ 93-4. Transporting waste materials through town limits.
It shall be unlawful to transport through the town limits of the Town of
Hillsville any waste materials mentioned in §§ 93-2 and 93-3, above set out,
which is not generated within the boundaries of the Town of Hillsville.
§ 93-5. Construal of provisions.
It is expressly understood that for purposes of their legality and
enforcement, §§ 93-2, 93-3, 93-4 and 93-7 (shown hereafter in this chapter)
shall be construed separately and independently, the same as if they were
separate statutory mandates.
§ 93-6. Violations and penalties.13
A violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article I, with each twenty-four (24) hours of operation
in violation hereof being deemed a new and separate offense.
§ 93-7. Civil penalties.
In addition to any penalty and/or punishment hereinabove set out, civil fines
shall be assessed to violators in an amount not to exceed one thousand
dollars ($1,000.) per day of operation in violation of this chapter.
§ 93-8. Redress for civil damages; future legislation.
Nothing herein shall prevent redress for civil damages against any violation
by any member of the public nor shall anything herein be deemed to
13.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 93-1 HILLSVILLE CODE § 93-8
93:62
contravene or limit existing or future legislation with regard to any such
waste generated within the Town of Hillsville.
Chapter 97
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 42.
Building construction — See Ch. 48.
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 56.
Drainage control — See Ch. 70.
Littering — See Ch. 88.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 108.
Solid waste — See Ch. 128.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 136.
Water and sewer — See Ch. 167.
§ 93-8 NUCLEAR WASTE § 93-8
93:63

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 97-1. Construal of provisions. [Amended 10-12-1992]
Various nuisances are defined and prohibited in other chapters of this Code,
and it is the intent of the Town Council in enacting this chapter to make it
supplemental to those other chapters in which nuisances are defined and
prohibited; and the provisions of this chapter relating to the abatement
of nuisances shall be regarded as secondary methods and procedures for
the abatement of nuisances in those instances where other methods and
procedures for abatement are provided.
§ 97-2. Nuisances prohibited within Town.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, harbor, commit or maintain or
to suffer to be caused, harbored, committed or maintained any nuisance as
defined by the statute or common law of this state or as defined by this Code
or other ordinance of the Town at any place within the Town.
§ 97-3. Certain nuisances enumerated.
A. The following acts, when committed, or conditions, when existing,
within the Town are hereby defined and declared to be nuisances:
(1) An act done or committed or aided or assisted to be done or
committed by any person, or any substance, being or thing kept,
maintained, placed or found in or upon any public or private place,
which is injurious or dangerous to the public health or safety.
(2) All buildings, bridges or other structures of whatever character
kept or maintained or which are permitted by any person owning or
having control thereof to be kept or maintained in a condition not
deemed as safe and sanitary as defined by the State Building Code.
[Amended 10-12-1992]
(3) All trees and other appendages of or to realty kept or maintained or
which are permitted by any person owning or having control
thereof to be kept or maintained in a condition unsafe, dangerous,
unhealthy and injurious to the general public. [Amended
10-12-1992]
(4) All ponds or pools of stagnant water and all foul-smelling or dirty
water or liquid when discharged through any drain, pipe or spout
or thrown into or upon any street, public place or lot to the injury of
the general public. [Amended 10-12-1992]
(5) All obstructions caused or permitted on any street or sidewalk to
the danger of the public, and all stones, rubbish, dirt, filth, slops,
vegetable matter or other article thrown or placed by any person
on or in any street, sidewalk or other public place, which in any way
may cause any injury to the public. [Amended 10-12-1992]
§ 97-1 NUCLEAR WASTE § 97-3
93:65
(6) All sidewalks, gutters or curbstones permitted to remain in an
unsafe condition or out of repair.
(7) All stables, cattle yards, hog, sheep or cow pens or yards or
structures for poultry permitted by the owner thereof or the person
responsible therefor to be harboring or breeding places for rodents
or otherwise to be in such a condition as to become injurious, foul
smelling and a hazard to the general public or to the persons in the
neighborhood thereof. [Amended 10-12-1992]
(8) All houses or buildings used for special storage of powder,
dynamite or other explosive substances, except those maintained
pursuant to a permit issued by competent authority.
(9) All septic tanks, privies, cesspools and privy vaults of a type
prohibited by state law or by rules and regulations promulgated by
authority of state law or which are maintained in any manner
contrary to state law or rules and regulations promulgated by
authority of state law or which otherwise constitute a hazard to the
health of persons in the neighborhood thereof. [Amended
10-12-1992]
B. Weeds and trash declared public nuisance; abatement required. Weeds
growing or trash lying on any parcel shall constitute a public nuisance,
except that in the case of a parcel greater than two acres in area,
natural vegetation growing more than 50 feet from every property line
shall not constitute a public nuisance. It shall be unlawful to cause or
allow a public nuisance with any respect to a parcel. The owner of any
parcel shall abate any public nuisance with respect to his parcel.
[Added 3-25-201314]
C. Weeds and trash prohibited; duty of owner to remove weeds and trash.
It shall be unlawful and a public nuisance for the owner of any parcel to
allow weeds, as defined herein, to grow or trash to stand upon such
parcel. It shall be the duty of the owner of any parcel to immediately
cut, remove or destroy any and all weeds and to remove trash on his
parcel. Any owner who shall violate any provision of this section may be
subject to the remedies pursuant to § 97-8, and be deemed guilty of a
Class 4 misdemeanor, and each day that such weeds shall remain uncut
or such trash is allowed to stand after the period within which they are
required hereunder to be cut or removed shall be deemed to constitute
a separate offense under this section. [Added 3-25-2013]
D. The nuisances described in this section shall not be construed as
exclusive, and any act of commission or omission and any condition
which constitutes a nuisance by statute or common law of the state,
when committed, omitted or existing within the Town limits, is hereby
declared to constitute a nuisance.
14.Editor’s Note: This legislation also redesignated former Subsection B as Subsection D.
§ 97-3 HILLSVILLE CODE § 97-4
93:66
§ 97-4. Responsibility of property owners, occupants and others.
Each owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or person in charge of any real
property within the Town and each agent or representative of any such
person is hereby charged with responsibility for the maintenance and use
of such real property in such manner that no use of or activity or condition
upon or within such real property shall constitute a nuisance; and all such
persons are hereby charged with the duty of observing all of the provisions
of this chapter, but such responsibility shall not be construed to permit any
other person not charged with such responsibility to commit or maintain
any nuisance upon or within any real property in the Town.
§ 97-4 NUCLEAR WASTE § 97-4
93:67

ARTICLE II
Abatement
§ 97-5. Inspections, investigations and complaints. [Amended
10-12-1992]
It shall be the duty of the Manager and the Chief of Police to cause
inspections to be made from time to time of all portions of the Town to
determine whether any condition exists or activity is being practiced which
constitutes a nuisance; and they shall cause any investigation to be made
upon complaint made by any three persons, and an investigation by Town
official shall be performed.
§ 97-6. Right of entry.
Town officers shall have the right to enter upon private premises for the
purposes specified in § 97-5, upon compliance with all applicable provisions
of law.
§ 97-7. Notice to abate condition constituting nuisance; appeals.
If at any time Manager or Police Chief shall find that a condition which
constitutes a nuisance exists within the Town, he shall give notice, in
writing, to the owner, occupant or person in charge of the premises upon
which such condition exists, stating therein the condition which constitutes
a nuisance and directing such addressee to remedy the condition within
the time stated in such notice, which shall be not more than 30 days;
and it shall be unlawful for any such owner, occupant or person in charge
to fail to comply with the terms of such notice, provided that any owner,
occupant or person in charge may, prior to the next regularly scheduled
Council meeting, appeal to the Town Council, in which case the terms of
such notice shall be stayed pending action of the Town Council, which shall
be final; provided, further, that if the officer giving notice shall state in such
notice that the condition which constitutes a nuisance is such as to be an
immediate hazard to the life and health of the public or any person within
or near the premises upon which such nuisance exists, then the addressee
shall comply with the terms of such notice.
§ 97-8. Failure to comply; action by Town.
A. Upon the failure of any person to whom notice has been given pursuant
to § 97-7 to comply with the terms of such notice or with the terms
imposed by the Town Council on appeal, as the case may be, the
Manager shall forthwith direct the appropriate Town officer to remedy
the condition which is the subject of such notice, and the expense
incurred by the Town in so doing shall be charged to the addressee of
such notice, to be collected as Town taxes or in any other manner
authorized by law. [Amended 10-12-1992]
§ 97-5 NUCLEAR WASTE § 97-8
93:69
§ 97-9. Arrests. [Amended 10-12-1992]
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit any police officer from
arresting any person from committing or maintaining a nuisance when such
arrest is made pursuant to law.
B. Abatement by the Town of any condition which constitutes a nuisance
and reimbursement to the Town of expenses incurred thereby shall not
bar prosecution for maintenance of a nuisance.
§ 97-8 HILLSVILLE CODE § 97-9
93:70
Chapter 101
PARADES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 88.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 108.
Special events — See Ch. 132.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 136.
§ 101-1. Purpose.
§ 101-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
these meanings:
DEMONSTRATION — A group of seven (7) or more persons assembled and
acting in concert to call the public's attention to their opposition to, support
of or position with respect to any subject.
EVENT — A parade or demonstration, or both.
PARADE — A mobile gathering, march or other procession of seven (7) or
more persons for the purpose of attracting the public's attention.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership, association,
organization or other entity.
SPONTANEOUS PARADE OR DEMONSTRATION — An unplanned or
unannounced coming together of persons, animals or vehicles consisting
of a parade or demonstration which may occur in response to unforeseen
circumstances or events of immediate and obvious importance that allows
no opportunity for application to the Town Council.
STREET — A public street, sidewalk or public place in the town.
A. The Town Council enacts this chapter for the purpose of regulating the
time, place and manner of parades and demonstrations in order to
accommodate competing demands for the public use of streets,
sidewalks and public places. Regulation is necessary to preserve the
public peace and safety, to permit free expression on issues of public
concern, to protect persons and property, to maintain acceptable
conditions of traffic flow upon the streets and sidewalks and to prevent,
control or eliminate any illegal, injurious or dangerous effects of this
lawful activity.
B. The Town Council does not enact this chapter or seek through its
enforcement to deny or abridge any person's rights of assembly and
free speech or the opportunity for communication of thought and
discussion of public questions in public places.
§ 97-9 PARADES § 101-3
101:71
§ 101-3. Permit required.
§ 101-4. Permit application.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to organize, direct, lead or
participate in any parade or demonstration upon any street within the
town unless the Town Council or Town Manager, as appropriate, has
first granted a permit for this activity.
B. This section shall not apply to any component of the Armed Forces of
the United States or of this commonwealth, any governmental agency
or organization, any funeral, religious or wedding procession or any
group of persons lawfully engaged in picketing.
C. If a parade or demonstration is conducted without a permit, the Town
Manager shall not disperse the event unless it is or becomes an
unlawful assembly or riot as defined in §§ 18.2-405 and 18.2-406, Code
of Virginia. In that latter case, the Town Manager shall follow the
procedures established for unlawful assemblies and riots. The Town
Manager, however, may seek the prosecution by the Town Attorney of
any person violating any provisions of this chapter.15
A. Any person proposing to organize, participate in or lead a parade or
demonstration upon or in any street within the town shall file an
application for a parade or demonstration with the Town Manager at
least fourteen (14) working days prior to the next Council meeting
before the parade or demonstration. The application shall set forth:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the person requesting
the permit.
(2) The name(s), address and telephone number(s) of the person(s) in
charge of the parade or demonstration.
(3) The name(s) and address of the sponsor(s) of the parade or
demonstration and all participating organizations.
(4) The date, hour and place for the assembly of the participants in the
parade or demonstration and the expected duration of the event.
(5) The streets, sidewalks and public places upon which the parade or
demonstration is to occur.
(6) Whether the parade or demonstration is to be conducted on foot,
with animals, with vehicles or any combination thereof and the
number of individuals, vehicles and animals expected to
participate.
(7) An estimate of the anticipated attendance.
(8) The purpose of the parade or demonstration.
15.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 101-3 HILLSVILLE CODE § 101-4
101:72
§ 101-5. Council action on application.
§ 101-6. Standards for denial.
The Town Council may deny an application for a parade or demonstration
permit and notify the applicant of such denial where:
§ 101-7. Spontaneous parades and demonstrations.
(9) Any other information that may be required by the Town Manager.
B. Each application for a parade or demonstration permit shall be signed
by the person named in the application as the person in charge of such
parade or demonstration.
A. Upon the filing of a complete application for a parade or demonstration
permit, the Town Manager shall promptly transmit copies to the Town
Council. At its next meeting, the Town Council shall consider and act on
the application, hearing the applicant on request and other persons the
Council deems necessary.
B. The Town Council shall consider and may grant an application for a
parade or demonstration permit and may impose limitations on the
time, place and manner of the conduct of the event to prevent
conditions that would be detrimental to the public peace and safety and
would cause a physically dangerous or unworkable traffic condition
upon streets. In determining such conditions, the Council may consider
the following factors:
(1) The number of persons who would be seriously inconvenienced by
the event.
(2) The effect of the event on the movement of vehicular traffic,
pedestrian passage, access to buildings or parking, commercial
and domestic activity in the town.
(3) The likelihood of injury, death or property damage.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, partnership,
association or organization covered by the permit to violate or fail to
comply with any such limitation.
A. The information contained in the application is found to be false or
nonexistent in any material detail.
B. The applicant refuses to agree to abide by or comply with all conditions
of the permit.
A. Upon the occurrence of conditions leading to the spontaneous parade
or demonstration (as determined by the Town Manager), the Town
Manager may immediately grant the permit for the parade or
demonstration under the same standards and procedures, with
necessary changes, as set out in this chapter for Town Council action.
§ 101-4 PARADES § 101-7
101:73
§ 101-8. Insulting, harassing or interfering with parade.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully harass or interfere with
any person lawfully parading or demonstrating pursuant to a permit issued
under the provisions of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for a participant
in an event to address bystanders using abusive or threatening language
which would tend to provoke him or others to a breach of the peace.
§ 101-9. Revocation of permit.
The Town Manager may revoke any permit issued pursuant to this chapter if
any person shall violate any prohibition, condition, restriction or limitation
of the permit.
§ 101-10. Parade for commercial purpose prohibited.
No permit shall be issued authorizing the conduct of a parade which the
Town Council or Town Manager finds is proposed to be held for the sole
purpose of advertising any product, goods, wares, merchandise or event
and is designed to be held purely for private profit.
§ 101-11. Parades conducted on state-maintained roads; additional
authorization required.
This chapter has no effect on the requirements for application to the
Virginia Department of Transportation (VDOT) before a parade can be
conducted on a state-maintained road. In that case, authorization must be
obtained from VDOT and the Town Council, pursuant to this chapter.16
§ 101-12. Violations and penalties.17
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I.
The Town Manager shall promptly report such action to the Town
Council.
B. Due to the spontaneous nature of such event and in order to maintain
safe or passable traffic conditions in the town, spontaneous parades
and demonstrations shall be held on those public streets or parts
thereof where the chance of unsafe or impassable traffic would be
minimized.
16.Editor's Note: Original Article XII, which immediately followed this section and contained
penalty provision, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I. For current penalty provisions, see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 101-7 HILLSVILLE CODE § 101-12
101:74
Chapter 104
PARKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parades — See Ch. 101.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 136.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 157.
Inoperable vehicles — See Ch. 160.
Licensing of vehicles — See Ch. 163.
§ 104-1. Nonmetered parking zones.
Nonmetered parking zones may be established and designated by the Town
Council and shall be clearly and appropriately marked. Any time-limited
parking zone so designated shall be in force from 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
Monday through Saturday, and shall not be in force on Sundays, Election
Day, New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day or Christmas Day. Any person exceeding the parking zone
limitations shall be in violation of this chapter. Each subsequent offense on
the same day and in the same space shall constitute a separate offense and
may be punished according to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 104-2. Flow of vehicles; parking lots. [Amended 11-11-1996]
§ 104-3. Prohibited parking areas. [Amended 11-11-1996]
No person shall park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or trafficcontrol
device, in any of the following places:
A. The Town Council shall regulate the flow of vehicular and pedestrian
traffic, the parking of vehicles and the establishment of speed limits and
controls upon all parking lots, shopping areas or other areas
accommodating 50 or more vehicles as defined in § 46.2-1219, Code of
Virginia.
B. No vehicle shall be parked on such lots, except within designated
markings or other identification on such lots and/or areas.
A. On a sidewalk.
B. In front of a public or private driveway.
C. Within an intersection.
D. Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
E. On a crosswalk.
§ 101-12 PARADES § 104-3
101:75
§ 104-4. Handicapped parking areas. [Amended 11-11-1996]
§ 104-5. Loading and unloading zones.
Loading and unloading parking zones shall be used only by delivery vehicles
parked for that purpose.
§ 104-6. Parking within spaces.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle across any line or
marking designating a parking space or to park in any way that such vehicle
shall not be wholly within a parking space as designated by such lines or
markings.
§ 104-7. Illegally parked vehicles.
F. On the roadway side of any vehicle parked at the edge or curb of a
street.
G. At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
H. In a safety zone or fire lane.
I. Against a yellow curb.
J. In a handicapped space.
A. It shall be unlawful for a vehicle not displaying disabled parking license
plates, an organizational removable windshield placard, a permanent
removable windshield placard or a temporary removable windshield
placard issued under § 46.2-731, Code of Virginia, or DV disabled
parking license plates issued under Subsection B of § 46.2-739, Code of
Virginia, to be parked in a parking space reserved for persons with
disabilities that limit or impair their ability to walk.
B. Summons or parking ticket. A summons or parking ticket for the offense
may be issued by law enforcement officers and other uniformed
personnel employed by the Town to enforce parking regulations without
the necessity of a warrant's being obtained by the owner of the private
parking area.
C. Violations and penalties. The penalty for violation of this article shall
not exceed that prescribed for a Class 3 misdemeanor, notwithstanding
any other provision of law. [Amended 5-22-2000]
A. Each police officer charged with the duty of enforcing this chapter may
place on any vehicle parked illegally under the provisions of this
chapter a notice to the owner or driver thereof that such vehicle has
been parked in violation of this chapter and instruct such owner or
driver when and where to report with reference to such violation.
§ 104-3 HILLSVILLE CODE § 104-7
101:76
Chapter 108
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 34.
Amusements — See Ch. 38.
Animals — See Ch. 42.
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 56.
Returned checks — See Ch. 60.
Curfew — See Ch. 66.
Littering — See Ch. 88.
Nuisances — See Ch. 97.
Parades — See Ch. 101.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 112.
Special events — See Ch. 132.
§ 108-1. Assault and battery.
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit a simple assault or any assault
and battery upon another person.
§ 108-2. Begging prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to beg or solicit personal contributions
upon any street or other public place within the town. It shall be the duty
of any officer of the town to notify such person of this section and to give
B. Fees for violation notices shall be set by the Town Council and shall be
as follows unless and until changed by the Town Council.18 [Amended
6-13-200619]
Type of Violation Fine
Overtime nonmetered $10
Parking in prohibited zone $10
Parking on yellow curb $10
Parking over lines $10
Double parking $10
Parking loading zone $10
Parking 15 feet from fire hydrant $10
Handicap zone $100
Fire lane $10
Other $10
18.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 18-8, Penalty, which immediately followed this section, was
deleted 11-11-1996.
19.Editor's Note: This legislation provided an effective dtae of 7-1-2006.
§ 104-7 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 108-2
108:77
such person the privilege of leaving the town, and if, after such notice, such
person continues to beg or solicit contributions or repeat such solicitation
after having been so warned, such acts shall constitute a misdemeanor.
§ 108-3. Disorderly conduct.
§ 108-4. False fire alarms.
It shall be unlawful for any person to turn in, report or otherwise cause a
false fire alarm within the town.
A. Any person who shall do or engage in any of the following shall be guilty
of disorderly conduct:
(1) Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward
another, whereby any person is placed in danger of safety of his
life, limb or health.
(2) Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward
another, whereby public property or property of any other person is
placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged.
(3) Any person who shall endanger lawful pursuits of another by acts of
violence or threats of bodily harm.
(4) Any person who shall cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl
or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or
property of another or public property.
(5) Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or
others and cause, provoke or engage in any fight or brawl.
(6) Any person who shall collect in bodies or in crowds and engage in
unlawful activities.
(7) Any person who shall use fighting words directed toward any
person who becomes outraged and thus creates turmoil.
(8) Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or
others and do bodily harm to another.
(9) Any person who shall, by acts of violence, interfere with another's
pursuit of a lawful occupation.
(10) Any person who shall congregate with another or others in or on
any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian
traffic and refuses to clear such public way when ordered to do so
by a peace officer or other person having authority.
B. Violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor.
§ 108-2 HILLSVILLE CODE § 108-5
108:78
§ 108-5. Discharge of fireworks.
It shall be unlawful for any person to fire, shoot or detonate any firecracker,
bomb, powder or dynamite within the town, without a proper license
therefor issued by the Mayor.
§ 108-6. Sale or possession of fireworks.
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale or store or have in possession
upon the person fireworks of any kind within the town.
§ 108-7. Gambling.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep within the town a room for
gambling or where persons resort for gambling purposes or any game of
chance, whether playing with cards, dice, money or other things, or to
permit gambling of any kind in any place; or for any person to gamble or
engage in any gambling game of any kind or character at any place, either
publicly or privately.
§ 108-8. Playing on streets or sidewalks.
It shall be unlawful for any person to play marbles or any other games or
pitch or throw balls of any kind or stones on the streets and sidewalks of the
town to the inconvenience or discomfort of the public.
§ 108-9. Houses of prostitution.
§ 108-10. Indecent exposure.
It shall be unlawful for any person to expose any part of his body, in public,
within the town, in an obscene and deliberate manner.
§ 108-11. Masks prohibited; exception.
A. No person shall keep a house of ill-fame, resorted to for the purpose of
prostitution or lewdness. In a prosecution for this offense, the general
character of the house may be proved.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any house of assignation or
bawdy house or any place where persons may meet for the purpose of
prostitution or illegal intercourse within the town. Every day such
house shall be kept or any prostitute kept, harbored or permitted to
remain therein for immoral purposes shall constitute a separate
offense.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person over twelve (12) years of age but less
than sixteen (16) years of age to appear in or upon any of the streets,
highways, alleys or public places in the town whereby the identity of
such person is concealed, without first obtaining permission from the
Mayor or Police Chief.
§ 108-5 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 108-11
108:79
§ 108-12. Obstructing justice.
No person, by threats or force, shall attempt to intimidate or impede a trial
justice, witness or town police officer in the discharge of his duty or resist
arrest or obstruct or impede the administration of justice in any court.
§ 108-13. Officer refusing to assist.
No person shall fail without good excuse to respond to the call of an officer
for assistance in the execution of his duty.
§ 108-14. Distribution of literature.
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute pamphlets, leaflets, books,
posters, handbills, newspapers, magazines or any kind of literature upon
the street, to private residences or at any other place within the town
without having first procured from the Mayor express permission to do so.
§ 108-15. Petit larceny.
Any person who shall steal from another any property of any kind or
character unless the property so stolen is of such value as to constitute a
felony under the state law shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
§ 108-16. Profane or abusive language.
It shall be unlawful for any person to curse or profanely swear in any public
place in the town or to use violent and abusive language to any person in
the presence of any witness, reasonably calculated to provoke a breach of
the peace.
§ 108-17. Damaging or defacing property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, deface or otherwise injure or
damage any public or private property within the town by cutting, marking,
breaking or burning the same or by defacing the same in any manner
whatsoever.
§ 108-18. Noise restrictions.20
No person shall make or cause to be made frequent or long continued and
unreasonable noise which disturbs the comfort and repose of any person in
the vicinity.
§ 108-19. Public drunkenness.
B. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not exceeding fifty dollars
($50.) or imprisoned not more than ten (10) days, or both.
20.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 108-11 HILLSVILLE CODE § 108-19
108:80
§ 108-20. Trespassing on certain public property.
§ 108-21. Carrying concealed weapons.
Chapter 112
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 88.
Nuisances — See Ch. 97.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 108.
Special sales — See Ch. 121.
§ 112-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SOLICITOR — Includes any person who goes from place to place or house
to house or who stands in any street or public place taking or offering to
take orders for goods, wares or merchandise or for service to be performed
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to become drunk and while so drunk
to appear in any public places within the town.
B. Any person guilty of a violation of the provisions of this section shall be
fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.).
C. Any person convicted of three (3) or more violations of this section
within a year shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.)
for the third or subsequent offense.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to go upon or remain upon any school
property, parks, playgrounds, water or sewer facilities or garbage dump
area after having been forbidden to do so, either orally or in writing, by
any duly authorized official of the town or any custodian or other person
lawfully in charge thereof.
B. Also, it shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the
owner, proprietor or custodian, to go or enter in the nighttime upon the
premises, property, driveways or walks of any cemetery, either public or
private, for any purpose other than to visit the burial lot or grave of
some member of his family. [Added 2-10-1992]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry concealed any pistol, dirk,
bowie knife, razor, knucks, slingshot or any weapon of like kind.
B. This section shall not apply to any police officer, Sheriff, state police
officer or any officer of the law while in the discharge of his official duty
within the town.
§ 108-19 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 112-1
108:81
in the future or for making, manufacturing or repairing any article or thing
whatsoever for future delivery.[Amended 11-11-1996]
§ 112-2. Peddlers. [Added 11-11-1996]
Peddlers are governed under the BPOL Ordinance.21
§ 112-3. Registration required.
All persons, before entering into or upon a residential premises within the
town for the purpose of soliciting, shall register with the Town Manager or
his designee and furnish the following information:22
§ 112-4. Permits issuance: display.
Upon furnishing the information required under § 112-3, the applicant shall
be issued a permit, unless the information furnished in compliance with this
chapter shows that the applicant has been convicted of a crime involving
moral turpitude or any felony. A permit under this chapter shall be good
for one year from the date of issuance, unless earlier revoked as provided
in this chapter. Every solicitor shall carry his permit with him at all times
while engaged in soliciting and shall display the same to any person who
shall demand to see the same while he is so engaged.
§ 112-5. Application and investigation fee. [Amended 5-22-2017[
A. The name, local and permanent addresses, social security number,
telephone numbers, age, race, weight, height, color of hair and eyes
and any other distinguishing physical characteristics of the applicant.
B. The nature or purpose for which solicitations will be made and the
nature of the goods, wares, merchandise or services offered for sale.
C. The name and permanent address of the employer or organization
represented; type of vehicle and license number, if applicable.
D. A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any
felony or misdemeanor, and if so, the nature of the offense, when and
where convicted and the penalty or punishment assessed therefor.
A. A fee of $25 to cover the costs of investigation of the applicant and
processing of the application shall be paid to the Town when the
application is filed and shall not be returnable under any
circumstances. The investigation will be conducted by the Hillsville
Police Department. Approval or disapproval will be done after the
investigation and by the investigating officer. 501(c)(3) and churches
are not subject to comply with the provisions of this section.
21.Editor's Note: See Ch. 144, Taxation, Art. VII, License Tax.
22.Editor's Note: The solicitor's application is on file and available for inspection in the office
of the Town Manager.
§ 112-1 HILLSVILLE CODE § 112-5
108:82
§ 112-6. Prohibited acts.
No person shall:
§ 112-7. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
B. Peddlers of ice cream and other ice confectioneries, milk products,
candies and confections:
(1) When sold on foot: $250.
(2) When sold from conveyances other than motor vehicles: $250 per
conveyance.
(3) When sold from motor vehicles and not made, mixed or prepared
on those vehicles: $250 per vehicle.
(4) When sold from motor vehicles and made, mixed or prepared on
those vehicles: $250 per vehicle.
C. Peddlers of bottled soft drinks, hot dogs and wrapped sandwiches: $250
for each vehicle used.
D. When such articles are peddled along with the articles specified in
other sections of this chapter, and the license tax imposed by this
chapter is paid, such person shall not be required to pay in addition
thereto the license taxes imposed by those other sections.
A. Enter into or upon a residential premises in the town under false
pretenses to solicit for any purpose or for the purpose of soliciting
orders for the sale of goods, wares, merchandise or services.
B. Remain in or on any residential premises after the owner or occupant
has requested any such person to leave.
C. Enter upon any residential premises for soliciting, when the owner or
occupant has displayed a "No Soliciting" sign on such premises.
D. Engage in the practice of soliciting in the town without a permit as
provided for in this chapter.
E. Knowingly give false information or withhold correct information in
obtaining a permit.
A. Any person who visits any residence or apartment at the request or
invitation of the owner or occupant thereof.
B. To unpaid members of any civic or charitable organization who have an
approved means of identification provided by such organization.
C. Newsboys soliciting subscriptions to any newspaper for home delivery
within the town.
§ 112-5 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 112-7
108:83
§ 112-8. Revocation of permit.
The permit issued under this chapter shall be revoked for any violation of
this chapter or for any violation of law that would have prevented it from
being issued under this chapter.23
Chapter 115
PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 112. Special sales — See Ch. 121.
§ 115-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, unless the context requires a different
meaning:
COIN — Any piece of gold, silver or other metal fashioned into a prescribed
shape, weight and degree of fineness, stamped by authority of a government
with certain marks and devices, and having a certain fixed value as money.
DEALER —
D. Route deliverymen who make deliveries at least once a week to regular
customers and whose solicitation is only incidental to their regular
deliveries.
E. Persons selling fresh farm products.
F. Persons licensed under the provisions of Title 38.2 of the Code of
Virginia.
Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation engaged in the business
of purchasing secondhand precious metals or gems; removing in any
manner precious metals or gems from manufactured articles not then
owned by the person, firm, partnership, or corporation; or buying,
acquiring, or selling precious metals or gems removed from
manufactured articles. "Dealer" includes all employers and principals
on whose behalf a purchase is made, and any employee or agent who
makes any purchase for or on behalf of his employer or principal.
A.
The definition of "dealer" shall not include persons engaged in the
following:
Purchases of precious metals or gems directly from other dealers,
manufacturers, or wholesalers for retail or wholesale inventories,
(1)
B.
23.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 9-8, which immediately followed this section and dealt with
penalties, was repealed 11-11-1996.
§ 112-7 HILLSVILLE CODE § 115-1
108:84
GEMS — Any item containing precious or semiprecious stones customarily
used in jewelry.
PRECIOUS METALS — Any item except coins composed in whole or in part
of gold, silver, platinum, or platinum alloys.
§ 115-2. Credentials and statement of ownership required from
seller.
§ 115-3. Prohibited purchases.
§ 115-4. Time limit for retention of purchases and materials.
provided that the selling dealer has complied with the provisions of
this chapter.
Purchases of precious metals or gems from a qualified fiduciary
who is disposing of the assets of an estate being administered by
the fiduciary.
(2)
Acceptance by a retail merchant of trade-in merchandise
previously sold by the retail merchant to the person presenting that
merchandise for trade-in.
(3)
Repairing, restoring or designing jewelry by a retail merchant, if
such activities are within his normal course of business.
(4)
Purchases of precious metals or gems by industrial refiners and
manufacturers, insofar as such purchases are made directly from
retail merchants, wholesalers, dealers, or by mail originating
outside the commonwealth.
(5)
Persons regularly engaged in the business of purchasing and
processing nonprecious scrap metals which incidentally may
contain traces of precious metals recoverable as a by-product.
(6)
A. No dealer shall purchase precious metals or gems without first:
(1) Ascertaining the identity of the seller by requiring an identification
issued by a governmental agency with a photograph of the seller
thereon, and at least one other corroborating means of
identification; and
(2) Obtaining a statement of ownership from the seller.
B. The Council may determine the contents of the statement of ownership.
A. No dealer shall purchase precious metals or gems from any seller who
is under the age of 18.
B. No dealer shall purchase precious metals or gems from any seller who
the dealer believes or has reason to believe is not the owner of such
items, unless the seller has written and duly authenticated
authorization from the owner permitting and directing such sale.
§ 115-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 115-4
108:85
§ 115-5. Record of disposition.
Each dealer shall maintain for at least 24 months an accurate and legible
record of the name and address of the person, firm, or corporation to
which he sells any precious metal or gem in its original form after the
waiting period required by § 115-4. This record shall also show the name
and address of the seller from whom the dealer purchased the item.
§ 115-6. Bond or letter of credit required of dealers when permit
obtained.
§ 115-7. Violations and penalties.
A. The dealer shall retain all precious metals or gems purchased for a
minimum of 15 calendar days from the date on which a copy of the bill
of sale is received by the chief law enforcement officer of the locality in
which the purchase is made. Until the expiration of this period, the
dealer shall not sell, alter, or dispose of a purchased item in whole or in
part, or remove it from the Town.
B. If a dealer performs the service of removing precious metals or gems,
he shall retain the metals or gems removed and the article from which
the removal was made for a period of 15 calendar days after receiving
such article and precious metals or gems.
A. Every dealer shall secure a permit as required by § 115-10, and each
dealer at the time of obtaining such permit shall enter into a
recognizance to the commonwealth secured by a corporate surety
authorized to do business in this commonwealth, in the penal sum of
$10,000, conditioned upon due observance of the terms of this chapter.
In lieu of a bond, a dealer may cause to be issued by a bank authorized
to do business in the commonwealth a letter of credit in favor of the
Town of Hillsville for $10,000.
B. Neither the provisions of this chapter nor any local ordinances dealing
with the subject matter of this chapter shall apply to the sale or
purchase of coins.
C. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any bank, branch
thereof, trust company or bank holding company, or any wholly owned
subsidiary thereof, engaged in buying and selling gold and silver
bullion.
A. Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor for the first offense. Upon
conviction of any subsequent offense he shall be guilty of a Class 1
misdemeanor.
B. Upon the first conviction of a dealer for violation of any provision of this
chapter, the chief law enforcement officer may revoke the dealer's
permit for one full year from the date the conviction becomes final.
§ 115-4 HILLSVILLE CODE § 115-7
108:86
Chapter 121
SALES, SPECIAL
Such revocation shall be mandatory for two full years from the date the
conviction becomes final upon a second conviction.
§ 115-7 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 115-7
108:87

ARTICLE I
Garage and Yard Sales
[Adopted 6-13-1979 (Sec. 19-11 of the 1978 Code)]
§ 121-1. Two-day garage sales. [Amended 2-9-1983; 4-10-1985;
11-28-1994; 11-11-1996]
Regardless of the location thereof, two two-day garage sales or yard sales
may be held per calendar year by Town residents regardless of the location
thereof and may be held only after issuance of a permit by the Town without
fee. The third sale and all sales thereafter require a permit and payment of
the fee of $5 per sale. A yard sale or garage sale within the meaning of this
section shall be a sale of secondhand goods and items. Such secondhand
goods must not have been purchased by the seller for the purpose of resale.
§ 121-2. Multifamily yard sales. [Amended 11-28-1994]
A. Multifamily yard sales will be permitted in residential areas, provided
that the property owner and/or Town resident is a participant. A fee of
$5 will be assessed each participant for each sale after using free yard
sales as noted in § 121-1. [Amended 11-11-1996]
B. Factories and businesses will be allowed to sponsor an annual
multifamily yard sale for their employees with no charge to the sponsor
or participants except during Memorial Day/Labor Day weekend.
[Amended 8-22-2011]
§ 121-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 121-2
108:89
Chapter 128
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 34.
Animals — See Ch. 42.
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 56.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 76.
Littering — See Ch. 88.
Nuisances — See Ch. 97.
Parades — See Ch. 101.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 108.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 112.
Special events — See Ch. 132.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 136.
Inoperable vehicles — See Ch. 160.
§ 121-2 HILLSVILLE CODE § 121-2
108:90
ARTICLE I
Condition of Premises
[Adopted 10-11-1978 as Ch. 11, Art. II, of the 1978 Code]
§ 128-1. Duty of property owner to keep property free of trash and
rubbish. [Amended 9-28-1992]
Every person owning real estate within the Town shall keep their property
free of all trash, garbage, refuse, litter and other substances which might
endanger the health and safety of the residents of the Town.
§ 128-2. Special trash, rubbish and brush pickups. [Added
4-9-1986]
§ 128-3. Removal of brush and trash by Town. [Amended
11-13-1995; 6-10-2013]
A. The Town will provide special trash, rubbish and brush pickups with the
following conditions and rules:
(1) All trash, rubbish and brush will be placed at curb- or roadside.
(2) All trash, rubbish and brush must be in a condition whereby two
men can load into a dump truck without mechanical aid.
(3) Brush must be cut into lengths that can be loaded compactly into a
dump truck.
(4) There shall be a limit of one load per month. Any additional loads
shall be charged at $25 per load. [Amended 11-11-1996]
(5) All real estate and personal property taxes must be paid in full in
order to receive free special pickups. [Added 4-24-2000;
amended 9-9-2019]
(6) Nothing in this section should be construed to apply to landowners
who wish to landscape, garden or plant native flowers, trees or
shrubs on their property to sustain birds, bees, butterflies and
other beneficial insects as befits a community with as many natural
resources as Hillsville. However, all such plantings shall be
conducted and maintained in an orderly fashion in keeping with
other aspects of Town Code regarding appropriate maintenance
and upkeep of properties. [Added 2-27-2012]
B. If the above conditions and rules create a hardship for the landowner,
arrangements may be made with the Town Manager to accommodate
the situation.
A. The owners of property within the Town shall, at such time or times as
the Town may prescribe, remove therefrom any and all trash, garbage,
refuse, litter and other substances which might endanger the health or
safety of other residents of the Town; or may, whenever the Town deems
§ 128-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 128-3
108:91
it necessary, have such trash, garbage, refuse, litter and other like
substances which might endanger the health of other residents of the
Town removed by its own agents or employees, in which event the cost
or expenses thereof shall be chargeable to and paid by the owners of
such property and may be collected by the Town as taxes are collected.
Trash, garbage, refuse, litter and other debris shall be disposed of in
personally owned or privately owned receptacles that are provided for
such use and for the use of the persons disposing of such matter or in
authorized facilities provided for such purpose and in no other manner
not authorized by law.
B. The Town Manager or agents of the Town shall, upon their own
initiative or when requested to do so in writing, investigate any land or
lot. If it has been determined that there is a violation of this section, the
Town Manager or an agent of the Town shall notify the owner of the
land or lot upon which the violation exists to remedy the condition.
Such notice shall be in writing and delivered or mailed by certified mail
to the last known address of the owner. If, after 30 days from the
mailing of the certified notice, the condition remains, the owner shall be
deemed to be in violation of this section. After that date, the Town
Manager or the Town's agents shall have such trash, garbage, refuse,
litter or other like substances removed, in which event the cost and
expenses thereof shall be chargeable to and paid by the owner of such
property and may be collected by the Town by billing or as taxes are
collected.
C. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any land or lot within the Town to
permit grass, weeds, brush and other foreign growth standing more
than eight inches in height to remain upon so much of the property as
lies within 100 feet of any street, dwelling house or commercial
building. The Town Manager or agents of the Town shall, upon their
own initiative or when requested to do so in writing, investigate any
land or lot. If it has been determined that there is a violation of this
section, the Town Manager or an agent of the Town shall notify the
owner of the land or lot upon which the violation exists to cut and/or
remove the condition. Such notice shall be in writing and delivered or
mailed by certified mail to the last known address of the owner. If, after
seven days from the mailing of the certified notice, the condition
remains, the owner shall be deemed to be in violation of this section.
Whenever the Town deems it necessary, after seven days from the time
of notice, the Town Manager or the Town's agents shall have such
grass, weeds, foreign growth or debris cut and/or removed, in which
event the cost and expenses thereof shall be chargeable to and paid by
the owner of such property and may be collected by the Town by billing
or as taxes are collected.
D. Any person or entity receiving a second notice of violation within one
calendar of the first notice of violation shall be fined an amount up to
$500. Any person or entity receiving a third violation within one
calendar year of the first two notices of violation shall be fined an
§ 128-3 HILLSVILLE CODE § 128-3
108:92
§ 128-4. Unpaid charges to become lien. [Amended 6-11-1980;
9-28-1992]
Every charge authorized by this Article with which the owner of any such
property shall have been assessed and which remains unpaid shall
constitute a lien against such property, and the Treasurer shall file with
the Clerk of the County Court a statement of the lien claim. This statement
shall contain the legal description of the premises served, the name of the
recorded owner, the amount of the unpaid bill and a notice that the Town
claims a lien of this amount for service rendered. This statement shall be
recorded in a lien book provided by the Town for the purpose of recording
such liens. Settlement or payment of these liens can be made upon paying
the amount of the recorded lien plus 6% interest from the date of such
filing and any costs involved in their recordation and in the recording of the
release of such lien. Release of such liens shall be executed by the Treasurer
upon presentation of evidence that the amount of the lien and cost involved
have been paid into the treasury of the Town.
§ 128-4.1. Violations; civil penalty. [Added 6-10-2013]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to
a civil penalty, not to exceed $100 for the first violation and initial summons
and not more than $350 for each additional summons. Each day during
which the violation is found to have existed shall constitute a separate
offense. The civil penalty for subsequent violations not arising from the
same set of operative facts within 12 months of the first violation shall not
exceed $350. Violations arising from the same operative set of facts shall
not be charged more frequently than once in any ten-day period, and a
series of specified violations arising from the same operative set of facts
shall not result in civil penalties which exceed a total of $4,000.
amount of $700. Any person or entity receiving a fourth or subsequent
notice of violation within one calendar year of the prior notices of
violation shall be fined an amount up to $1,000. Whenever the Town
deems it necessary, after seven days from the time of notice, the Town
Manager or the Town’s agents shall have such grass, weeds, foreign
growth or debris cut and/or trash, refuse removed, in which event the
cost and expenses thereof shall be chargeable to and paid by the owner
of such property and may be collected by the Town by billing or as taxes
are collected. [Added 7-10-2017]
§ 128-3 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 128-4.1
108:93

ARTICLE II
Refuse and Garbage Collection
[Adopted 10-11-1978 as Ch. 11, Art. III, of the 1978 Code]
§ 128-5. Refuse containers required; specifications.
§ 128-6. Placement of containers; collection schedule.
A. All householders and apartment house owners with garbage and refuse
to be collected by the Town shall provide one or more metal or plastic
containers with a capacity of not more than 32 gallons, and with tightfitting
lids that shall be kept thereon at all times, except when the
container is being filled or emptied, and lined with trash bags.
[Amended 10-24-1984; 9-28-1992]
B. Apartment house owners or business establishments may provide any
approved type of truck-lift container for garbage and refuse. The
number of truck-lift containers shall be limited to two. [Amended
1-14-2013]
C. Eating establishments and all business firms handling foods, including
grocery stores, produce markets and dairies, shall provide metal or
plastic containers with a capacity of not more than 32 gallons, and with
tight-fitting lids, lined with trash bags of a size and quality to hold trash
without bursting, or an approved type of truck-lift container for waste
and food products. [Amended 10-24-1984; 9-28-1992]
D. Business establishments shall provide storage rooms or covered
storage bins for waste products other than food wastes and shall put all
trash in large boxes or cartons and place in the storage room or bin for
collection.
A. Householders shall place all refuse containers at one location at the
edge of any street adjacent to their property. Town employees will not
enter private property for the collection of garbage and refuse except
when so authorized by the Town Manager. [Amended 10-26-1983]
B. Refuse containers shall not be set out before 12:00 noon the day prior
to the scheduled pickup. For the first offense of this subsection, a
warning letter shall be sent by the Town Manager. The second offense
shall be a civil penalty with a fine of $25. The third offense shall be a
misdemeanor with a fine of $50. [Added 3-27-199524]
C. Business establishments will place their refuse containers at the rear or
side of the establishments in such a manner that they will be readily
accessible to the sanitation crew. Trash that is placed in said container
must be done in such a manner that it is within the container proper.
Also, no grease shall be placed within the container. Failure to keep the
24.Editor’s Note: This section also renumbered former Subsections B through D as
Subsections C through E, respectively.
§ 128-5 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 128-6
108:95
§ 128-7. Charges. [Amended 7-12-1993]
A charge for the services provided by this Article and payable to the Town
shall be made in accordance with a schedule of charges prepared by the
Town Manager.
§ 128-8. Refuse generated outside Town. [Added 4-23-2001]
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, throw, cast or dump any
solid waste or refuse generated outside of the Town of Hillsville in the
public trash bins on Town streets, at residences within the Town, or in bulk
containers located at businesses within the Town.
trash properly within the container or placing grease within the
container shall cause the Town to refuse service until such conditions
are corrected. [Amended 11-14-1990]
D. Collections will be made for households and business establishments in
accordance with a schedule prepared by the Town Manager. [Amended
11-11-1996]
E. The provisions of this section shall exclude special pickup items.
[Added 3-27-1995]
§ 128-6 HILLSVILLE CODE § 128-8
108:96
Chapter 132
SPECIAL EVENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 42.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 112.
Special sales — See Ch. 121.
Zoning — See Ch. 171.
§ 132-1. Vendor's license required.
All persons not otherwise licensed or permitted to sell under Chapter 144,
Taxation, Article VII, License Tax, shall be required to obtain a vendor's
license to sell during special events.
§ 132-2. Restrictions pertaining to vendors.
A. Sufficient evidence must be presented that all delinquent Town taxes
and fees must be paid prior to issuance of any license as provided by
§ 58.1-3700 of the Code of Virginia. [Added 9-25-2017]
A. Vendors licenses will be valid from 7:00 a.m. on Friday to 6:00 p.m. the
following Monday. Vendors whose activity is selling parking spaces to
the general public may do so beginning Thursday morning at 6:00 a.m.
All merchandise should be covered until the event opens Friday
morning. Food vendors may begin selling on Thursday.
B. All sales by vendors must be from a stationary location. No house-tohouse
selling will be allowed during special events weekend, and no
peddler's licenses will be issued.
C. Five-foot safety zone.
(1) For safety reasons, no portion of a vendor's stand shall be located
closer than five feet to an adjoining sidewalk or, in the absence of a
sidewalk, not less than five feet from the edge of the pavement of
the adjoining street. For the purposes of this section, a vendor's
stand will not be considered as adjoining the sidewalk or street if it
is separated by a permanent fence at least 36 inches in height or a
wall at least 36 inches in height that has been in existence at least
30 days prior to the special events weekend and which wall or
fence has been constructed and maintained by the landowner, the
Town or the state.
(2) No item or article for sale, display or advertisement will be allowed
within this five-foot section between the street or sidewalk and the
vendor's stand.
§ 128-8 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 132-2
108:97
§ 132-3. Restrictions pertaining to landowners.
§ 132-4. Restrictions pertaining to lessors.
(3) No vehicles will be parked within the five-foot safety zone unless it
is the normal and permanent parking place of a resident and then
can only be used by that resident.
D. All vendors using propane or flammable materials will be required to
have a fire extinguisher at their stand with the rating of five pounds dry
chemical or equivalent. Failure to have a fire extinguisher with a rating
as stated will result in suspension of a vendor's license and a fine of
$25.
A. Landowners are required to buy permits for the amount of space they
intend to rent and are responsible for selling permits and informing
renters of all special event rules and regulations. Landowners and
vendors are required to sign permits acknowledging they understand
and will comply with all rules and regulations. Landowners who
purchase the permits for the amount of space they intend to rent by
4:30 p.m. on the Thursday prior to the special event and turn in the
money for the permits by 4:30 p.m. the Thursday after the special
events weekend will be given a ten-percent discount. [Amended
7-13-1998; 9-25-2017]
B. Landowners renting spaces should provide port-a-john (rest room
facilities) based on the quantity of their rental spaces. These should be
cleaned daily and inspected regularly.
A. Any person (lessor) intending to lease or rent vendor spaces will be
required to submit to the Town office prior to the special event a
drawing of his property, divided into numbered vendor's spaces,
describing the square footage.
B. All lessors shall have a listing of their vendors for emergency purposes.
C. Lessors with 20 or more vendors shall be required to furnish trash
receptacles.
D. All lessors having vendor's stands that are 200 feet beyond the street
right-of-way shall be required to provide a fire lane of no less than 15
feet in width which shall traverse the property in such a manner as to
provide ready access for emergency vehicles to all parts of the property.
This may mean that more than one fire lane will be needed. Such lanes
shall be posted as such on the property and shall be shown on the
required map mentioned above. Failure to submit a map showing the
lane(s) and/or failure to provide such lanes properly marked shall result
in denial of license to vendors to sell on the property involved.
§ 132-2 HILLSVILLE CODE § 132-5
108:98
§ 132-5. Prohibited transactions with animals. [Amended
8-11-2003; 10-27-2008]
It shall be unlawful for any person who would be required to obtain a
vendor's license, to buy, sell, trade, barter, or give away any live animal
during the Memorial Day Flea Market or the Labor Day Gun Show and Flea
Market that is held within the corporate limits of the Town of Hillsville. For
the purpose of this legislation, an animal shall include, but not be limited
to dogs, cats, birds, reptiles, mammals, fish, amphibians, or exotic species
offered as pets. Violation of this section is a Class 3 Misdemeanor.
§ 132-6. Vendor's license fees. [Amended 6-13-200625; 9-25-2017]
§ 132-7. Vendor's license fees for persons parking cars. [Amended
6-13-200626; 9-25-2017]
Vendor's license fees for persons parking cars will be as follows:
Number of Cars Fee
Up to 25 $22
Up to 50 $35
Over 50 $48
§ 132-8. Yard sales.27
Yard sales will be permitted, provided that they are single-family in nature
and are at the residence or property of the family conducting the sale and
A. Vendor's license fees will be charged at the following rate per space:
Size of Space
(square feet) Fee
Up to 200 $22
201 to 400 $35
401 to 600 $48
601 to 800 $61
B. For spaces greater than 800 square feet, the fees will be increased
following the system outlined above. (Repeat above system of charges;
examples: 1,000 square feet equals a fee of $74, 1,200 square feet
equals a fee of $87 and 1,400 square feet equals a fee of $100.) A
"minimum space" shall be defined as an area consisting of 200 square
feet or less. A surcharge of $18 will be added for all food vendors.
25.Editor's Note: This legislation provided an effective date of 1-1-2007.
26.Editor's Note: This legislation provided an effective date of 1-1-2007.
27.Editor's Note: For other provisions pertaining to this topic, see Ch. 121, Sales, Special,
Art. I.
§ 132-5 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 132-8
108:99
that the proper permit has been obtained. Nonprofit organizations may also
conduct a yard sale, provided that they have secured permission from the
property owner, that the goods for sale have not been purchased by the
organization for resale and that the proper permit has been obtained. No
vendor may sell at a yard sale.
§ 132-9. Temporary food establishments. [Amended 7-22-2002;
5-11-2009; 3-13-2017; 2-26-2018]
All temporary food establishments in the Town of Hillsville, Virginia, shall
comply with the temporary event food facility policy of the Virginia
Department of Health and also be required to do the following:
A. In addition to overhead covering, all temporary food establishments
serving foods requiring temperature control for safety, otherwise
known as TCS foods (i.e., chicken, beef, seafood, shell eggs, dairy,
cooked fruits or vegetables, cut tomatoes, cut melons, etc.), shall have
cooking and preparation areas protected with sneeze guards or be
separated by at least 30 inches from the general public. The serving
area opening or window shall not exceed 10 square feet for every 144
square feet of protected temporary food establishment area.
B. In addition to floors being a hard surface material (i.e., asphalt or
concrete) or gravel/grass covered with a suitable material to control
dust and mud such as mats or rubber-backed outdoor carpeting, all
food, food contact equipment, and single-service items (plates, bowls,
paper towels, eating utensils, etc.) shall be stored at a minimum of six
inches off the ground or in waterproof, covered storage containers.
C. All temporary food establishments shall have all food contact surfaces
constructed of an approved cleanable substance such as stainless steel,
Formica or gloss paint. No paper, porous or raw wood is allowed for
food preparation. All non-food-contact surfaces shall be easily
cleanable. All screens, tent and canopy materials shall remain clean
during the duration of the event.
D. Due to the insufficient capability of charcoal briquettes to maintain
properly controlled cooking temperatures, no preparation of TCS foods,
such as beef, pork, fish and poultry, shall be performed using charcoaltype
grills and cookers. Alternative methods for cooking include electric
and propane gas cooking equipment.
E. For festivals or events of more than two days' duration, any food vendor
handling, preparing or holding for sale to the public foods requiring
temperature control (TCS foods) shall have working electric freezer
equipment to properly store frozen foods so that they remain frozen
solid and working electric refrigeration that will consistently hold TCS
foods at 41°F or lower.
F. Any vendor selling food to the public shall submit a completed
application for a temporary food establishment permit and the
§ 132-8 HILLSVILLE CODE § 132-9
108:100
appropriate fee to the Carroll County Health Department for each
temporary food establishment location. All applications and fees shall
be submitted no later 10 days prior to the event. Late applications or
incomplete applications will not be processed.
G. All temporary food vendors shall have a person in charge (PIC) that is
on site, for each location, who demonstrates food safety knowledge by
holding a current and valid food protection manager certification or, at
minimum, showing proof of having completed a food handler training
course within the past three years from an accredited program
accepted by the Carroll County Health Department. If a vendor has
more than one location, each location shall have a separate PIC meeting
this requirement. A copy of the certificate or proof of training shall
accompany the application submission 10 calendar days before
proposed opening. The only exception will be for temporary food
vendors selling only prepackaged foods; however, they shall submit
their application 10 days before proposed opening.
H. A vendor's license from the Town of Hillsville will not be issued, and
therefore no food will be allowed to be served or sold, until a
satisfactory inspection has been completed and a permit issued by the
Health Department. These events cover a large area and there are
many food vendors so it is recommended that vendors allow ample time
for arrival, set up, and inspection prior to their anticipated opening.
Health Department representatives will begin conducting inspections
and issuing permits at least one day before food service is allowed at
the event.
I. Any on-site-cooked foods shall be sold and/or consumed the same day of
preparation. Any leftovers must be properly disposed of at the end of
the food vendor's business day and shall not be held over and served on
a different day. The exception to this would be if the food vendor can
demonstrate approved food safety procedures to the local Health
Department by submitting a hazard analysis critical control point
(HACCP) plan 10 calendar days before proposed opening for approval.
J. All temporary food vendors shall provide customers access to a
handwashing area or hand sanitizer within 50 feet of their register.
K. The provisions of the Code of Virginia § 35.1-1 et seq. or any successor
statute shall not apply to:
(1) Food booths at fairs, where such booths are promoted or sponsored
by any political subdivision of the state or by any charitable
nonprofit organization [501c(3)] or group thereof; and
(2) Concession stands at youth athletic facilities or activities, if such
stands are promoted or sponsored by either a political subdivision
of the state; by an applicable youth athletic association; by a
volunteer fire department or rescue squad; or by any charitable
nonprofit organization or group thereof which has been recognized
as being a part of a recreational program of the county and wherein
§ 132-9 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 132-9
108:101
§ 132-10. Violations and penalties.
such association or organization is located, by an ordinance or
resolution of the county; and
(3) All those properly exempted from the provisions of the Code of
Virginia § 35.1-14 or any successor statute, except as provided in
this section, shall rely on the Virginia Department of Health to
provide advice, consultation and expertise in the realm of food
preparation and service activities for the purpose of ensuring the
public's health, safety, and welfare.
L. Supervision of food sales as contemplated in this section shall be made
by the Health Officer of the Town or a qualified person designated by
such officer. Such supervision shall include:
(1) A requirement of notice from the food concessionaire as to the time
and place of the sale of food;
(2) Meetings as necessary with the representatives of such
organizations to provide information and assistance, where
necessary, to provide a healthy environment for the sale of food;
(3) Inspections, as necessary, to determine if such operations are being
conducted in a healthy environment and to provide assistance in
remediation, if necessary;
(4) Inspections, as necessary, to determine if the authorized
organizations are operating such food concessions; and
(5) No other supervision unless directed by future ordinance of the
Town Council.
A. Any vendor, owner, manager or person in charge of a vendor's stand
violating any provisions of a special events sales ordinance shall be
guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor.
B. Any property owner, tenant, manager, custodian or other person in
charge of the property, after notification by the Chief of Police or an
officer designated by him who allows a vendor to remain upon his
property in violation of any of the special events sales ordinances shall
be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor.
C. There will be a penalty of $100 for any vendor who begins selling prior
to obtaining and posting the required vendors license. [Added
3-13-2017]
D. Licenses not returned to Town Hall by the specified date will be
assessed a late penalty of $50 per person. [Added 3-13-2017]
E. Any person or entity previously receiving a license or permit pursuant
to §§ 132-1, 132-2, 132-3, 132-4, 132-6, 132-7, or 132-9 who does not
ensure that the property on which said person or entity operated
§ 132-9 HILLSVILLE CODE § 132-10
108:102
§ 132-11. Suspension of license; bond.
Chapter 136
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Drainage control — See Ch. 70.
Littering — See Ch. 88.
Nuisances — See Ch. 97.
Parades — See Ch. 101.
Parking-- See Ch. 104.
Solid waste — See Ch. 128.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 140.
Utilities — See Ch. 153.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 157.
Inoperable vehicles — See Ch. 160.
Water and sewer — See Ch. 167.
pursuant to said permit or license is clear of trash and debris within
seven days of the end of the special event shall be ineligible to receive
any additional such license or permit. No person or entity shall be
eligible to receive a license or permit pursuant to §§ 132-1, 132-2,
132-3, 132-4, 132-6, 132-7, or 132-9 if said person or entity has an
outstanding or unresolved Town of Hillsville notice of violation
concerning the property involved in the license or permit or any other
property in the Town of Hillsville. [Added 10-22-2018]
A. The vendor's license of anyone charged under these provisions shall be
suspended until such time as the vendor comes into compliance or posts
a bond with the Town in the amount of $100. This bond may be given to
any officer of the Town upon due receipt of which this bond was posted.
Such bond is intended to allow a vendor who disputes a charge to
continue to operate pending a decision upon the charge by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
B. Upon conviction, and after all appeals have been exhausted, said bond
shall be applied first to any fines and costs assessed by the court. Upon
acquittal of the charge, such bond shall be refunded to the vendor.
C. The posting of a compliance bond shall be separate from any
appearance or other bond which may be required by a Magistrate or
Judge.
D. Any person who operates with a suspended vendor's license shall be
guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.
§ 132-10 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 132-11
136:103

Part 1
[Adopted 10-11-G1e9n7e8rAals PCrho.v 1is5io Onfs The 1978 Code]
ARTICLE I
Construction of Sidewalks and Driveways
§ 136-1. Construction of sidewalks.
Upon application of any property owner to the Town Council for a sidewalk
to be constructed by the town along the street on which the property
owner fronts, the Council shall take under advisement the practicability of
constructing the walk, upon an agreement from the property owner to pay
one-half ( 1/2) of the construction costs of that portion of the walk which
extends in front of the property so owned by the person. If it is found
practicable to construct the walk, the town shall require of the owner a
written agreement to pay his portion of the costs, after which the work will
be done under the direction and control of the town.
§ 136-2. Construction of driveways.
A permit is required for the construction of a driveway across a sidewalk
or across that portion of the street between the curbline and the property
line. This permit is issued from the office of the Mayor only upon application
by the owner of the property who shall make his own arrangements for the
construction authorized, which shall be done in accordance with the town's
specifications and under the supervision of the Mayor.
§ 136-1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 136-2
136:105

ARTICLE II
Use of Streets
§ 136-3. Banners not to be suspended across streets.
No banners shall be suspended across streets without the permission of the
Town Manager.28
§ 136-4. Skating or sleigh riding on streets or sidewalks; bicycles.
[Amended 8-26-1987]
§ 136-5. Permit required for obstructing streets.
To obstruct streets, sidewalks or parkways with building material, ladders,
scaffolds or ropes or in any other manner requires a permit, regardless
of the purpose, character or intent of the obstruction. These permits are
issued from the office of the Mayor.
§ 136-6. Storing materials in streets.30
Storing materials of any character or description in any part of the streets
of the town for any period of time requires a special permit, which is issued
from the office of the Town Manager and which limits the amount of space
to be occupied and the period of time for such storage.
§ 136-7. Discharge of certain substances into streets prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge wastewater, industrial
waste, sludge, grease, oil or other substances in or into any street, alley or
other public place in the town or to permit the flowage of such substances
from the property of such person into the streets, alleys or public places of
the town.
A. It shall be unlawful for anyone to ride or slide on sled, sleighs, skates or
other devices on wheels or runners on the streets or sidewalks within
the town, except by permission from the Town Manager.29
B. No person shall ride a bicycle upon or along a sidewalk or across a
roadway, upon and along a crosswalk, including those of any church,
school or recreational facility, or any business property open to the
public, provided that signs are placed in the general areas indicating
such prohibition.
C. Violation of Subsection A or B shall constitute a traffic infraction.
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 136-3 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 136-7
136:107

ARTICLE III
Excavations
§ 136-8. Permit required; deposit.
Before opening any street or sidewalk, whether it is improved or not,
a permit shall be obtained from the office of the Mayor. A deposit may
be required or a written agreement between the town and the applicant
shall be executed whereby the applicant agrees to restore the surface to
its original condition or equal upon completion of his work requiring the
opening.
§ 136-8 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 136-8
136:109

ARTICLE IV
Snow and Ice Removal
§ 136-9. Clearing snow from sidewalks.
All sidewalks within the town shall be cleared of snow within twenty-four
(24) hours from the time it shall cease falling. Each person is charged with
the duty of complying with this section.
§ 136-9 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 136-9
136:111

Part 2
[Adopted 4-9O-1b9s8tr6u(cSteiocn. 1O0f- 2S6id Oewf aTlhkes 1978 Code)]
ARTICLE V
Removal of Obstructions
§ 136-10. Obstruction unlawful; removal.31
§ 136-11. Exception.
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to prevent organized sidewalk
sales as from time to time may be authorized by the Town Council.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to impede or partially impede the
flow of pedestrian traffic by obstructing or partially obstructing the
sidewalks or walkways of the town.
B. Should any person be in violation of this chapter, it shall be the duty of
any officer of the town to notify such person of this section, who shall
forthwith remove or have removed the obstacle or obstruction.
C. Each day's violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 136-10 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 136-11
136:113
Chapter 140
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 48.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 52.
Drainage control — See Ch. 70.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 76.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 136.
Utilities — See Ch. 153.
Water and sewer — See Ch. 167.
Zoning — See Ch. 171.
§ 136-11 HILLSVILLE CODE § 136-11
136:114
ARTICLE I
Title, Authority and Jurisdiction
§ 140-1. Title; legislative authority.
This chapter, which shall be known and may be cited as the "Subdivision
Ordinance of the Town of Hillsville," is adopted pursuant to the authority of
Article 7, Land Subdivision and Development, of the Virginia Planning Act,
Code of Virginia 1950, as amended.
§ 140-2. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all land within the jurisdiction
of the Town of Hillsville, including that within a distance of two (2) miles
from the corporate limits of the Town of Hillsville.
§ 140-1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 140-2
136:115

ARTICLE II
Purpose
§ 140-3. General purpose.
The general purpose of this chapter is to establish certain subdivision
standards and procedures for the Town of Hillsville, Virginia. It is part
of a long-range plan to guide and facilitate the orderly beneficial growth
of the community and to promote the public safety, convenience, comfort,
prosperity and general welfare. There standards and procedures can
provide a guide for the change that occurs when lands and acreage become
urban in character as a result of residential, commercial or industrial
development and can make possible the provision of public services in
a safe, adequate and efficient manner. Subdivided land sooner or later
becomes a public responsibility in that roads and streets must be
maintained and numerous public services customary to urbanized areas
must be provided. This chapter assists the community in meeting these
responsibilities.
§ 140-4. Specific purposes.
More specifically, the regulations included herein are designed to bring
about the coordination of streets within subdivisions with other existing and
planned streets; to provide for the safe and efficient circulation of traffic; to
avoid hazardous intersections and other dangerous conditions; to provide
adequate drainage and water and sewer systems; to establish construction
standards for streets and other improvements; to lessen flood damage and
to control erosion and sedimentation; to ensure that land is platted and
developed in a way that is consonant with the efficient and economic use
of public funds; to require the proper legal description and monumenting
of subdivided land; and to assure that the purchasers of lots are offered a
commodity that is suitable for development and use.
§ 140-3 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 140-4
136:117

ARTICLE III
Definitions and Word Usage
§ 140-5. Word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and terms shall be
interpreted as follows:
§ 140-6. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, certain words and terms shall be defined as
follows:
ADMINISTRATOR — The official designated by the Town Council to
administer and enforce this chapter.
BLOCK — A track of land bounded by streets or by a combination of
streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way or shorelines of
waterways.
BUILDING — Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of
person, animal, chattel or movable property of any kind, and which is
permanently affixed to the land.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — A line or lines within a lot or other parcel of
land so designated on a recorded plat as otherwise established by law in
front of which no building or structure shall be erected.
CUL-DE-SAC — A local public street having only one end open to traffic and
the other end being permanently terminated by an appropriate turnaround
for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement.
EASEMENT — A grant by a property owner of the use of land for a specific
purpose or purposes.
FINAL PLAT — The map or plan of a subdivision of land which meets all
the requirements of this chapter, including any accompanying material, as
described in Article VII.
FRONTAGE — The length of the property line of any lot, lots or tract of land
measured along a public street, road or highway against which land abuts.
A. "Lot" included the words "plot" and "parcel."
B. "Shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
C. "May" is permissive.
D. "Approve" shall be considered to be followed by the words "or
disapproved."
E. All distances and areas refer to measurement in a horizontal plane.
F. Any reference to the ordinance or chapter includes all ordinances
amending or supplementing the same.
§ 140-5 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 140-6
136:119
HIGHWAY DEPARTMENT — The Virginia Department of Highways and
Transportation.
HIGHWAY ENGINEER — The Resident Engineer employed by the Virginia
Department of Highways and Transportation serving Carroll County.
IMPROVEMENTS — Public utilities, circulation and drainage facilities,
including but not limited to streets, storm and sanitary sewer systems,
curbs and gutters, culverts, catch basins and other drainage structures,
waterlines and fire hydrants, sidewalks and street signs.
LOT — A portion of a subdivision, or any other parcel of land intended for
transfer of ownership or for building development, or both.
OWNER — Any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or
corporations or any other legal entity having legal title to the land sought to
be subdivided under this chapter.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT — A parcel of land under single
ownership or control, having a minimum area of ten (10) acres, for which
a detailed site plan is submitted to the Planning Commission for review
under the provisions of this chapter. Types of development which may be
reviewed and approved as planned units include residential communities,
mobile home parks and resort and recreation complexes containing such
campgrounds, motels and vacation homes for sale or rent.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the Town of
Hillsville.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — The map or plan of a subdivision of land which
meets all the requirements of this chapter, including any accompanying
material, as described in Article VI.
RESUBDIVISION — An authorized change in property lines of a recorded
subdivision.
STREET — A way for vehicle traffic, whether designated as a street,
highway, road or however otherwise designated. For the purposes of this
chapter, the street system is classified as follows:
ARTERIAL STREETS — Those used primarily for traffic and from which
direct access to abutting property may be restricted or prohibited.
A.
COLLECTOR STREETS — Those which carry traffic from local streets
to the major system of arterial streets, including the principal entrance
streets of a residential development and certain streets for circulation
within such development.
B.
LOCAL STREETS — Those which are used primarily for access to
abutting properties.
C.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS — Minor streets which are parallel to
and adjacent to arterial streets and which provide access to abutting
properties and protection from through traffic.
D.
§ 140-6 HILLSVILLE CODE § 140-6
136:120
SUBDIVIDER — Any person, firm or corporation who or which creates a
subdivision, as defined in this chapter.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a parcel of land into three (3) or more lots
or parcels, any of which contains less than five (5) acres, for the purpose of
transfer of ownership or of building development, including all changes in
street or lot lines and the creation of any new street or easement; except,
however, as follows:
TOWN — The Town of Hillsville, Virginia.
TOWN COUNCIL — The Town Council of the Town of Hillsville, Virginia.
ALLEYS — Minor ways which are used primarily for vehicle service
access to the back of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
E.
The sale or exchange of adjacent property between adjoining lot
owners, which such sale or exchange does not create additional
building sites.
A.
The division of land into parcels of five (5) acres or more not involving
any new street or easement.
B.
A bona fide division or partition of agricultural land for agricultural
purposes or from the building site for members of the family owning
any such agricultural lands.
C.
A bona fide division or partition of land by a property owner to his or
her children and their spouses for a building site.
D.
§ 140-6 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 140-6
136:121

ARTICLE IV
Preparation and Recording of Subdivision Plats
§ 140-7. Recording of plats.
Any owner, proprietor or developer of any tract of land situated within the
jurisdiction of this chapter, who subdivides such tract or who causes any
public streets, alleys or public areas to be created, shall cause a plat to be
made of such subdivision and shall cause said plat to be recorded in the
office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court of Carroll County. The plat shall be in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 140-8. Approval required prior to recording.
No plat of a subdivision shall be recorded until each plat shall have been
approved and such approval evidenced thereon in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 140-9. Permit issuance.
No permit shall be issued for the erection or occupancy of any structure
or building to be located in any subdivision, a plat whereof is required to
be recorded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, until such plat shall
have been recorded as herein provided.
§ 140-10. Recording required prior to sale of lots.
No lot shall be sold in any subdivision before the plat has been recorded.
§ 140-11. Plat preparation.
Every subdivision plat submitted for recordation shall be prepared by a
certified professional engineer or land surveyor licensed by the State of
Virginia, who shall endorse upon each such plat a certificate signed by him
setting forth the source of the title of the owner of the land subdivided and
the place of record of the last instrument in the chain of title reference,
surveyor or engineer responsible for the survey, town or city, magisterial
district, watershed, post office and also any relevant remarks pertaining to
the survey. When the plat is of land acquired from more than one (1) source
of title, the outlines of the several tracts shall be indicated upon such plat.
No provision of this chapter shall preclude the preparation of a preliminary
plat by an architect, landscape architect or land planner.
§ 140-12. Required statement.
Every such plat shall contain a statement as follows: "The platting or
dedication of the following described land (here insert a correct description
of the land subdivided) is with the free consent and in accordance with
the desire of the undersigned owners, proprietors and trustees, if any." The
statement shall be signed by such persons and duly acknowledged before
some officer authorized to take acknowledgment of deeds.
§ 140-7 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 140-13
136:123
§ 140-13. Transfer of easements.
The recordation of the final plat shall operate to transfer to the town or
county, in fee simple, such portion of the premises platted as is on such plat
set apart for streets, alleys or other public use and to transfer to said town
or county any easement indicated on such plat to create a public right of
passage over the same.
§ 140-14. Statutory requirements.
The preparation and recording of subdivision plats shall be done in
accordance with the provisions of Article 7, Land Subdivision and
Development, of the Virginia Planning Act, Code of Virginia 1950, as now or
hereafter in effect.
§ 140-13 HILLSVILLE CODE § 140-14
136:124
ARTICLE V
Review and Approval of Subdivisions
§ 140-15. Application.
Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed, the subdivider or his agent
shall apply in writing to the Planning Commission for approval of a
preliminary plat and submit five (5) copies thereof prepared in accordance
with Article VI of this chapter. He shall submit a fee with this application
in accordance with Article XII of this chapter. This application shall be
submitted at least seven (7) days prior to the meeting of the Planning
Commission at which it is to be considered.
§ 140-16. Preliminary plat approval.
Following review of the preliminary plat, the Planning Commission shall
communicate within forty-five (45) days in writing with the subdivider,
informing him of action taken and stating specific changes, if any, that
are required in the preliminary layout. If for any reason the subdivision
is disapproved, the reasons for such disapproval shall be given. In cases
where approval of the plat is conditional upon changes being made in
the subdivision layout, one (1) copy of the plat shall be returned to the
subdivider with the desired changes marked thereon.
§ 140-17. Engineering drawings and specifications.
After receiving notice of approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider
shall submit to the Administrator four (4) copies of plans and specifications
for all improvements to be installed. The Administrator shall advise the
subdivider concerning the character and extent of improvements and the
estimated amount of the performance bond or other surety that will be
required before final approval of the subdivision plat. The Administrator,
after consultation with the Resident Engineer of the Virginia Department
of Highways and Transportation, shall advise the subdivider of approval or
disapproval, in writing, within sixty (60) days.
§ 140-18. Installation of improvements.
The subdivider shall, prior to filing with the Planning Commission a final
plat for approval, complete all improvements and installation of utilities
required under these regulations, or in lieu of completing said
improvements, the subdivider shall furnish the town with a performance
bond as required by Article X of this chapter.
§ 140-19. Submission of final plat.
The subdivider shall, within six (6) months after official notification of
approval by the Planning Commission in respect to the preliminary plat,
apply in writing to the Planning Commission for approval of the final
subdivision plat and submit three (3) copies thereof prepared in accordance
with Article VII of this chapter. This application shall be submitted at least
§ 140-15 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 140-19
136:125
seven (7) days prior to the meeting of the Planning Commission at which it
is to be considered. The subdivider may file for approval only that portion of
the approved preliminary plat which he proposes to record and develop at
that time.
§ 140-20. Final plat approval.
§ 140-21. Recording following final approval.
Unless the subdivider shall have said plat recorded in the office of the Clerk
of the Circuit Court of Carroll County within thirty (30) days after final
approval by the Planning Commission and before any lots are sold in said
subdivision, approval of the final plat shall become null and void.
A. Unless an application for final approval is made within six (6) months
after approval of the preliminary plat, said approval of the preliminary
plat shall become null and void.
B. The Planning Commission shall, within forty-five (45) days from the
date of submittal of the final plat, approve, modify or disapprove such
plat; and failure to act within forty-five (45) days shall be deemed
approval.
C. Approval of the final subdivision plat by the Planning Commission shall
be shown on the face of the plat by the signature of the Chairman. The
approval of the plat shall not be finally effective until the subdivider has
made or provided for the improvements required pursuant to Article X
of this chapter to the satisfaction of the Town Council and this approval
has been attested by the signature of the Mayor on said plat.
§ 140-19 HILLSVILLE CODE § 140-21
136:126
ARTICLE VI
Preliminary Plats
§ 140-22. Plat requirements.
The subdivider shall submit to the Planning Commission five (5) copies of
the preliminary plat, at a scale of one hundred (100) feet to the inch, which
shall show thereon:
§ 140-23. Vicinity sketch map.
The preliminary plat shall include a vicinity sketch map, at a scale of
two thousand (2,000) feet to the inch, showing the relationship of the
A. The proposed subdivision name and location.
B. The names and addresses of the owner of record, subdivider, the person
who prepared the plat and holders of any easements affecting the
property.
C. The names of all subdivisions immediately adjacent, and the names of
the owners of record of adjacent unsubdivided property.
D. The date of the drawing, true North point and scale.
E. A survey of the tract boundary.
F. Topographical data compiled by accepted field or photogrammetric
methods, with a contour interval no greater than five (5) feet; location
of watercourses, including floodplain limits where applicable, and the
high-water-line of natural and artificial lakes.
G. Significant natural landscape features, including rock outcrops and
large trees.
H. The location, width and names of all existing or platted streets within or
adjacent to the subdivision; the location of existing buildings,
easements, railroad rights-of-way, utility lines and drainageways.
I. Preliminary plans for all utilities, including but not limited to the
proposed method of accomplishing surface drainage, water supply and
sewage disposal; preliminary designs for any bridges and culverts that
may be required.
J. The location and dimensions of proposed streets, alleys, lots, building
lines and easements, identifying lots by number and streets by name.
K. If the subdivision includes or abuts a water area, any proposed pierhead
line beyond which no pier or dock may be constructed.
L. The proposed use of all lots after being subdivided.
M. Designation of all parcels of land proposed to be dedicated or reserved
for public use and the conditions, if any, of such dedication.
§ 140-22 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 140-23
136:127
subdivision to its environs. This map shall comprehend an area extending
at least one (1) mile on each side of the subdivision and shall identify
roads, political boundaries, other subdivisions and important landmarks and
natural features.
§ 140-24. Supporting information.
The following information shall be furnished, either set forth on the fact of
the plat or submitted as separate documents:
A. Sedimentation and erosion control measures proposed for the
subdivision, on advice of the New River Soil and Water Conservation
District.
B. Signed statements of the appropriate officials concerning the
availability of water, sewer, gas and electricity to the proposed
subdivision.
C. Private restrictions, if any, proposed to be included in the deeds.
§ 140-23 HILLSVILLE CODE § 140-24
136:128
ARTICLE VII
Final Plats
§ 140-25. Format and scale.
The final subdivision plat shall be drawn on tracing cloth or plastic tracing
material of good quality. It shall be black and white and the size shall be
seventeen by twenty-two (17 x 22) inches. This size includes a margin of
one-half ( 1/2) inch on the north, east and south sides and a two-inch margin
on the west side. If the map is drawn in two (2) or more sections, each
section shall be accompanied by a key map showing the location of the
sections. The scale is to be shown on a bar graph and shall not be smaller
than one (1) inch equals two hundred (200) feet. The map is to be made
within the rule of good mapping, with all bearings and distances to read
in a clockwise direction, and all printing shall be readable from the south
and east side. The subdivider shall submit to the Planning Commission the
original and three (3) prints of the final plat; also, one (1) copy of the above
on linen is to be filed.
§ 140-26. Boundary survey map.
The boundary survey map shall show at least two (2) permanent monuments
which can be used for orientation in the reproduction of the survey on
the ground, and where possible it should be tied into the state coordinate
system or national survey points placed by the Department of Interior
and the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey. Names of adjacent
landowners, streets, highways, streams, etc., shall be shown.
§ 140-27. Plat preparation: certificates.
The final plat shall be prepared by a certified professional engineer or land
surveyor licensed by the State of Virginia. It shall contain the certificates
and statements required by Article IV of this chapter. A place shall be
provided on the plat to receive the signature of the Chairman of the
Planning Commission and the Mayor of the Town of Hillsville.
§ 140-28. Content.
The final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat as approved and shall
show the following:
A. Name and location of subdivision.
B. Name and address of record owner and subdivider.
C. North arrow, shown with apparent declination designed. True North
shall be shown with a full arrow and Magnetic North shall be shown
with a half arrow, and it shall be placed outside the area included in the
survey.
D. Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements and other
rights-of-way and property lines of lots. Bearings shall be shown to the
§ 140-25 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 140-28
136:129
§ 140-29. Requirements for survey.
All dimensions, both linear and angular, shall be determined by an accurate
control survey which must close and balance within a limit of one (1) foot
in five thousand (5,000). A bearing and distance tie between at least two
(2) permanent monuments on the interior boundary of the subdivision and
a bearing and distance tie to a corner of the subdivision from an outside
reference marker, in accordance with Article IX of this chapter, shall be
made and shown on the plat.
§ 140-30. Final approval not guaranteed.
Approval by the Administrator of the preliminary plat does not constitute a
guarantee of approval of the final plat.
nearest ten (10) seconds and dimensions to the nearest hundredth of
a foot. Data for all curves shall be shown in detail at the curve or in
a curve data table containing the following: delta, radius, arc, tangent,
chord, chord bearing and degree of curve.
E. Location of monuments and property markers.
F. Record name of adjoining subdivisions, and names of record owners of
adjoining unsubdivided land.
G. Name and right-of-way width of each street or other right-of-way.
H. Location, dimensions and purpose of all easements.
I. Abutting streets and roads, with names and right-of-way widths.
J. Designating numbers or symbols for all lots and blocks.
K. In the case of the resubdivision of existing recorded lots, existing lot
lines shown by dotted lines and the resubdivision by full lines.
L. Purpose for which sites, other than residential lots, are dedicated or
reserved.
M. Minimum building setback lines on all lots.
N. Private restrictions, if any, proposed to be included in the deed.
O. Where temporary turnarounds are required by this chapter, shown on
the plat and the following notation made on the plat: "Any area on this
plat designated as a temporary turnaround shall be constructed and
used as other streets in the subdivision until such time as (insert here
the name of the street) is extended to join another street and the cul-desac
ceases to exist. Thereupon the land in the temporary turnaround
area which extends beyond the normal right-of-way line of the street
will be vacated for street purposes and will revert to adjoining lot
owners."
§ 140-28 HILLSVILLE CODE § 140-30
136:130
ARTICLE VIII
Design Standards
§ 140-31. General principles.
The subdivider shall observe the following general requirements and
principles of land subdivision:
§ 140-32. Street layout and construction.
In the layout of streets, the subdivider shall comply with the following:
A. Suitability of land. Land which the Planning Commission determines to
be unsuitable for development because of vulnerability to flooding, poor
drainage or the characteristics likely to be harmful to the safety,
welfare or health of the future residents or to the public shall not be
submitted unless adequate methods to correct all such hazards are
devised and approved by the Planning Commission.
B. Conformity with official plans. All proposed subdivisions shall conform
to any adopted plans for the town and shall be in accord with planning
policies of the town and the county. The subdivider shall make available
for public acquisition such lands in the area to be subdivided as are
designated by official plans for parks, playgrounds and schools or other
public buildings. Whenever said area includes any part of a major
arterial or collector street as designated on an official plan, appropriate
provision for the right-of-way thereof shall be incorporated in the
subdivision plat.
C. Preservation of natural features. In the design of any subdivision,
careful consideration will be given to preserving natural features and
amenities and to the preservation of sites and buildings having historic
value.
D. Private streets prohibited. There shall be no private streets platted in
any subdivision. Each lot shall have direct frontage on and access to a
dedicated public street.
E. Large tracts. Where land is subdivided into larger parcels than normal
building lots, such parcels shall be arranged in such a way that future
resubdivision is feasible.
F. Neighborhood consideration. Street and block layout shall be made
with consideration of the most advantageous development of adjoining
tracts and the entire neighborhood.
G. Advertising standards. A subdivider when advertising a subdivided
tract of land for sale shall be specific as to the following items, whether
officially approved water and sewage facilities are available or not.
§ 140-31 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 140-32
136:131
A. Streets shall be coordinated with the existing street system and
provision shall be made for continuity of principal streets as
appropriate.
B. Where, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, it is desirable to
provide for future street access to adjoining unsubdivided property,
proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary of such property.
Where one (1) or more lots front on any such street extension, a
temporary turnaround shall be provided.
C. Local streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be
discouraged.
D. All dead-end streets or culs-de-sac shall terminate in a turnaround
having a minimum right-of-way diameter of one hundred (100) feet.
E. Less than full-width streets shall not be permitted, and boundary
streets along the edge of the tract shall not be permitted unless
required to provide right-of-way for streets and arterials designated by
an official major street plan.
F. Where land in a proposed subdivision is adjacent to a major arterial
highway, the Planning Commission may require marginal access
streets, reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a non-access
reservation along the rear property line or such other treatment as may
be necessary for protection of residential properties and to afford
separation of through and local traffic.
G. Alleys may be required at the rear of lots used for commercial and
industrial purposes. In general, alleys shall not be platted in residential
blocks unless the need for them can be demonstrated to the Planning
Commission.
H. Street right-of-way widths shall not be less than the following:
Street Type
Right-of-Way Width
(feet)
Arterial 100
Collector 60
Local 50
Marginal access 40
Alley 20
Cul-de-sac turnaround 100 (in diameter)
I. In general, streets shall be planned in harmony with existing
topography. Street grades shall be kept below twelve percent (12%)
where practicable, and in no case exceed the maximum permissible
grade prescribed by the Virginia Department of Highways. Minimum
§ 140-32 HILLSVILLE CODE § 140-32
136:132
grade for all streets shall be one-half of one percent ( 1/2 of 1%) for
drainage.
J. The horizontal and vertical alignment of all streets shall conform to
standards approved by the Virginia Department of Highways and
Transportation. In no case shall a street have a curve radius of less than
one hundred (100) feet, measured to the center line.
K. A tangent of at least two hundred (200) feet shall be provided between
reverse curves on arterial streets and one hundred (100) feet on
collector streets.
L. Streets shall intersect at right angles or as nearly so as practicable. In
no case shall the angle of intersection be less than seventy-five degrees
(75º) unless approved by the Planning Commission upon
recommendation of the Resident Engineer for an unusual condition of
terrain.
M. Street jogs or offsets at intersections shall be avoided.
N. Intersections with an arterial street shall be at least one thousand
(1,000) feet apart, measured from center line to center line.
O. Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a radius of
at least ten (10) feet or a greater radius where the Planning
Commission determines such to be desirable for reasons of safety.
P. In cases where Virginia Department of Highways specifications are
lacking or are less restrictive than the requirements of this chapter, this
chapter shall prevail.
Q. The roadway shall be graded to thirty (30) feet, exclusive of side
ditches.
R. Base for pavement shall be at least thirty (30) feet in width and six (6)
inches in depth and be of stone, gravel or other satisfactory material
approved by the Virginia Department of Highways.
S. Proposed streets which are obviously in alignment with other already
existing and named streets shall bear the names of the existing streets.
In no case shall the names of proposed streets duplicate existing street
names irrespective of the use of the suffix street, avenue, boulevard,
driveway, place, land or final plats, and shall be approved by the
Administrator. Names of existing streets shall not be changed except by
approval of the governing body.
T. A cross-section showing the proposed street construction, depth and
type of base, type of surface, etc. shall be provided.
U. A profile or contour map showing the proposed grades for the streets
and drainage facilities, including elevations of existing and proposed
ground surface at all street intersections and at points of major grade
§ 140-32 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 140-32
136:133
§ 140-33. Blocks.
The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due
regard to provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs
of the type of use contemplated; requirements of Chapter 171, Zoning;
convenience and safety of vehicular and pedestrian circulation; and
convenient access to water areas.
§ 140-34. Lots. [Amended 11-11-1996]
The size, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the location
of the subdivision and the type of development and use contemplated.
change along the center line of streets, together with proposed grade
lines connecting therewith, shall be provided.
A. The length of residential blocks shall generally not exceed one
thousand six hundred (1,600) feet nor be less than three hundred (300)
feet.
B. Provision for pedestrian walks across blocks may be required by
easement or dedication when determined to be essential by the
Planning Commission to provide circulation or convenient public access
to facilities such as schools, parks and water areas.
C. Blocks shall have a minimum width of two hundred (200) feet and shall
accommodate two (2) rows of lots, except that a single row of lots will
be permitted adjacent to a water area or abutting an arterial highway
which is not used for access to the lots.
A. Depth and width of parcels reserved or laid out for commercial and
industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street
service and parking facilities required.
B. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to the street.
C. Corner lots shall have extra width as necessary to meet building line
requirements on both streets.
D. The subdividing of land shall be such as to provide, by means of a public
street, each lot with satisfactory access to an existing street.
E. All remnants of lots below minimum size left over after subdividing of a
tract must be added to adjacent lots or otherwise disposed of rather
than allowed to remain as unusable parcels.
F. Where the land covered by a subdivision includes two (2) or more
parcels in separate ownership and lot arrangement is such that a
property ownership line divides one (1) or more lots, the land in each lot
so divided shall be transferred by deed to single ownership,
simultaneously with the recording of the final plat. Said deed is to be
deposited with the Clerk of the Court and held with the final plat until
§ 140-32 HILLSVILLE CODE § 140-34
136:134
§ 140-35. Easements.
Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided
for utilities and surface drainage where necessary and shall be at least
twelve (12) feet wide. The plat shall clearly state that it is the obligation
of abutting property owners to keep all drainage ditches open along said
easements, and this provision shall be included in the deed of each lot
affected.
the subdivider is ready to record the same, and they both shall then be
recorded together.
G. Lots intended for business or industrial use shall be designed
specifically for such purposes with adequate space set aside for offstreet
parking and delivery facilities.32
32.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 8-5, Lot size, which immediately followed this section, was
deleted 11-11-1996. For current provisions on this topic, see Ch. 171, Zoning.
§ 140-34 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 140-35
136:135

ARTICLE IX
Monuments and Reference Points
§ 140-36. Placement.
Monuments, to serve as permanent reference points, shall be placed in
accordance with the following requirements:
A. At least one (1) corner of the subdivision shall be designated by bearing
and distance tie from a readily discernible reference marker. If a corner
is within two thousand (2,000) feet of a United States Coast and
Geodetic Survey station or a station of the state coordinated grid
system, then this corner shall be marked with a monument designated
by computed coordinates to an accuracy of one in ten thousand
(1:10,000), and such monument shall be identified on the final
subdivision plat. Where such reference station is not available, the tie
shall be made to some permanent and readily identifiable landmark.
B. Monuments shall be placed in the ground at all corners and at angle
points in the boundary lines of the subdivision, at all points of angles
and curvature in the right-of-way lines of all streets and at all lot
corners within the subdivision.
C. At designated points in the outer boundary and at a minimum of at least
two (2) points in each block of the subdivision, such monuments shall be
designated as control points and shall be of stone or precast concrete
not less than four (4) inches square or four (4) inches in diameter and at
least thirty (30) inches long. In all other locations, the monuments or
markers shall be steel or wrought iron pipe not less than one-half ( 1/2)
inch or more than one (1) inch in diameter and at least twenty-four (24)
inches long. The monument shall not extend more than four (4) inches
above ground level.
§ 140-36 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 140-36
136:137

ARTICLE X
Required Improvements
§ 140-37. General requirements.
Improvements shall be provided as follows:
§ 140-38. Performance bond.
The cost of all improvements required by the provisions of this section shall
be paid by the subdivider, or as much thereof as the Council shall direct. If
the actual installation of improvements is not completed prior to the filing
of an application for final plat approval, the subdivider shall execute an
agreement and post a bond with surety or other guarantee satisfaction to
the Council and in an amount equal to or greater than the estimated cost
of the uncompleted improvements. The Council may require that the bond
or other guarantee be greater than the estimated cost of improvements to
allow for inflationary cost increases.
A. Streets. Streets shall be graded to the full width and in conformance
with the approved cross sections and profiles. The pavement base and
surface shall be appropriate to the type of development and use
contemplated. All streets shall be constructed in accordance with
specifications and standards of the Highway Department.
B. Drainage. A drainage system shall be provided to ensure adequate
drainage of surface and stormwater. The system shall be constructed
and installed in accordance with plans and specifications approved by
the Town Council.
C. Water supply. Where a public water supply is reasonably accessible, the
subdivider shall connect with the public supply and shall provide water
mains and a suitable water connection at each lot.
D. Sanitary sewers. Where a public sanitary sewerage system is
reasonably accessible, the subdivider shall connect therewith and shall
provide a connection for each lot.
E. Other improvements. Curbs and gutters and sidewalks shall be
installed in subdivisions where warranted by the type and density of
development. Fire hydrants shall be installed where a central water
system is provided. In subdivisions where new streets are created,
street name signs shall be installed. Said improvements, when
required, shall conform to specifications of the Highway Department
and the Town Council.
§ 140-37 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 140-38
136:139

ARTICLE XI
Variances and Modifications
§ 140-39. Planned unit development.
The design requirements of this chapter may be modified in the case of a
planned unit development, upon determination by the Planning Commission
that the proposed development will provide adequate public spaces and
fully meet needs for light, air, service, circulation, recreation and livability.
Before approval of any such planned unit development, a detailed site plan
shall be submitted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and
provision shall be made for such covenants and other legal provisions as will
ensure that the plan will be carried out.
§ 140-40. Variances.
Where, because of unusual topographical conditions peculiar to the site
or because of unusual shape of the property, the Planning Commission
finds that strict adherence to the requirements of this chapter would result
in extraordinary hardship to the subdivider or builder, including but not
limited to summer homes or vacation cottages built on mountainous or
rough terrain, it may permit a variance in the regulations so that substantial
justice is done and the public interest secured, provided that the granting
of such variance will alleviate a clearly demonstrable hardship as
distinguished from a special privilege or convenience sought by the
subdivider; and, provided, further, that such variance will not have the
effect of nullifying the intent of this chapter.
§ 140-41. Conditions.
In granting variance and modifications, the Planning Commission may
impose such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the
objectives of the standards or requirements so varied or modified.
§ 140-39 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 140-41
136:141

ARTICLE XII
Fees
§ 140-42. Fees established. [Amended 6-13-200633]
There shall be a charge for the examination and review of every subdivision
plat submitted to the Planning Commission. This fee shall be $20 for each
subdivision plat, plus $2 for each lot contained in the subdivision. This fee
shall be paid to the Town of Hillsville at the time an application is made for
approval of the preliminary subdivision plat.
33.Editor's Note: This legislation provided an effective date of 7-1-2006.
§ 140-42 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 140-42
136:143

ARTICLE XIII
Violations and Penalties
§ 140-43. Violations and penalties.
Any owner or any proprietor of any tract of land who subdivides that tract
of land and violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject
to fines as provided by Article 7, Land Subdivision and Development, of the
Virginia Planning Act, Code of Virginia 1950, as amended.
§ 140-44. Additional remedies.
In addition to other remedies, the Council may institute any appropriate
action or proceedings to prevent violation or attempted violation or to
prevent any act which would constitute such a violation.
§ 140-43 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 140-44
136:145

ARTICLE XIV
Amendments
§ 140-45. Amendments.
This chapter may be amended from time to time by the Council in
accordance with § 15.1-431, Code of Virginia 1950, as now or hereafter in
effect.
§ 140-45 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 140-45
136:147

ARTICLE XV
Filing Requirements
§ 140-46. Certified copies to be filed.
Certified copies of this chapter and all amendments thereof shall be filed in
the office of the Town Manager and in the office of the Clerk of the Circuit
Court of Carroll County.
§ 140-46 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 140-46
136:149
Chapter 142
TATTOO PARLORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements — See Ch. 38.
§ 142-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
TATTOO — To mark or color the skin by pricking in coloring matter so as to
form indelible marks or figures or by the productions of scars.
TATTOO ARTIST — Any person who actually performs the work of tattooing.
TATTOO OPERATOR — Any person who controls, operates, conducts, or
manages any tattoo establishment, whether actually performing the work of
tattooing or not.
TATTOO PARLOR — Any room or space where tattooing is practiced or
where the business of tattooing is conducted or any part thereof.
§ 142-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall conduct a tattoo parlor or engage in business as a
tattoo operator or tattoo artist without first securing a permit therefor, or
when such permit previously issued has been revoked or suspended, or who
shall violate any of the other provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
Class 4 misdemeanor. The Director of Public Health shall revoke the permit
of any person who shall be convicted on two separate occasions within a
twelve-month period of violating any of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 142-3. Physical examinations of and health requirements for
tattoo artists.
Each tattoo artist shall have an annual physical examination, reported on a
form to be prescribed by the Department of Public Health, which physical
examination shall include an x-ray of the chest and such other laboratory
tests as may be deemed necessary by the Department of Public Health. A
report of the physical examination and laboratory tests shall be presented
with the application for each permit for a tattoo parlor or for any renewal
thereof. No persons shall engage in tattooing as a tattoo artist while in the
communicable state of any disease, including the common cold.
§ 140-46 HILLSVILLE CODE § 142-4
142:150
§ 142-4. Records required to be kept by operators.
Proper records for each patron or customer shall be kept and maintained
by the tattoo operator of each tattoo parlor, which record shall include
the patron or customer’s name, address, date, and signature of patron
or customer. All records shall be available for inspection upon request of
Department of Public Health.
§ 142-5. Minors.
No tattoo operator or tattoo artist shall tattoo any person who is under
the age of 18 unless such person shall present to the tattoo operator or
artist notarized consent to such tattooing from a parent or guardian of such
person. In this event, the notarized consent shall be attached to and become
a part of the records referred to in § 142-4.
§ 142-6. Prohibited designs, words or phrases.
No tattoo operator or tattoo artist shall tattoo on any person any obscene
word, phrase, or design.
§ 142-7. Removal of tattoo.
No tattoo operator or artist shall remove or attempt to remove any tattoo.
§ 142-8. Required facilities for parlors.
Each tattooing parlor shall have an operating room, which operating room
shall be separate and apart from a waiting room or such other rooms as
may be used. Patrons or customers shall be tattooed only in such operating
room. The operating room shall be equipped with hot and cold running
water, together with such sinks and basins as may be necessary. Sufficient
toilet, urinal, and handwashing facilities shall be accessible to customers,
operators, and artists within the tattoo parlor.
§ 142-9. Personal cleanliness of tattoo artist; required equipment.
There shall be available within the tattoo parlor adequate hot and cold
running water, soap, approved germicidal solution, and individual hand
brushes and fingernail files for each tattoo artist. Each tattoo artist shall
clean his fingernails with an individual file which has been soaked in
germicidal solution after each use, wash his hands with soap and hot
water, using an individual hand brush, and thoroughly rinse his hands in
a germicidal solution to be approved by the Department of Public Health
before working on each patron or customer. An unused individual paper
towel or napkin shall be used for drying the tattoo artist's hands after
rinsing. Each tattoo artist shall wear a new set of sterile rubber gloves and
a clean gown or coat while actually engaged in tattooing.
§ 142-4 TATTOO PARLORS § 142-10
142:151
§ 142-10. Cabinets for storage of equipment.
Adequate cabinets for the storage of instruments, dyes, carbon, and stencils
shall be provided for each operator and shall be maintained in a sanitary
condition.
§ 142-11. Floors; disposition of waste material.
All flooring within tattoo parlors shall be of impervious material and shall
be at all times maintained in a clean condition. The tattoo parlor shall
have proper facilities for the disposition of waste material. Instruments and
materials used in the tattoo parlor must be disposed of in accordance with
all medical standards and in compliance with all local, state and federal
requirements.
§ 142-12. Ventilation; walls and ceilings.
Tattoo parlors must have adequate light and ventilation, and all walls and
ceilings shall be painted a light color and properly maintained.
§ 142-13. Instructions as to care of skin after tattooing.
Printed or mimeographed instructions, approved by the Director of Public
Health, shall be given to each patron or customer on the care of the skin
after tattooing as a precaution to prevent infection after each tattooing. A
copy of these instructions shall also be posted in a conspicuous place in the
tattoo parlor, clearly visible to the person being tattooed.
§ 142-14. Preparation of area to be tattooed.
When it is necessary to shave the area to be tattooed, a new blade for each
patron shall be used when a safety razor is employed, and the permanent
parts of such safety razor shall be treated as set forth in this section for the
treatment of a straight razor. If a straight razor is used, it shall be cleansed
with soap and water, rinsed in clean water, and then sterilized by being
immersed for 15 minutes in an approved germicidal solution, or by boiling
for a period of at least five minutes before the razor is used again on another
person. After shaving the area to be tattooed, such area shall be cleaned
with an approved germicidal solution in a sanitary manner before the design
is placed on the skin.
§ 142-15. Stencil for transferring design.
The stencil for transferring the design to the skin shall be thoroughly
cleaned and rinsed in an approved germicidal solution after each use.
§ 142-16. Removal of excess dye; bandages.
The excess dye originally applied to the skin shall be removed with
individual sterile gauze or sterile cotton only. The area tattooed shall then
be allowed to dry and the entire area covered with a piece of sterile gauze
§ 142-10 HILLSVILLE CODE § 142-16
142:152
only, which may in turn be covered with a piece of tissue and fastened with
adhesive.
§ 142-17. Needles.
A sterile set of needles must be used for each patron or customer. Needles
used in tattooing shall be sterilized by being placed in boiling water for a
period of at least five minutes, shaken dry and, if not immediately used,
stored in sterile containers. The open end of the needle tube of the tattooing
machine shall be cleaned and sterilized in a similar manner before each use.
§ 142-18. Sterilizing device required.
Each tattoo parlor shall be equipped with a sterilizing device maintained
in a safe and effective working order and which is to be approved by the
Director of Public Health.
§ 142-19. Applications; inspections.
No person shall operate a tattoo parlor, or engage in the practice or
business of tattooing as a tattoo operator or as a tattoo artist, unless such
person shall first secure a permit from the Director of Public Health or his
duly authorized assistant. Applications for any such permit shall be made
in writing on a form prescribed by the Director of Public Health, wherein
the applicant shall agree to conform to all ordinances, rules and regulations
governing such places now in effect or as subsequently enacted, and to
permit such examination and inspections as may be deemed necessary by
the Director of Public Health. Before such permit is granted, it shall be the
duty of the Health Officer to cause an inspection to be made of the premises
or tattoo parlor in which the business is to be conducted and to refuse
the permit if the condition of the premises, its equipment, or the health
of the applicant shall not conform to the requirements of this chapter, but
if the same do conform to the requirements of this chapter, the Director
of Public Health shall issue the permit requested. It will be the further
duty of the Health Officer to cause inspections to be made from time to
time of all tattoo parlors and the equipment thereof, and if the place of
business is not maintained, conducted or operated in conformity with the
requirements of this chapter, as now enacted or as subsequently amended,
then the Director of Public Health may suspend the permit of the operator
or artist until the tattoo parlor and the operation thereof is made to conform
to the requirements of this chapter.
§ 142-20. Permit term; renewal.
All permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall, unless sooner revoked,
expire on September 30 following their date of issue. Applications for the
renewal of permits shall be made on or before September 1 following their
date of issue, and the requirements for the renewal thereof shall be the
same as for new permits, as set forth in this chapter. Tattoo parlors in
§ 142-16 TATTOO PARLORS § 142-20
142:153
operation as of the effective date of this chapter shall have a period of 180
days to meet the requirements herein set forth.
§ 142-21. Permit form and transfer.
All permits granted shall be issued in the name of the individual person
applying therefor, shall give the location of the tattoo parlor where the
applicant will operate, and shall not be transferable.
Chapter 144
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 3.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 22.
Returned checks — See Ch. 60.
§ 142-20 HILLSVILLE CODE § 142-21
142:154
ARTICLE I
Tax Rate
[Adopted 10-11-1978 as Ch. 5, Art. II, of the 1978 Code]
§ 144-1. Annual assessment; valuation of property.
The Council shall, annually, before June 30, fix the tax rates on all real and
personal property properly subject to taxation within and by the town and
shall assess such taxes as may be required to provide for the needs and
purposes of the town. In determining the valuation of property in the town,
reference shall be had to the records of the Commissioner of Revenue of the
county.
§ 144-1.1. Special assessment for land use. [Added 1-14-201334]
A. Properties located within the Town of Hillsville which are assessed by
the Commissioner of Revenue for Carroll County for use-value purposes
shall be entitled to use-value assessment and taxation in the Town of
Hillsville.
B. Land may be eligible for special valuation and assessment when it
meets the following criteria:
(1) Agriculture: when devoted to the bona fide production for sale of
plants and animals useful to man under uniform standards
prescribed by the Commissioner of Agriculture and Consumer
Services, or when devoted to and meeting the requirements and
qualifications for payments or other compensation pursuant to a
soil conservation program and under an agreement with an agency
of the federal government. A minimum of five acres in agriculture
use is required.
(2) Horticulture: when devoted to the bona fide production for sale of
fruits and all kinds, including grapes, nuts and berries; vegetables;
nursery and floral products under uniform standards prescribed by
the Commissioner of Agriculture and Consumer Services, or when
devoted to and meeting the requirements and qualifications for
payments or other compensation pursuant to a soil conservation
program under an agreement with an agency of the federal
government. A minimum of five acres in horticulture is required.
(3) Forest: when devoted to tree growth in such quantity and so spaced
and maintained as to constitute a forest area under standards
prescribed by the State Forester. A minimum of 20 acres in forest
use is required.
C. Property owners must submit an application on the basis of a use
assessment to the Commissioner of Revenue for Carroll County on or
34.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it will commence for those assessments
and real estate taxes billed on or after 1-1-2014.
§ 144-1 TATTOO PARLORS § 144-1.1
142:155
§ 144-2. Tax tickets; bills for taxes.
As soon as practicable after taxes are assessed as provided in § 144-1,
the Town Treasurer shall make or cause to be made for each taxpayer a
tax ticket substantially in the form prescribed by the State Department of
Taxation and shall send by mail to each taxpayer a bill for such taxes.
§ 144-3. When taxes due and payable; penalty. [Added 11-24-1987;
amended 6-27-2016]
Except as otherwise provided, all taxes shall be due and payable as soon as
the tax bills referred to in § 144-2 are sent. Any person failing to satisfy such
tax bill on or before December 5 following the mailing thereof shall incur a
penalty of 5% of the total taxes due. On all delinquent taxes and penalties
assessed thereon, there shall accrue interest at the highest rate allowed
by Virginia law. A thirty-day grace period will be given on penalty and/or
interest for real estate taxes mailed out after November 5. All payments for
overdue taxes will be applied to the most delinquent account as provided
by § 58.1-3913 of the Code of Virginia unless a written payment plan is
approved by the Town Treasurer.
§ 144-3.1. Administrative fees and collection fees on delinquent
accounts. [Added 12-12-2016]
before November 1 preceding the tax year for which such taxation is
sought.
D. The applicant must furnish, upon request, to the Commissioner of
Revenue for Carroll County, proof of all prerequisites to use valuation
and assessment, such as proof of ownership, description, areas, uses,
and production.
E. Whenever land which has qualified for the assessment and taxation
according to use has been converted to a nonqualifying use or rezoned
to a more intensive use at the request of the owner or his agent, that
land is subject to the roll-back tax as provided in the Code of Virginia,
§ 58.1-3237D, as amended.
F. In the event of a change in use, acreage, or zoning, the property owner
must report such change to the Commissioner of Revenue for Carroll
County within six days of said change.
A. On each delinquent account now or hereafter owed to the Town there is
hereby imposed an administrative fee in addition to all penalties and
interest, in the amount of $30 for taxes or other charges collected 30
days or more after notice of delinquent taxes or charges, pursuant to
§ 58.1-3919 of the Code of Virginia, but prior to taking judgment for
such taxes or charges, and $35 for taxes or other charges collected
after judgment. If the delinquent charges concern a nuisance
abatement, the administrative fee shall be $150 or 25% of the costs,
§ 144-1.1 HILLSVILLE CODE § 144-3.1
142:156
whichever is less; but in no event shall the administrative fee be less
than $25.
B. There is also imposed on each delinquent account now or hereafter
owed to the Town collection fees actually contracted for by the Town to
any attorney or collection agency. Said collection fees shall not exceed
20% of the taxes or other charges so collected and shall become due
and payable when the Town refers a delinquent account to an attorney
or collection agency.
C. Court costs and/or attorney fees incurred in court proceedings to
enforce Town ordinances and/or to collect such delinquent accounts
shall also be charged and collected as otherwise permitted by the Code
of Virginia and the court hearing the matter.
D. No tax assessment or tax bill shall be deemed delinquent and subject to
the collection procedures prescribed herein during the pendency of any
administrative appeal under § 58.1-3980 of the State Code, so long as
the appeal is filed within 90 days of the date of the assessment, and for
30 days after the date of the final determination of the appeal, provided
that nothing in this subsection shall be construed to preclude the
assessment or refund, following the final determination of such appeal,
of such interest as otherwise may be provided by general law as to that
portion of a tax bill that has remained unpaid or was overpaid during
the pendency of such appeal and is determined in such appeal to be
properly due and owing.
§ 144-3.1 TATTOO PARLORS § 144-3.1
142:157

ARTICLE II
Bank Franchise Tax
[Adopted 5-14-1980 (Ch. 24 of the 1978 Code)]
§ 144-4. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Article, the following words shall have the meanings
ascribed to them by this section:
BANK — As defined in § 58.1-1201, Code of Virginia.[Amended
11-11-1996]
NET CAPITAL — A bank's net capital computed pursuant to § 58.1-1205,
Code of Virginia.[Amended 11-11-1996]
§ 144-5. Imposition of town bank franchise tax. [Amended
11-11-1996]
Pursuant to the provisions of § 58.1-1200 et seq., Code of Virginia, there is
hereby imposed upon each bank located within the boundaries of this town
a tax not to exceed 80% of the state rate of taxation for each $100 of net
capital as set forth in § 58.1-1206, Code of Virginia.
§ 144-6. Filing of return and payment of tax.
A. On or after the first day of January of each year, but not later than
March 1 of any such year, all banks whose principal offices are located
within this town shall prepare and file with the Commissioner of
Revenue a return as provided by § 58.1-1207, Code of Virginia, in
duplicate, which shall set forth the tax on net capital computed
pursuant to § 58.1-1205, Code of Virginia. The Commissioner of
Revenue shall certify a copy of such filing of the bank's return and
schedule and shall forthwith transmit such certified copy to the State
Department of Taxation. [Amended 11-11-1996]
B. In the event that the principal office of a bank is located outside the
corporate boundaries of this town and such bank has branch offices
located within this town, in addition to the filing requirements set forth
in Subsection A hereof, any bank conducting such branch business shall
file with the Commissioner of Revenue or appropriate assessing officer
of this county a copy of the real estate deduction schedule,
apportionment and other items which are required by §§ 58.1-1212 and
58.1-1213, Code of Virginia. [Amended 11-11-1996]
C. Each bank, on or before the first day of June of each year, shall pay into
the Treasurer's office (or other appropriate official) of this town all
taxes imposed pursuant to this Article.
§ 144-4 TATTOO PARLORS § 144-7
142:159
§ 144-7. Penalty upon bank for failure to comply. [Amended
11-11-1996]
Any bank which shall fail or neglect to comply with any provision of this
Article shall be subject to a penalty of 5% of the tax due.
§ 144-7 HILLSVILLE CODE § 144-7
142:160
ARTICLE III
Electric and Gas Utility Consumer Tax
[Adopted 9-25-200035]
§ 144-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CCF — The volume of gas at standard pressure and temperature in units of
100 cubic feet.[Added 4-23-2007]
COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL USER — The owner or tenant of property
used for commercial or industrial purposes, including the owner of mastermetered
apartment buildings, who pays for utility service for that
property.[Added 4-23-2007]
CONSUMER — Every person who, individually or through agents,
employees, officers, representatives or permittees, makes a taxable
purchase of electricity in this jurisdiction.
GAS UTILITY — A public utility authorized to furnish natural gas service in
Virginia.[Added 4-23-2007]
KILOWATT HOURS (kWh) DELIVERED — One thousand watts of electricity
delivered in a one-hour period by an electric provider to an actual consumer,
except that in the case of eligible customer-generators (sometimes called
"cogenerators") as defined in Virginia Code § 56-594, it means kWh supplied
from the electric grid to such customer-generators, minus the kWh
generated and fed back to the electric grid by such customer-generators.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company or their entity.
PIPELINE DISTRIBUTION COMPANY — – A person, other than a pipeline
transmission company, which transmits, by means of a pipeline, natural
gas, manufactured gas, or crude petroleum and the products or byproducts
thereof to a purchaser for purposes of furnishing heat or light. [Added
4-23-2007]
RESIDENTIAL CONSUMER — The owner or tenant of property used
primarily for residential purposes, including, but not limited to, apartment
houses and other multiple-family dwellings.
SELLER — Includes every person, whether a public service corporation, a
municipality or a private corporation or not, who sells or furnishes a utility
service. [Added 4-23-2007]
SERVICE PROVIDER — The person who delivers electricity to a consumer
or a gas utility or pipeline distribution company which delivers natural gas
to a consumer.[Amended 4-23-2007]
35.Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Art. III, Utility Tax, adopted 8-8-1984
(Ch. 31 of the 1978 Code), as amended.
§ 144-8 TATTOO PARLORS § 144-8
142:161
USED PRIMARILY — Relates to the larger portion of the use for which
electric or natural gas utility service is furnished.[Amended 4-23-2007]
§ 144-9. Electric utility consumer tax.
A. In accordance with Virginia Code § 58.1-3814, effective January 1,
2001, there is hereby imposed and levied a monthly tax on each
purchase of electricity delivered to consumers by a service provider,
classified as determined by such provider, as follows:
(1) Residential consumers: such tax shall be the greater of the rate of
$0.0151 on each kWh or fraction thereof delivered monthly to such
consumer by a service provider, or 20% times the minimum
monthly charge imposed by the service provider, but in either case
not to exceed $3 monthly.
(2) Commercial consumers: such tax shall be the greater of the rate of
$0.0125 on each kWh or fraction thereof delivered monthly to such
consumer by a service provider, or 20% times the minimum
monthly charge imposed by the service provider, but in either case
not to exceed $20 monthly.
(3) Industrial consumers: such tax shall be the greater of (a) the rate of
$0.0185 on each kWh or fraction thereof delivered monthly to such
consumer by a service provider, or 20% times the minimum
monthly charge imposed by the service provider, but in either case
not to exceed $40 monthly.
(4) The conversion of tax pursuant to this article to monthly kWh
delivered shall not be effective before the first meter reading after
December 31, 2000, prior to which time the tax previously imposed
by this jurisdiction shall be in effect.
B. Exemptions. The following consumers of electricity are exempt from the
tax imposed by this article.
(1) Any church or religious body entitled to exemption pursuant to
Article 4 of Chapter 36 of Title 38.1 of the Code of Virginia
(§ 58.1-3650 et seq.)
(2) The United States of America, the Commonwealth and the political
subdivisions thereof, including this jurisdiction.
C. Billing, collection and remittance of tax.
(1) The service provider shall bill the electricity consumer tax to all
users who are subject to the tax and to whom it delivers electricity
and shall remit the same to this jurisdiction on a monthly basis.
Such taxes shall be paid by the service provider to this jurisdiction
in accordance with Virginia Code § 58.1-3814, Paragraphs F and G,
and Virginia Code § 58.1-2901. If any consumer receives and pays
for electricity but refuses to pay the tax imposed by this section, the
§ 144-8 HILLSVILLE CODE § 144-9
142:162
§ 144-10. Violations and penalties.
Any consumer of electricity failing, refusing or neglecting to pay the tax
imposed and levied under this article, and any officer, agent or employee
of any service provider violating the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than $10 nor more than
$500, or by imprisonment in jail for not more than 90 days, or by both such
fine and imprisonment. Each such failure, refusal, neglect or violation shall
constitute a separate offense. Such conviction shall not relieve any person
from the payment, collection and remittance of the tax as provided in this
article.
§ 144-11. Local natural gas utility consumer tax. [Added 4-23-2007]
service provider shall notify this jurisdiction of the name and
address of such consumer. If any consumer fails to pay a bill issued
by a service provider, including the tax imposed by this section, the
service provider must follow its normal collection procedures and
upon collection of the bill or any part thereof must apportion the
net amount collected between the charge for electric service and
the tax and remit the tax portion to this jurisdiction.
(2) Any tax paid by the consumer to the service provider shall be
deemed to be held in trust by such provider until remitted to this
jurisdiction.
D. Computation of bills not on monthly basis. Bills shall be considered as
monthly bills for the purposes of this article if submitted 12 times per
year of approximately one month each. Accordingly, the tax for a
bimonthly bill (approximately 60 days) shall be determined as follows:
(1) The kWh will be divided by 2;
(2) A monthly tax will be calculated using the rates set forth above;
(3) The tax determined by Subsection D(2) shall be multiplied by 2;
(4) The tax in Subsection D(3) may not exceed twice the monthly
"maximum tax."
A. In accordance with Code of Virginia § 58.1-3814, there is hereby
imposed and levied a monthly tax on each purchase of natural gas
delivered to consumers by pipeline distribution companies and gas
utilities classified by "class of consumers" as such term is defined in
Code of Virginia § 58.1-3814J, as follows:
(1) Residential consumers. Such tax on residential consumers of
natural gas shall be $1 plus at the rate of $0.133 on CCF delivered
monthly to residential consumers, not to exceed $2.50 per month.
(2) Nonresidential consumers. Such tax on nonresidential consumers
shall be at the rates per month show for each CCF delivered by a
§ 144-9 TATTOO PARLORS § 144-11
142:163
pipeline distribution company or a gas utility for the classes as set
forth below:
(a) Commercial consumers. Such tax shall be $2 plus the rate of
$0.126 on each CCF delivered monthly to commercial
consumers, not to exceed $20 monthly.
(b) Industrial consumers. Such tax shall be $2 plus the rate of
$0.126 on each CCF delivered monthly to industrial
consumers, not to exceed $50 monthly.
B. Exemptions. The following consumers of natural gas shall be exempt
from the tax imposed by this section.
(1) Any public safety agency as defined in Code of Virginia § 58.1-3813.
(2) Any church or religious body entitled to exemption pursuant to
Article 4 of Chapter 36 of § 58.1-3650 et seq.
(3) The United States of America, the commonwealth and the political
subdivisions thereof, including this jurisdiction.
C. Billing, collection and remittance of tax. The service provider shall bill
the natural gas consumer tax to all users who are subject to the tax and
to whom it delivers natural gas and shall remit the same to this
jurisdiction on a monthly basis. Such taxes shall be paid by the service
provider to this jurisdiction in accordance with Code of Virginia
§ 58.1-3814, Paragraphs H and I, and Code of Virginia § 58.1-2901. If
any consumer receives and pays for natural gas billed but refuses to
pay the tax imposed by this section, the service provider shall notify this
jurisdiction of the name and address of such consumer. If any consumer
fails to pay a bill issued by a service provider, including the tax imposed
by this section, the service provider must follow its normal collection
procedures and upon collection of the bill or any part thereof, must
apportion the net amount collected between the charge for natural gas
and the tax and remit the tax portion to this jurisdiction. Any tax paid by
the consumer to the service provider shall be deemed to be held in trust
by such provider until remitted to this jurisdiction.
D. Computation of bills not on monthly basis. Bills shall be considered as
monthly bills for the purposes of this article if submitted 12 times per
year of approximately one month each. Accordingly, the tax for a
bimonthly bill (approximately 60 days) shall be determined as follows:
(1) The CCF will be divided by two;
(2) A monthly tax will be calculated using the rates set forth above;
(3) The tax determined by Subsection D(2) shall be multiplied by two;
(4) The tax in Subsection D(3) may not exceed twice the monthly
"maximum tax."
§ 144-11 HILLSVILLE CODE § 144-12
142:164
§ 144-12. through § 144-14. (Reserved)
§ 144-12 TATTOO PARLORS § 144-12
142:165

ARTICLE IV
Tax on Unlicensed Vehicles
[Adopted 8-13-1986 (Ch. 35 of the 1978 Code)]
§ 144-15. Tax imposed. [Amended 11-11-1996]
The Town of Hillsville hereby imposes a license tax in an amount not to
exceed $100 annually upon the owners of motor vehicles which do not
display current license plates unless exempted under §§ 46.2-622 et seq.,
46.2-1554 and 46.2-1555 and 46.1-120 of the Virginia Motor Vehicle Code
and are not in a public dump, in an automobile graveyard, as defined by
§ 33.1-348, or in the possession of a licensed junk dealer or licensed motor
vehicle dealer.
§ 144-16. Exceptions.
A. This Article shall not apply to any vehicles stored on private property
for a period not in excess of 60 days for the purpose of removing parts
for the repair of another vehicle.
B. Nothing in this article shall be applicable to any vehicle being held or
stored by or at the direction of any governmental authority, to any
vehicle owned by a member of the armed forces on active duty or to any
vehicle regularly stored within a structure.
C. The following vehicles shall also be exempted from this article: vehicles
stored in such a manner so as to be screened from public view and
vehicles stored under a preformed opaque car cover.
§ 144-15 TATTOO PARLORS § 144-16
142:167

ARTICLE V
Transient Lodging Tax
[Adopted 3-8-1989 (Ch. 34 of the 1978 Code)]
§ 144-17. Tax imposed. [Amended 11-11-1996; 6-27-2011; 7-1-2013]
Commencing April 8, 1989, there is hereby levied and imposed, in addition
to all other taxes and fees of every kind now imposed by law, on each
transient a tax of 8% of the amount paid by lodging by or for any such
transient to any hotel. Such tax shall be collected from such transient at the
time and in the manner provided for by this article.
§ 144-18. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall, for the
purposes of this article, have the following respective meanings except
when the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
HOTEL — Any public or private hotel, inn, hostelry, tourist home or house,
motel, rooming house, bed-and-breakfast or other lodging place within
the Town offering lodging, as defined herein, for compensation, to any
transient, as defined herein.
LODGING — Space or room furnished with such space or room for a unit
price.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, society, association, joint-stock
company, corporation, estate receiver, trustee, assignee, referee or any
other person acting in a fiduciary or representative capacity, whether
appointed by a court or otherwise; and any combination or group of
individuals acting as a unit.
TRANSIENT — Any person who, for a period of not more than 30
consecutive days, either at his own expense or at the expense of another,
obtains lodging at any hotel, as defined herein.
TREASURER — The Treasurer of the Town of Hillsville and any of his duly
authorized agents.
§ 144-19. Collection procedure.
Every person receiving any payment for lodging with respect to which a tax
is levied under this article shall collect the amount of such tax so imposed
from the transient on whom such tax is levied or from the person paying for
such tax or from the person paying for such lodging at the time payment for
such board and lodging is made. The taxes required to be collected under
this article shall be deemed to be held in trust by the person required to
collect such taxes until remitted as required in this article.
§ 144-20. Reports; remittance of tax collected.
A. It shall be the duty of every seller in acting as the tax collection medium
or agency for the Town to collect from the purchaser, for the use of the
§ 144-17 TATTOO PARLORS § 144-20
142:169
§ 144-21. Interest and penalties. [Amended 8-22-2011]
If any person shall fail or refuse to remit to the Treasurer the tax required
to be collected and paid under this article within the time and in the amount
specified in this article, there shall be added to such tax by the Treasurer a
penalty in the amount of 10% thereof or fraction thereof during which the
failure continues and interest thereon at the rate of 10% per annum, which
shall be computed upon the taxes and penalty from the date such taxes are
due and payable.
§ 144-22. Failure or refusal to collect and report tax.
If any person shall fail or refuse to collect the tax imposed under this Article
or make the reports and remittances required in this article, the Treasurer
shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and
information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the
Treasurer shall procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain
upon which to base the assessment of any tax payable by any person who
failed or refused to collect such tax and to make such report and remittance,
he shall proceed to determine and assess against such person such tax,
penalty and interest as provided for in this article and shall notify such
person, by registered mail sent to his last known place of address, of the
amount of such tax, interest and penalty, and the total amount thereof shall
be payable within 10 days from the date of the mailing of such notice.
§ 144-23. Records to be kept by person liable for collection and
payment of tax.
It shall be the duty of every person liable for the collection and payment
to the Town of any tax imposed by this article to keep and to preserve
for a period of three years such suitable records as may be necessary to
determine and show accurately the amount of such tax as he may have
been responsible for collecting and paying to the Town. The Treasurer may
inspect such records at all reasonable times.
Town, the tax hereby imposed and levied at the time of collecting and
the purchase price charged for the lodging, and the taxes collected
during each calendar month shall be reported to the Treasurer and
remitted by each seller to the Treasurer on or before the 20th day of
the following calendar month. The taxes collected by a seller shall be
deemed to be held in trust by such seller until they have been remitted
to the Treasurer. The required report shall be in such form as may be
prescribed by the Treasurer. [Amended 8-22-2011]
B. If the report is timely filed, the seller is allowed to withhold 5% of the
proceeds collected by the seller for the month.36 [Amended
11-11-1996]
36.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C, which immediately followed and required that a
report be filed even if no tax is due, was repealed 8-22-2011.
§ 144-20 HILLSVILLE CODE § 144-24
142:170
§ 144-24. Tax immediately due upon cessation of business.
Whenever any person required to collect and remit the tax imposed and
levied by this article shall go out of business, dispose of his business or
otherwise cease to operate, all of such taxes collected and any tax payable
under this article shall thereupon be reported and remitted to the Treasurer
of the Town.
§ 144-25. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this article shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. Each violation or
failure shall constitute a separate offense. Such conviction shall not relieve
any such person from the payment, collection or remittance of the tax as
provided in this article.
§ 144-24 TATTOO PARLORS § 144-25
142:171

ARTICLE VI
Meals Tax
[Adopted 12-9-1991 (Ch. 37 of the 1978 Code)]
§ 144-26. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CATERER — A person who for compensation furnishes meals to another,
either for pickup or on the premises of another.
MEAL — Any prepared food and drink, including alcoholic beverages,
offered or held out for sale which when sold is ready for immediate
consumption whether eaten on or off premises; to include food served as full
course breakfasts, lunches, dinners, short orders, side orders, sandwiches,
soups, salads, desserts and drinks. Foods such as packaged snacks (potato
chips, crackers, etc.) and beverages purchased separately from a meal are
not taxable.[Amended 12-23-1991]
PREPARED — The application of labor to food to make it ready or available
for immediate consumption.
PURCHASER — Any person who purchases a meal.
RESTAURANT — Any place or thing in the town from which, or in which,
meals are sold, including but not limited to places of business known
as "bars," "cafes," "cafeterias," "coffee shops," "clubs," "delicatessens,"
"diners," "dining rooms," "drive-ins," "eateries," "grills," "lunch counters,"
"restaurants," "snack bars," "grocery stores" and "convenience stores"; also,
push carts or other mobile facilities from which meals are sold or provided.
SELLER — Any person or caterer who sells meals.
TREASURER — The Treasurer of the Town of Hillsville and any of his/her
duly authorized agents.
§ 144-27. Tax imposed. [Amended 6-28-2004]
In addition to all other taxes and fees of any kind now or hereafter imposed
by law, a tax is hereby levied and imposed on the purchaser of every meal
served, sold or delivered in the Town by a restaurant or caterer. The rate of
this tax shall be 8% of the amount paid for the meal. A fractional cent of tax
due shall be rounded to the next higher cent.
§ 144-28. Payment and collection of tax.
In every case, the tax shall be calculated by the seller and paid by the
purchaser at the time the charge for the meal becomes due and payable,
whether payment is to be made in cash or on credit by means of a credit
card or otherwise. The seller shall add the tax to the amount charged for
the meal and shall pay the taxes collected to the town as provided in this
article.
§ 144-26 TATTOO PARLORS § 144-29
142:173
§ 144-29. Collection in trust for Town.
All amounts collected as taxes under this article shall be deemed to be held
in trust by the seller collecting them, until remitted to the Town as provided
by this article.
§ 144-30. Reports and remittances.
The Treasurer may require all prospective sellers of meals licensed to do
business in the town to register for collection of the tax imposed by this
article. Every seller shall make a report to the Treasurer for each calendar
month, showing the amount of charges collected for meals and the amount
of tax required to be collected. The monthly reports shall be made on forms
prescribed by the Treasurer on or before the 20th day of the calendar month
following the month being reported. Each report shall be accompanied by a
remittance of the amount of tax due, made payable to the Town.
§ 144-31. Discount.
For the purpose of compensating sellers for the collection of the tax
imposed by this article, every seller shall be allowed 3% of the amount
of tax due and accounted for in the form of a deduction on his or her
monthly return, provided that the amount due is not delinquent at the time
of payment.
§ 144-32. Penalty and interest.
If any person whose duty it is to do so shall fail or refuse to make the report
or remit the tax required by this article within the time and in the amount
required, there shall be added to the tax, by the Treasurer, a penalty in
the amount of 10% of the tax, and interest thereon at the rate of 10% per
annum, which shall be computed upon the tax and penalty from the date
such were due and payable.
§ 144-33. Procedure when tax not reported or collected.
If any person whose duty it is to do so shall fail or refuse to collect the
tax imposed under this Article and to make timely report and remittance
thereof, the Treasurer shall proceed in such a manner as is practicable
to obtain facts and information on which to base an estimate of the tax
due. As soon as the Treasurer has procured whatever facts and information
may be obtainable, upon which to base the assessment of any tax payable
by any person who has failed to collect, report or remit such tax, the
Treasurer shall proceed to determine and assess against such person the
tax, penalty and interest provided in this Article and shall notify the person,
by registered mail sent to his or her last known address, of the amount of
such tax, penalty and interest. The total amount thereof shall be payable ten
(1) calendar days after the date such notice is sent.
§ 144-29 HILLSVILLE CODE § 144-34
142:174
§ 144-34. Preservation of records.
It shall be the duty of every person liable for collection and remittance of the
taxes imposed by this Article to preserve for a period of two years records
showing all purchases taxable under this Article, the amount charged the
purchaser for each such purchase, the date thereof, the taxes collected
thereon and the amount of tax required to be collected by this Article. The
Treasurer shall have the authority and power to examine such records at
reasonable times and without unreasonable interference with the business
of such person for the purpose of administering and enforcing the
provisions of this Article and to make transcripts of all or any part thereof.
§ 144-35. Duty of person going out of business.
Whenever any person required to collect and remit to the town any tax
imposed by this Article shall cease to operate or shall otherwise dispose of
his or her business, the tax shall immediately become due and payable, and
the person shall make to the Treasurer a report and remittance thereof by
the first day of the month following which said business was terminated or
disposition made thereof.
§ 144-36. Advertising payment of absorption of tax prohibited.
No seller shall advertise or hold out to the public in any manner, directly or
indirectly, that all or any part of a tax imposed under this Article will be paid
or absorbed by the seller or by anyone else or that the seller or anyone else
will relieve any purchaser of the payment of all or any part of the tax.
§ 144-37. Tips and service charges.
§ 144-38. Exemptions.
The following classes of transactions involving meals shall not be subject to
tax under this Article:
A. When a purchaser provides a tip for an employee of a seller and the
amount of the tip is wholly in the discretion of the purchaser, the tip is
not subject to the tax imposed by this Article, whether paid in cash to
the employee or added to the bill and charged to the purchaser's
account, provided that, in the latter case, the full amount of the tip is
turned over to the employee by the seller.
B. An amount or percentage, whether designated as a tip or a service
charge, that is added to the price of a meal by the seller and required to
be paid by the purchaser is a part of the selling price of the meal and is
subject to the tax imposed by this Article.
A. Meals furnished to restaurant employees as part of their compensation,
when no charge is made to the employee.
B. Meals sold by public or private elementary or secondary schools to their
students or employees.
§ 144-34 TATTOO PARLORS § 144-38
142:175
§ 144-39. Enforcement.
§ 144-40. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-11-1996]
Conviction shall not relieve any person from the payment, collection or
remittance of the tax as provided in this Article. Each violation of any
portion of this Article shall be considered a separate offense, and for each
day that said violation occurs, it shall be considered a separate offense.
§ 144-41. Regulations.
The Treasurer may issue regulations for the administration and
enforcement of this Article.
C. Meals purchased by agencies of federal, state or local governments.
D. Meals furnished by a hospital, medical clinic, convalescent home,
nursing home, home for the aged, infirm or handicapped or other
extended care facility to patients or residents thereof.
E. Meals furnished by a nonprofit charitable organization to elderly,
infirm, handicapped or needy persons in their homes or at central
locations.
F. Meals sold by a nonprofit educational, religious, charitable or
benevolent organization on an occasional basis as a fundraising activity.
G. Any other sale of a meal which is exempt from taxation under the
Virginia Retail Sales and Use Tax Act or administrative rules and
regulations issued pursuant thereto.
A. It shall be the duty of the Treasurer to ascertain the name of every
seller in the town who is liable for the collection of the tax imposed by
this Article and any person who fails, refuses or neglects to collect such
tax or to make the reports and remittances required by this Article. The
Treasurer may cause to be issued a summons for such person, and the
summons may be served upon such person by any town police officer in
the manner provided by law, and the Treasurer may seek a conviction in
the General District Court of the County of Carroll, Virginia, or other
civil remedy, including injunction, against such person.
B. In the event that the purchaser of any meal refuses to pay the tax
imposed by this Article, the seller may call upon the Police Department
for assistance; and the investigating officer may, when probable cause
exists, cause a summons to be issued to the purchaser for his violation,
returnable to the General District Court as provided by law.
§ 144-38 HILLSVILLE CODE § 144-41
142:176
ARTICLE VII
Business License Tax
[Adopted 11-13-1995; amended in its entirety 11-25-1996]
§ 144-42. Overriding conflicting ordinances.
Except as may be otherwise provided by the laws of the Commonwealth of
Virginia, and notwithstanding any other current ordinances or resolutions
enacted by this governing body, whether or not compiled in the Code of the
Town of Hillsville, to the extent of any conflict, the following provisions shall
be applicable to the levy, assessment and collection of licenses required and
taxes imposed on businesses, trades, professions and callings and upon the
persons, firms and corporations engaged therein within this town.
§ 144-43. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, unless otherwise required by the context,
the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AFFILIATED GROUP —
One or more chains of includable corporations connected through stock
ownership with a common parent corporation which is an includable
corporation if:
Stock possessing at least 80% of the voting power of all classes
of stock and at least 80% of each class of the nonvoting stock of
each of the includable corporations, except the common parent
corporation, is owned directly by one or more of the other
includable corporations; and
(1)
The common parent corporation directly owns stock possessing
at least 80% of the voting power of all classes of stock and at
least 80% of each class of the nonvoting stock of at least one of
the other includable corporations. As used in this subsection, the
term "stock" does not include nonvoting stock which is limited and
preferred as to dividends. The term "includable corporation" means
any corporation within the affiliated group, irrespective of the state
or country of its incorporation, and the term "receipts" includes
gross receipts and gross income.
(2)
A.
Two or more corporations if five or fewer persons who are individuals,
estates or trusts own stock possessing:
At least 80% of the total combined voting power of all classes of
stock entitled to vote or at least 80% of the total value of shares of
all classes of the stock of each corporation; and
(1)
More than 50% of the total combined voting power of all classes of
stock entitled to vote or more than 50% of the total value of shares
of all classes of stock of each corporation, taking into account the
(2)
B.
§ 144-42 TATTOO PARLORS § 144-43
142:177
ASSESSMENT — A determination as to the proper rate of tax, the measure
to which the tax rate is applied and, ultimately, the amount of tax, including
additional or omitted tax, that is due. An assessment shall include a written
assessment made pursuant to notice by the assessing official or a selfassessment
made by a taxpayer upon the filing of a return or otherwise
not pursuant to notice. Assessments shall be deemed made by an assessing
official when a written notice of assessment is delivered to the taxpayer by
the assessing official or an employee of the assessing official or mailed to
the taxpayer at his last known address. Self-assessments shall be deemed
made when a return is filed or, if no return is required, when the tax is paid.
A return filed or tax paid before the last day prescribed by ordinance for the
filing or payment thereof shall be deemed to be filed or paid on the last day
specified for the filing of a return or the payment of tax, as the case may be.
ASSESSOR or ASSESSING OFFICIAL — The Treasurer of the Town of
Hillsville.
BASE YEAR — The calendar year preceding the license year, except for
contractors subject to the provisions of § 58.1-3715.
BUSINESS — A course of dealing which requires the time, attention and
labor of the person so engaged for the purpose of earning a livelihood or
profit. It implies a continuous and regular course of dealing, rather than
an irregular or isolated transaction. A person may be engaged in more
than one business. The following acts shall create a rebuttable presumption
that a person is engaged in a business: advertising or otherwise holding
oneself out to the public as being engaged in a particular business; or filing
tax returns, schedules and documents that are required only of persons
engaged in a trade or business.
CONTRACTOR — The meaning prescribed in § 58.1-3714.B of the Code of
Virginia, as amended, whether such work is done or offered to be done by
day labor, general contract or subcontract.
DEFINITE PLACE OF BUSINESS — An office or a location at which occurs
a regular and continuous course of dealing for 30 consecutive days or more.
A definite place of business for a person engaged in business may include a
location leased or otherwise obtained from another person on a temporary
or seasonal basis and real property leased to another. A person's residence
shall be deemed to be a definite place of business if there is no definite
place of business maintained elsewhere and the person is not licensable as
a peddler or itinerant merchant.
stock ownership of each such person only to the extent such stock
ownership is identical with respect to each such corporation.
When one or more of the includable corporations, including the
common parent corporation is a nonstock corporation, the term "stock,"
as used in this subsection, shall refer to the nonstock corporation
membership or membership voting rights, as is appropriate to the
context.
C.
§ 144-43 HILLSVILLE CODE § 144-43
142:178
FINANCIAL SERVICES —
The buying, selling, handling, managing, investing and providing of
advice regarding money, credit, securities and other investments and
shall include the service for compensation by a credit agency, an
investment company, a broker or dealer in securities and commodities
or a security or commodity exchange, unless such service is otherwise
provided for in this article.
BROKER — An agent of a buyer or a seller who buys or sells stocks,
bonds, commodities or services, usually on a commission basis.
(1)
COMMODITY — Staples, such as wool, cotton, etc., which are
traded on a commodity exchange and on which there is trading in
futures.
(2)
DEALER — Any person engaged in the business of buying and
selling securities for his own account, but does not include a bank,
or any person insofar as he buys or sells securities for his own
account, either individually or in some fiduciary capacity, but not as
part of a regular business.
(3)
SECURITY — The same meaning as in the Securities Act
(§ 13.1-501 et seq.) of the Code of Virginia, or in similar laws of the
United States regulating the sale of securities.
(4)
A.
Those engaged in rendering financial services include, but without
limitation, the following:
(1) Buying installment receivables.
(2) Chattel mortgage financing.
(3) Consumer financing.
(4) Credit card services.
(5) Credit unions.
(6) Factors.
(7) Financing accounts receivable.
(8) Industrial loan companies.
(9) Installment financing.
(10) Inventory financing.
(11)Loan or mortgage brokers.
(12)Loan or mortgage companies.
(13)Safety deposit box companies.
(14)Security and commodity brokers and services.
B.
§ 144-43 TATTOO PARLORS § 144-43
142:179
GROSS RECEIPTS — The whole, entire, total receipts attributable to the
licensed privilege, without deduction, except as may be limited by the
provisions of Chapter 37 of Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia.
LICENSE YEAR — The calendar year for which a license is issued for the
privilege of engaging in business.
PERSONAL SERVICES — Rendering for compensation any repair, personal,
business or other services not specifically classified as "financial, real estate
or professional services" under this article, or rendered in any other
business or occupation not specifically classified in this article unless
exempted from local license tax by Title 58.1 of the Code of Virginia.
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES — Services performed by architects, attorneysat-
law, certified public accountants, dentists, engineers, land surveyors,
surgeons, veterinarians and practitioners of the healing arts (the arts and
sciences dealing with the prevention, diagnosis, treatment and cure or
alleviation of human physical or mental ailments, conditions, diseases, pain
or infirmities) and such occupations, and no others, as the Virginia
Department of Taxation may list in the BPOL guidelines promulgated
pursuant to § 58.1-3701 of the Code of Virginia. The Department shall
identify and list each occupation or vocation in which a professed
knowledge of some department of science or learning, gained by a
prolonged course of specialized instruction and study is used by its practical
application to the affairs of others, either advising, guiding or teaching
them, and in serving their interests or welfare in the practice of an art
or science founded on it. The word "profession" implies attainments in
professional knowledge as distinguished from mere skill and the application
of knowledge to uses for others rather than for personal profit.
PURCHASES — All goods, wares and merchandise received for sale at
each definite place of business of a wholesale merchant. The term shall
also include the cost of manufacture of all goods, wares and merchandise
manufactured by any wholesaler or wholesale merchant and sold or offered
for sale. Such merchant may elect to report the gross receipts from the sale
of manufactured goods, wares and merchandise if it cannot determine or
chooses not to disclose the cost of manufacture.
REAL ESTATE SERVICES — Rendering a service for compensation as lessor,
buyer, seller, agent or broker and providing a real estate service, unless
the service is otherwise specifically provided for in this article, and such
services include, but are not limited to, the following:
(15)Stockbroker.
(16)Working capital financing.
A. Appraisers of real estate.
B. Escrow agents, real estate.
C. Fiduciaries, real estate.
D. Lessors of real property.
§ 144-43 HILLSVILLE CODE § 144-43
142:180
RETAILER or RETAIL MERCHANT — Any person or merchant who sells
goods, wares and merchandise for use or consumption by the purchaser or
for any purpose other than resale by the purchaser, but does not include
sales at wholesale to institutional, commercial and industrial users.
SERVICES — Things purchased by a customer which do not have physical
characteristics or which are not goods, wares or merchandise.
WHOLESALER or WHOLESALE MERCHANT — Any person or merchant
who sells wares and merchandise for resale by the purchaser, including
sales when the goods, wares and merchandise will be incorporated into
goods and services for sale, and also includes sales to institutional,
commercial, government and industrial users which, because of the
quantity, price or other terms, indicate that they are consistent with sales at
wholesale.
§ 144-44. License required; payment; penalties and interest;
payment of taxes.
E. Real estate agents, brokers and managers.
F. Real estate selling agents.
G. Rental agents for real estate.
A. Every person engaging in this jurisdiction in any business, trade,
profession, occupation or calling (collectively hereinafter "a business")
as defined in this article, unless otherwise exempted by law, shall apply
for a license for each such business if:
(1) Such person maintains a definite place of business in this
jurisdiction;
(2) Such person does not maintain a definite office anywhere but does
maintain an abode in this jurisdiction, which abode for the
purposes of this article shall be deemed a definite place of
business.
(3) There is no definite place of business, but such person operates
amusement machines, is engaged as a peddler or itinerant
merchant, carnival or circus as specified in §§ 58.1-3717, 3718 or
3728, respectively, of the Code of Virginia, or is a contractor
subject to § 58.1-3715 of the Code of Virginia, or is a public service
corporation subject to § 58.1-3731 of the Code of Virginia.
B. A separate license shall be required for each definite place of business.
A person engaged in two or more businesses or professions carried on
at the same place of business may elect to obtain one license for all such
businesses and professions if all of the following criteria are satisfied:
(1) Each business or profession is licensable at the location and has
satisfied any requirements imposed by state law or other provisions
of the ordinances of the Town of Hillsville;
§ 144-43 TATTOO PARLORS § 144-44
142:181
(2) All of the businesses or professions are subject to the same tax rate
or, if subject to different tax rates, the licensee agrees to be taxed
on all businesses and professions at the highest rate; and
(3) The taxpayer agrees to supply such information as the Assessor
may require concerning the nature of the several businesses and
their gross receipts.
C. Each person subject to a license tax shall apply for a license prior to
beginning business, if he was not subject to licensing in this jurisdiction
on or before January 1 of the license year, or no later than March 1 of
the current license year if he had been issued a license for the
preceding license year. The application shall be on forms prescribed by
the assessing official.
D. The tax shall be paid with the application in the case of any license not
based on gross receipts. If the tax is measured by the gross receipts of
the business, the tax shall be paid on or before May 1.
E. The assessing official may grant an extension of time, not to exceed 90
days, in which to file an application for a license, for reasonable cause.
The extension shall be conditioned upon the timely payment of a
reasonable estimate of the appropriate tax, subject to adjustment to the
correct tax at the end of the extension, together with interest from the
due date until the date paid, and, if the estimate submitted with the
extension is found to be unreasonable under the circumstances, a
penalty of 10% of the portion paid after the due date.
F. A penalty of 10% of the tax may be imposed upon the failure to file an
application or the failure to pay the tax by the appropriate due date.
Only the late filing penalty shall be imposed by the assessing official if
both the application and payment are late; however, both penalties may
be assessed if the assessing official determines that the taxpayer has a
history of noncompliance. In the case of an assessment of additional tax
made by the assessing official, if the application and, if applicable, the
return were made in good faith and the understatement of the tax was
not due to any fraud, reckless or intentional disregard of the law by the
taxpayer, there shall be no late payment penalty assessed with the
additional tax. If any assessment of tax by the assessing official is not
paid within 30 days, the Treasurer (or other collecting official) may
impose late payment penalty of 10%. The penalties shall not be imposed
or, if imposed, shall be abated by the official who assessed them if the
failure to file or pay was not the fault of the taxpayer. In order to
demonstrate lack of fault, the taxpayer must show that he acted
responsibly and that the failure was due to events beyond his control.
(1) "Acted responsibly" means that the taxpayer exercised the level of
reasonable care that a prudent person would exercise under the
circumstances in determining the filing obligations for the business
and the taxpayer undertook significant steps to avoid or mitigate
the failure, such as requesting appropriate extensions (where
§ 144-44 HILLSVILLE CODE § 144-44
142:182
§ 144-45. Situs of gross receipts.
applicable), attempting to prevent a foreseeable impediment,
acting to remove an impediment once it occurred and promptly
rectifying a failure once the impediment was removed or the failure
discovered.
(2) "Events beyond the taxpayer's control" include, but are not limited
to, the unavailability of records due to fire or other casualty; the
unavoidable absence (e.g., due to death or serious illness) of the
person with the sole responsibility for tax compliance; or the
taxpayer's reasonable reliance in good faith upon erroneous
written information from the assessing official, who was aware of
the relevant facts relating to the taxpayer's business when he
provided the erroneous information.
G. Interest.
(1) Interest shall be charged on the late payment of the tax from the
due date until the date paid without regard to fault or other reason
for the late payment. Whenever an assessment of additional or
omitted tax by the assessing official is found to be erroneous, all
interest and penalty charged and collected on the amount of the
assessment found to be erroneous shall be refunded, together with
interest on the refund from the date of payment or the due date,
whichever is later. Interest shall be paid on the refund of any tax
paid under this article from the date of payment or due date,
whichever is later, whether attributable to an amended return or
other reason. Interest on any refund shall be paid at the same rate
charged under § 58.1-3916.
(2) No interest shall accrue on an adjustment of estimated tax liability
to actual liability at the conclusion of a base year. No interest shall
be paid on a refund or charged on a late payment, in event of such
adjustment, provided that the refund or the late payment is made
not more than 30 days from the date of the payment that created
the refund or the due date of the tax, whichever is later.
H. Requirement for payment of Town taxes. Sufficient evidence must be
presented that all delinquent Town business license, real estate,
personal property, meals, transient occupancy, or other applicable taxes
and fees must be paid prior to issuance of a business license as
provided by § 58.1-3700 of the Code of Virginia [Added 6-27-2016]
A. General rule. Whenever the tax imposed by this article is measured by
gross receipts, the gross receipts included in the taxable measure shall
be only those gross receipts attributed to the exercise of a licensable
privilege at a definite place of business within this jurisdiction. In the
case of activities conducted outside of a definite place of business, such
as during a visit to a customer location, the gross receipts shall be
attributed to the definite place of business from which such activities
§ 144-44 TATTOO PARLORS § 144-45
142:183
are initiated, directed or controlled. The situs of gross receipts for
different classifications of business shall be attributed to one or more
definite places of business or offices as follows:
(1) The gross receipts of a contractor shall be attributed to the definite
place of business at which his services are performed or, if his
services are not performed at any definite place of business, then
the definite place of business from which his services are directed
or controlled, unless the contractor is subject to the provisions of
§ 58.1-3715 of the Code of Virginia.
(2) The gross receipts of a retailer or wholesaler shall be attributed to
the definite place of business at which sales solicitation activities
occur or, if sales solicitation activities do not occur at any definite
place of business, then the definite place of business from which
sales solicitation activities are directed or controlled; however, a
wholesaler or distribution house subject to a license tax measured
by purchases shall determine the situs of its purchases by the
definite place of business at which or from which deliveries of the
purchased goods, wares and merchandise are made to customers.
Any wholesaler who is subject to license tax in two or more
localities and who is subject to multiple taxation because the
localities use different measures may apply to the Department of
Taxation for a determination as to the proper measure of purchases
and gross receipts subject to license tax in each locality.
(3) The gross receipts of a business renting tangible personal property
shall be attributed to the definite place of business from which the
tangible personal property is rented or, if the property is not rented
from any definite place of business, then the definite place of
business at which the rental of such property is managed.
(4) The gross receipts from the performance of services shall be
attributed to the definite place of business at which the services are
performed or, if not performed at any definite place of business,
then the definite place of business from which the services are
directed or controlled.
B. Apportionment. If the licensee has more than one definite place of
business and it is impractical or impossible to determine to which
definite place of business gross receipts should be attributed under the
general rule (and the affected jurisdictions are unable to reach an
apportionment agreement), except as to circumstances set forth in
§ 58.1-3709 of the Code of Virginia, the gross receipts of the business
shall be apportioned between the definite places of businesses on the
basis of payroll. Gross receipts shall not be apportioned to a definite
place of business unless some activities under the applicable general
rule occurred at or were controlled from such definite place of business.
Gross receipts attributable to a definite place of business in another
jurisdiction shall not be attributed to this jurisdiction solely because the
§ 144-45 HILLSVILLE CODE § 144-45
142:184
§ 144-46. Limitations and extensions.
§ 144-47. Appeals and rulings.
other jurisdiction does not impose a tax on the gross receipts
attributable to the definite place of business in such other jurisdiction.
C. Agreements. The Assessor may enter into agreements with any other
political subdivision of Virginia concerning the manner in which gross
receipts shall be apportioned among definite places of business.
However, the sum of the gross receipts apportioned by the agreement
shall not exceed the total gross receipts attributable to all of the
definite places of business affected by the agreement. Upon being
notified by a taxpayer that its method of attributing gross receipts is
fundamentally inconsistent with the method of one or more political
subdivisions in which the taxpayer is licensed to engage in business and
that the difference has or is likely to result in taxes on more than 100%
of its gross receipts from all locations in the affected jurisdictions, the
Assessor shall make a good faith effort to reach an apportionment
agreement with the other political subdivisions involved.
A. Where, before the expiration of the time prescribed for the assessment
of any license tax imposed pursuant to this article, both the assessing
official and the taxpayer have consented in writing to its assessment
after such time, the tax may be assessed at any time prior to the
expiration of the period agreed upon. The period so agreed upon may
be extended by subsequent agreements in writing made before the
expiration of the period previously agreed upon.
B. Notwithstanding § 58.1-3903 of the Code of Virginia, the assessing
official shall assess the local license tax omitted because of fraud or
failure to apply for a license for the current license year and the six
preceding years. (Note that this applies to only 1997 and later. Prior to
1997 is current plus three preceding years.)
C. The period for collecting any local license tax shall not expire prior to
the period specified in § 58.1-3940 of the Code of Virginia, two years
after the date of assessment if the period for assessment has been
extended pursuant to this section, two years after the final
determination of an appeal for which collection has been stayed
pursuant to the following § 144-47B or D of this article or two years
after the final decision in a court application pursuant to § 58.1-3984 of
the Code of Virginia or similar law for which collection has been stayed,
whichever is later.
A. Any person assessed with a licensing tax under this article as the result
of an audit may apply, within 90 days from the date of the assessment,
to the assessing official for a correction of the assessment. The
application must be filed in good faith and sufficiently identify the
taxpayer, audit period, remedy sought, each alleged error in the
assessment, the grounds upon which the taxpayer relies and any other
§ 144-45 TATTOO PARLORS § 144-47
142:185
facts relevant to the taxpayer's contention. The Assessor may hold a
conference with the taxpayer, if requested by the taxpayer, or require
submission of additional information and documents, further audit or
other evidence deemed necessary for a proper and equitable
determination of the applications. The assessment shall be deemed
prima facie correct. The Assessor shall undertake a full review of the
taxpayer's claims and issue a determination to the taxpayer setting
forth its position. Every assessment pursuant to an audit shall be
accompanied by a written explanation of the taxpayer's right to seek
correction and the specific procedure to be followed in the jurisdiction
(e.g., the name and address to which an application should be directed).
B. Provided that an application is made within 90 days of an assessment,
collection activity shall be suspended until a final determination is
issued by the Assessor, unless the Assessor determines that collection
would be jeopardized by delay or that the taxpayer has not responded to
a request for relevant information after a reasonable time. Interest shall
accrue in accordance with the provisions of § 144-44G of this article,
but no further penalty shall be imposed while collection action is
suspended. The term "jeopardized by delay" includes a finding that the
application is frivolous or that a taxpayer desires to depart quickly from
the locality; to remove his property therefrom; to conceal himself or his
property therein; or to do any other act tending to prejudice or to
render wholly or partially ineffectual proceedings to collect the tax for
the period in question.
C. Any person assessed with a license tax under this article as a result of
an audit may apply within 90 days of the determination by the assessing
official on an application pursuant to Subsection A above to the Tax
Commissioner for a correction of such assessment. The Tax
Commissioner shall issue a determination to the taxpayer within 90
days of receipt of the taxpayer's application, unless the taxpayer and
the assessing official are notified that a longer period will be required.
The application shall be treated as an application pursuant to
§ 58.1-1821 of the Code of Virginia, and the Tax Commissioner may
issue an order correcting such assessment pursuant to § 58.1-1822 of
the Code of Virginia. Following such an order, either the taxpayer or the
assessing official may apply to the appropriate circuit court pursuant to
§ 58.1-3984 of the Code of Virginia. However, the burden shall be on the
party making the application to show that the ruling of the Tax
Commissioner is erroneous. Neither the Tax Commissioner nor the
Department of Taxation shall be made a party to an application to
correct an assessment merely because the Tax Commissioner has ruled
on it.
D. On receipt of a notice of intent to file an appeal to the Tax Commissioner
under Subsection C above, the assessing official shall further suspend
collection activity until a final determination is issued by the Tax
Commissioner, unless the Assessor determines that collection would be
jeopardized by delay or that the taxpayer has not responded to a
§ 144-47 HILLSVILLE CODE § 144-47
142:186
§ 144-48. Recordkeeping and audits.
Every person who is assessable with a license tax shall keep sufficient
records to enable the Assessor to verify the correctness of the tax paid
for the license years assessable and to enable the assessor to ascertain
what is the correct amount of tax that was assessable for each of those
years. All such records, books of accounts and other information shall be
open to inspection and examination by the Assessor in order to allow the
Assessor to establish whether a particular receipt is directly attributable to
the taxable privilege exercised within this jurisdiction. The Assessor shall
provide the taxpayer with the option to conduct the audit in the taxpayer's
local business office, if the records are maintained there. In the event the
records are maintained outside this jurisdiction, copies of the appropriate
books and records shall be sent to the Assessor's office upon demand.
§ 144-49. Exclusions and deductions from gross receipts.
request for relevant information after a reasonable time. Interest shall
accrue in accordance with the provisions of § 144-44G, but no further
penalty shall be imposed while collection action is suspended. The term
"jeopardized by delay" shall have the same meaning as set forth in
Subsection B above.
E. Any taxpayer may request a written ruling regarding the application of
the tax to a specific situation from the Assessor. Any person requesting
such a ruling must provide all the relevant facts for the situation and
may present a rationale for the basis of an interpretation of the law
most favorable to the taxpayer. Any misrepresentation or change in the
applicable law or the factual situation as presented in the ruling request
shall invalidate any such ruling issued. A written ruling may be revoked
or amended prospectively if there is a change in the law, a court
decision or the Assessor notifies the taxpayer of a change in the policy
or interpretation upon which the ruling was based. However, any
person who acts on a written ruling which later becomes invalid shall
be deemed to have acted in good faith during the period in which such
ruling was in effect.
A. General rule. Gross receipts for license tax purposes shall not include
any amount not derived from the exercise of the licensed privilege to
engage in a business or profession in the ordinary course of business or
profession.
B. The following items shall be excluded from gross receipts:
(1) Amounts received and paid to the United States, the
commonwealth or any county, city or town for the Virginia retail
sales or use tax or for any local sales tax or any local excise tax on
cigarettes or for any federal or state excise taxes on motor fuels.
(2) Any amount representing the liquidation of a debt or conversion of
another asset to the extent that the amount is attributable to a
§ 144-47 TATTOO PARLORS § 144-49
142:187
transaction previously taxed (e.g., the factoring of accounts
receivable created by sales which have been included in taxable
receipts even though the creation of such debt and factoring are a
regular part of its business) .
(3) Any amount representing returns and allowances granted by the
business to its customer.
(4) Receipts which are the proceeds of a loan transaction in which the
licensee is the obligor.
(5) Receipts representing the return of principal of a loan transaction
in which the licensee is the creditor or the return of principal or
basis upon the sale of a capital asset.
(6) Rebates and discounts taken or received on account of purchases
by the licensee. A rebate or other incentive offered to induce the
recipient to purchase certain goods or services from a person other
than the offeror and which the recipient assigns to the licensee in
consideration of the sale of goods and services shall not be
considered a rebate or discount to the licensee, but shall be
included in the licensee's gross receipts, together with any
handling or other fees related to the incentive.
(7) Withdrawals from inventory for purposes other than sale or
distribution and for which no consideration is received and the
occasional sale or exchange of assets other than inventory, whether
or not a gain or loss is recognized for federal income tax purposes.
(8) Investment income not directly related to the privilege exercised by
a licensable business not classified as rendering financial services.
This exclusion shall apply to interest on bank accounts of the
business and to interest, dividends and other income derived from
the investment of its own funds in securities and other types of
investments unrelated to the licensed privilege. This exclusion shall
not apply to interest, late fees and similar income attributable to an
installment sale or other transaction that occurred in the regular
course of business.
C. The following shall be deducted from gross receipts or gross purchases
that would otherwise be taxable;
(1) Any amount paid for computer hardware and software that is sold
to a United States federal or state government entity, provided that
such property was purchased within two years of the sale to said
entity by the original purchaser who shall have been contractually
obligated at the time of purchase to resell such property to a state
or federal government entity. This deduction shall not occur until
the time of resale and shall apply to only the original cost of the
property and not to its resale price, and the deduction shall not
apply to any of the tangible personal property which was the
subject of the original resale contract if it is not resold to a state or
§ 144-49 HILLSVILLE CODE § 144-49
142:188
§ 144-50. License fee and tax.
Every person or business subject to licensure under this article shall be
assessed and required to pay annually a fee for the issuance of such license
in the amount of $30 or the rate set forth below for the class of enterprise
listed, whichever is greater:
federal government entity in accordance with the original contract
obligation
(2) Any receipts attributable to business conducted in another state or
foreign country in which the taxpayer is liable for an income or
other tax based upon income.
A. For contractors and persons constructing for their own account for sale,
$0.15 per $100 of gross receipts ($0.16 per $100 maximum);
B. For retailers, $0.15 per $100 of gross receipts ($0.20 per $100
maximum);
C. For financial, real estate and professional services, $0.15 per $100 of
gross receipts; ($0.58 per $100 maximum);
D. For repair, personal and business services and all other businesses and
occupations not specifically listed or exempted in this article or
otherwise by law, $0.15 per $100 of gross receipts; ($0.36 per $100
maximum).
E. For wholesalers, $0.05 per $100 of purchases (See § 58.1-3716 of the
Code of Virginia for limitations.);
F. For carnivals, circuses and speedways, $100 for each performance held
in this jurisdiction (See § 58.1-3728 of the Code of Virginia for
limitations.);
G. For fortune tellers, clairvoyants and practitioners of palmistry, $500 per
year;
H. For massage parlors, $2,000 per year;
I. For itinerant merchants or peddlers, $25 per day (See limitation in
§ 58.1-3717 of the Code of Virginia; (not to exceed $500 per year.);
J. For photographers, $30 per year with no regularly established place of
business in the commonwealth (See limitation in § 58.1-3727.);
K. For permanent coliseums, arenas or auditoriums having a maximum
capacity in excess of 10,000 persons, open to the public, $500 per year
(See limitation in § 58.1-3729 of the Code of Virginia.);
L. For savings and loan associations and credit unions, $50 per year; and
M. For direct sellers as defined in § 58.1-3719.1 of the Code of Virginia
with total annual sales in excess of $4,000, $0.15 per $100 of total
§ 144-49 TATTOO PARLORS § 144-50
142:189
annual retail sales or $0.05 per $100 of total annual wholesale sales,
whichever is applicable.
N. For public service companies: [Added 2-10-1997]
(1) The telephone company shall pay an annual license fee of 1/2 of 1%
of the gross receipts of such business accruing to such corporation
from such business in the town; provided, however, that charges for
long distance telephone calls shall not be considered receipts of
business accruing to such corporation from such business in the
town.
(2) The light and power company shall pay an annual license fee of 1/2
of 1% of the gross receipts of such business accruing to such
corporation from such business in town.
§ 144-50 HILLSVILLE CODE § 144-50
142:190
Chapter 153
UTILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Returned checks — See Ch. 60.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 136.
Water and sewer — See Ch. 167.
§ 153-1. Delinquent utility accounts. [Amended 4-23-1986]
All utility accounts are due in full within 20 days of the date of billing.
Accounts not paid when due shall accrue penalty thereon at the rate of 10%
per month.
§ 153-2. Intent and purpose.
The Town Council of Hillsville finds and declares that the provisions of this
chapter are enacted for the following reasons:
§ 153-3. Application for utility service. [Amended 12-9-1987]
A. To ensure timely and complete payment of all utility charges and all
installments and surcharges arising from utility services supplied to
customers.
B. To regulate termination of utility services to customers for nonpayment
of utility charges and/or installments and surcharges.
C. To provide full and adequate notice to a customer of a proposed
termination of utility service to that customer and of the procedure to
follow to avoid termination.
D. To provide customers with a fair and reasonable opportunity, prior to
termination, to dispute the correctness of utility charges and/or
installments and surcharges.
E. To provide a reasonable deferred payment plan to residential customers
unable to pay a utility charge timely and completely.
F. To standardize the contents of the utility bill, the notice of termination
and other notices sent to customers.
A. All prospective utility customers shall, prior to the commencement of
utility service, submit to the Town a written application providing the
following information:
(1) The name and authorized signature of the customer.
(2) The address of the customer to which all notices should be sent.
§ 144-50 TATTOO PARLORS § 153-3
142:191
§ 153-4. Temporary services. [Added 3-8-1993]
The Town, upon request, shall make available temporary water and sewer
services on the opening of an account with the Town. Where a current
meter exists and temporary service is to be of a duration no longer than
two weeks, the deposit shall be $45. If the period is from two weeks to four
weeks, the deposit shall be $80. Any period exceeding this time frame and
utility customers with existing or prior accounts shall fall under § 153-3C
above. In instances where temporary service is requested and no meter is
present, the applicant shall pay all costs (labor and material) connected
(3) The desired date for commencement of utility service.
B. Utility service shall not be supplied to any prospective residential
customer if that person has any outstanding and unpaid utility charges
and/or installments and surcharges arising from prior utility service.
C. All utility customers except industrial customers and homeowners with
existing or prior accounts with the Town and whose credit is in good
standing with the Town for a period of at least one year shall pay a
deposit in an amount equal to five times the monthly minimum water
and/or sewer charges, if billed bimonthly, or three times the minimum
water and/or sewer charges, if billed monthly, applicable to them prior
to the commencement of utility service. Exceptions may be limited in
the discretion of the Town Manager. Nonresidential customers may
apply for a refund of the deposit after one year of continuous service if
all utility charges for that year have been paid promptly and in full. All
other security deposits shall be refunded upon termination of utility
services after deduction of any unpaid charges. Residential customers
owning the property to which the utility service is furnished may apply
for a refund of the deposit after two years of continuous service if all
utility charges for the two-year period have been paid promptly and in
full. [Amended 10-24-1990; 8-24-1992]
D. Owners of one or more rental units may elect to execute an agreement
guaranteeing the payment of all utility services. With such an
agreement, the Town shall waive the security deposit for all customers
who rent from that owner. The agreement shall be substantially as
follows: [Amended 12-14-1988]
I agree to pay any and all delinquent utility charges for any utility
customer that rents property from me. I shall pay such delinquent
charges upon demand of the Town.
Signed
E. Owners of residential or nonresidential buildings with one meter
serving two or more users will be required to place the utility account in
their name. [Added 9-25-1995]
§ 153-3 HILLSVILLE CODE § 153-4
142:192
with setting a temporary meter as well as the deposit mentioned above. In
all cases the deposit shall be refunded pursuant to § 153-3C.
§ 153-5. Residential utility bills. [Amended 8-8-1984; 10-24-1990]
A residential utility bill shall be mailed every 60 days to every customer for
utility service supplied during the time period shown on the utility bill. Each
utility bill shall contain the following information:
§ 153-6. Customer information.
The Town shall provide, upon request, information on the following:
§ 153-7. Deferred payment plan.
A. The utility charge and/or surcharge due. [Amended 6-22-1992]
B. The date of the utility bill. [Amended 6-22-1992]
C. The date when complete payment is due at the Town office, which shall
be 20 days from the date of the utility bill.
D. Notice that failure to pay the amount shown on the utility bill timely and
completely shall result in a late penalty of 10% of the charges due.
[Amended 6-22-1992]
A. The availability and operation of deferred payment plans.
B. The procedure to dispute a utility charge and/or an installment and
surcharge.
C. The procedure to avoid termination of utility service due to nonpayment
of utility charges and/or installments and surcharges.
D. The procedure to obtain reinstatement of utility service.
A. Any residential customer, except those described in § 153-7B, who is
unable to pay a utility charge timely and completely may request, in
writing, that the Town establish for him a deferred payment plan to
enable him to pay the utility charge and to avoid termination of utility
service.
B. The following classes of residential customers are ineligible to request
a deferred payment plan:
(1) A residential customer whose utility service has been terminated
for nonpayment of utility charges and/or installments and
surcharges within the past six months of the customer's present
request for a deferred payment plan.
(2) A residential customer who has failed to make a timely and
complete payment of a utility charge and/or an installment and
§ 153-4 TATTOO PARLORS § 153-7
142:193
surcharge within the past six months of the customer's present
request for a deferred payment plan.
(3) A residential customer who is currently making installment and
surcharge payments under a prior deferred payment plan.
C. The Town shall not establish a deferred payment plan based on request
by a residential customer that is not timely. A request is timely if it is
received by the Town prior to the date of termination of utility service.
D. Upon receipt of an untimely request or a request from an ineligible
residential customer, the Town shall mail to the customer a notice of his
ineligibility or of the untimeliness of his request. The Town shall then
proceed as if the customer had not made the request.
E. Upon receipt of an eligible residential customer's timely request for the
establishment of a deferred payment plan, the Town shall discuss with
the residential customer and then mail to or personally serve upon him
the exact payment requirement of the customer's deferred payment
plan. The payment plan shall become effective only upon the Town's
receipt of the customer's written acceptance of the payment
requirements.
F. No deferred payment plan shall be established that does not meet the
following minimum payment requirements:
(1) An initial payment of at least 25% of the utility charge subject to
the deferred payment plan, payable at the time of the customer's
written acceptance of the payment requirement of his deferred
payment plan. Exception for water and/or sewer connection
deferred payment plans: payment of at least one-twelfth ( 1/12)
down and a maximum of 11 monthly installments with the first
installment due 30 days after payment of the initial installment.
[Amended 8-8-1984; 10-24-1990]
(2) A maximum of five monthly installment payments, with the first
such installment due 30 days after payment of the initial payment.
(3) A monthly surcharge of 10% of the customer's outstanding balance
added following payment of the initial payment or an installment
payable at the time that each installment is due. This surcharge will
be excluded from water and sewer connection fees with the
stipulation that payment is made in full and the connection made
within one year from the time of application. [Amended
6-8-1988]
G. When a payment by a residential customer is not sufficient to satisfy an
installment and surcharge payable under the customer's deferred
payment plan and a currently payable utility charge, the payment shall
first be applied to the installment and surcharge and then to the
currently payable utility charge.
§ 153-7 HILLSVILLE CODE § 153-7
142:194
§ 153-8. Customer disputes.
H. In the event that the Town rejects a residential customer's request for
the establishment of a deferred payment plan, for reasons other than
the untimeliness of the request or the ineligibility of the customer, the
Town shall mail to the customer a notice of rejection stating the
following:
(1) The reason(s) that the customer's request was rejected;
(2) The date of the notice of rejection; and
(3) The date that complete payment of the utility charge is due at the
Town, which shall be the payment date shown on the utility bill, or
the date of termination shown on the notice of termination or five
days after the date of the notice of rejection, whichever is latest.
I. If payment has not been received by the date specified on the Deferred
Payment Plan Application, utility service will be terminated. Complete
payment of the amount which prompted the termination, plus a
reconnection fee of $75, must be remitted to the Town before services
can be reinstated. [Added 6-22-1992; amended 6-26-2000]
A. At any time before the date of termination of utility service for
nonpayment of the amount(s) shown on a utility bill, a notice of
rejection or a notice of termination, a customer may dispute the
correctness of all or part of the amount(s) shown in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. A customer shall not be entitled to dispute
the correctness of all or part of the amount if all or part of the amount
was the subject of a previous dispute under this section.
B. The procedure for customer disputes shall be as follows:
(1) Before the date of termination, the customer shall notify the Town,
in writing, that he disputes all or part of the amount shown on a
utility bill, a notice of rejection or a notice of termination, stating as
completely as possible the basis for the dispute.
(2) If the Town determines that the present dispute is untimely or that
the customer previously disputed the correctness of all or part of
the amount shown, the Town shall mail to the customer a notice
stating that the present dispute is untimely or invalid. The Town
shall then proceed as if the customer had not notified the Town of
the present dispute.
(3) If the Town determines that the present dispute is not untimely or
invalid under this section, the Town, within three days after the
receipt of the customer's notice, shall arrange an informal meeting
between the customer and the Town Manager.
(4) Based on the Town's records, the customer's allegations and all
other relevant materials available to the Manager, the Manager
§ 153-7 TATTOO PARLORS § 153-8
142:195
shall resolve the dispute, attempting to do so in a manner
satisfactory to both the Town and the customer.
(5) Within five days of completion of the meeting, the Manager shall
mail to the customer a copy of his decision resolving the dispute.
(6) If the decision is unsatisfactory to the customer, the customer
within five days of his receipt of the Manager's decision, may
request, in writing, a formal hearing before the Town Council.
(7) The formal hearing before the Town Council shall be held within 10
days of the Town's receipt of the customer's written request.
(8) At the hearing, the Town and the customer shall be entitled to
present all evidence that is relevant and material to the dispute and
to examine and cross-examine witnesses. A tape-recorded (or at the
option of the Town, a stenographic) record of the hearing shall be
maintained.
(9) Based on the record established at hearing, the Town Council,
within five days of the completion of hearing, shall issue a written
decision formally resolving the dispute. This decision shall be final
and binding on the Town and the customer and shall be the decision
of the majority of the Council. The Mayor shall write the decision.
C. Utilization of this dispute procedure shall not relieve a customer of his
obligation to pay all other undisputed utility charges and/or
installments and surcharges and the undisputed portion(s) of the
amount(s) which is the subject of the present dispute, timely and
completely, notwithstanding § 153-8.
D. Failure to pay all such undisputed amounts timely and completely shall
subject the customer to termination of utility service in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
E. Until the date of the Town Council's or Town Manager's decision,
whichever is later, the Town shall not terminate the utility service of
this residential customer and shall not issue a notice of termination to
him solely for nonpayment of the disputed amount(s). If it is determined
that the customer must pay some or all of the disputed amount(s), the
Town shall promptly mail to or personally serve upon the customer a
notice of termination, which shall contain the following.
(1) The amount to be paid.
(2) The date of the notice of termination.
(3) The date of termination, which shall be at least 15 days after the
date of the notice of termination.
(4) Notice that, unless the Town receives complete payment of the
amount shown prior to the date of termination, utility service shall
be terminated.
§ 153-8 HILLSVILLE CODE § 153-8
142:196
§ 153-9. Utility service termination procedure.
§ 153-10. Limitations on termination of utility service.
The Town shall terminate utility service for nonpayment of utility charges
and/or installments and surcharges only during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m., Monday through Thursday. No termination shall be permitted on
a legal holiday or on the day before a legal holiday.
(5) Notice that in lieu of paying the amount shown, an eligible
residential customer, prior to the date of termination, may request
the establishment of a deferred payment plan.
(6) Notice that further information is available at the Town office upon
request.
A. Except as provided in § 153-8D, the provisions of this section shall
govern all terminations of utility service for nonpayment of utility
charges and/or installments and surcharges.
B. If, by the payment due date shown on a utility bill or a notice of
rejection, the Town has not received complete payment of the amount
shown on the bill or the notice, the Town shall mail to or personally
serve upon the customer a notice of termination no more than four days
after the payment due date. [Amended 6-22-1992]
C. The notice of termination shall contain the following:
(1) The amount to be paid.
(2) The date of the notice of termination.
(3) The date of termination, which shall be at least 15 days after the
date of the notice of termination.
(4) Notice that, unless the Town receives complete payment of the
amount shown prior to the date of termination, utility service shall
be terminated.
(5) Notice that further information is available at the Town office upon
request.
D. If, prior to the date of termination, the Town has not received complete
payment of the amount shown on the notice of termination; the
residential customer has not requested the establishment of a deferred
payment plan; or the customer has not notified the Town that he
disputes the correctness of all or part of the amount shown on the
notice of termination, then the Town shall terminate utility service
provided to the customer on the date of termination.
E. If the Town receives payment of the entire amount shown on the notice
of termination prior to the date of termination, such payment shall be
considered a timely and complete payment for purposes of this chapter.
§ 153-8 TATTOO PARLORS § 153-11
142:197
§ 153-11. Reinstatement of utility service. [Amended 6-26-2000]
In the event of termination of utility service in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, the Town shall reinstate utility service to the
customer within 24 hours of the Town's receipt of complete payment of the
amount whose nonpayment prompted the termination, plus a connection fee
of $75. Such payment shall not be considered a timely payment for purposes
of this chapter.
§ 153-12. Computation of time. [Amended 1-9-1984]
In computing any period of time prescribed by this chapter, the day of the
act or event from which the designated period of time begins to run shall
not be included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included,
unless it is a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal holiday, in which event the period
runs until the next day which is not a Saturday, a Sunday or a legal holiday.
When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate
Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation.
§ 153-13. Unauthorized reconnection. [Amended 1-9-1984]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person other than an authorized Town
employee to reconnect or restore a utility service that has been
terminated by the Town pursuant to this chapter. The reconnection of
water service after it has been terminated pursuant to this chapter,
unless reinstatement has been authorized by the Town, shall be prima
facie evidence of an intent to violate this section by the person to whose
benefit it is that such service is restored and shall be punishable by a
fine of $50. If payment is not made within 72 hours, this will be
classified as a Class 1 misdemeanor and legal action will be taken. The
person will, in addition to the fine, be responsible for paying all court
costs. [Amended 6-22-1992]
B. In addition, unauthorized reconnection of a utility as defined shall
result in a utility bill to be charged by the Town to the utility user in
proportion to the unauthorized use plus reinstatement charges
pursuant to § 153-11. In the case of landlord-tenant relationships, the
following procedures will apply in regards to the billing: [Added
12-12-1984]
(1) The resident user (tenant) shall be primarily responsible for
contacting the Town for utility services and payment of charges,
including unauthorized usage charges as herein defined.
(2) It shall be the responsibility of the landowner/landlord to notify the
Town of incoming tenants. Failure to so notify the Town shall result
in landowner/landlord liability as to the unauthorized utility usage
charges as herein defined, plus a reconnection fee of $75.
Unauthorized utility usage charges shall be defined as charges for
water and/or sewer used if the meter is turned on by anyone other
than authorized Town personnel. If payment is not made within 20
§ 153-11 HILLSVILLE CODE § 153-13
142:198
§ 153-14. Rates. [Amended 5-11-1983; 1-8-1986; 2-12-1986;
10-28-1987; 11-24-1987; 12-9-1987]
days, this will be classified as a Class 1 misdemeanor and legal
action will be taken. [Amended 6-22-1992; 6-26-2000]
(3) On rental property that is unoccupied, the landowner/landlord shall
be responsible for liability as to the unauthorized utility usage
charges as herein defined, plus a reconnection fee of $75. If this is
not paid within 20 days, this will be classified as a Class 1
misdemeanor and legal action will be taken. The landlord/
landowner will, in addition to the usage charges and reconnection
fee, be responsible for paying all court costs. [Added 6-22-1992;
amended 6-26-2000]
A. A landlord and/or tenant renting one apartment will be charged one
minimum residential rate and a minimum residential rate for each
apartment, plus any excess over minimum usage at the applicable rate.
[Amended 12-14-1988]
B. A landlord and/or tenant renting two or more apartments will be
charged one minimum residential rate and a minimum residential rate
for each apartment, plus any excess over minimum usage at the
applicable rate.
C. Multifamily complexes and apartments will be charged one minimum
residential rate and a minimum residential rate for each apartment,
plus any excess over minimum usage at the applicable rate. [Amended
12-14-1988]
D. Motels and hotels will be charged one minimum residential rate for
every four units, plus any excess over minimum usage at the applicable
rate.
E. Commercial customers with more than one business will be charged
one commercial minimum rate for each business. [Added 9-25-1995]
F. A commercial customer renting apartments within their business
building will be charged as follows:
(1) One commercial minimum rate for each business, plus any excess
over minimum usage at the applicable rate.
(2) Also, one residential minimum rate for each residential unit, plus
any excess over minimum usage at the applicable rate.
G. Landowners are entitled to a credit of 1/2 the minimum water and/or
sewer charge, provided that the rental unit(s) is vacant for 30
consecutive days, "vacant" meaning unoccupied and unrented. There
shall be a limit of one month retroactive credit from the date of
notification to the Town. Landlords may claim this credit by written
verification submitted to the Town office and approved by the Town
§ 153-13 TATTOO PARLORS § 153-14
142:199
Chapter 157
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 34.
Parades — See Ch. 101.
Parking-- See Ch. 104.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 108.
Special events — See Ch. 132.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 136.
Inoperable vehicles — See Ch. 160.
Licensing of vehicles — See Ch. 163.
Manager, "written verification" meaning completion of "credit for
vacancy update" upon payment of each bill. The Town reserves the
right to request landowners' records of unit rentals. This credit applies
to metered and unmetered rental property. Landowners with any
delinquent accounts on record with the Town of Hillsville will not
qualify for the credit. [Amended 1-11-1989; 6-22-1992; 3-13-2017]
H. Exception. If under this section it can be demonstrated that any two or
more described units share common facilities, then one minimum only
shall be charged at the higher of the two rates, plus any excess over the
minimum usage at the applicable rate.
§ 153-14 HILLSVILLE CODE § 153-14
157:200
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 157-1. Word usage.37
Words and phrases under and contained in this chapter shall have the
meanings ascribed to them by § 46.2-100, Code of Virginia, except where
the context clearly requires a different meaning.
§ 157-2. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter applicable to the drivers of vehicles shall
apply to the drivers of all vehicles, regardless of ownership, subject to such
specific exceptions as are set forth in this chapter.
§ 157-3. Adoption of state law. [Amended 7-11-1984; 11-14-1990]
Pursuant to the provisions of § 46.2-1313, Code of Virginia, as amended,
all of the provisions and requirements of the laws of the state contained
in Chapter 8 (Regulation of Traffic), Chapter 3 (Licensure of Drivers) and
Chapter 10 (Motor Vehicle and Equipment Safety) of Title 46.2, as amended,
and other provisions of Title 46.2, where applicable, and provisions of
Article 2 (§ 18.2-266 et seq.) of Chapter 7 of Title 18.2 of the Code of
Virginia, as amended, except those which are felonies or which by their
very nature can have no application within the town, are hereby adopted
and made a part of this chapter as fully as though set out herein and are
hereby made applicable with the town. References therein to "highways of
the state" shall be deemed to refer to streets, highways, and alleys within
the town. It shall be unlawful for any person within the town to violate or
fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any section of the Code of Virginia
which is adopted by this section.
§ 157-4. Enforcement by officers; officers to be uniformed; officers
to be paid fixed and determined salaries.38
Provisions dealing with enforcement and officers shall be as provided in
§§ 46.2-102 and 46.2-103, Code of Virginia,
§ 157-5. Stopping vehicles for inspection or to secure information.
Any policeman who shall be in uniform or who shall exhibit his badge or
other sign of authority shall have the right to stop any motor vehicle, trailer
or semitrailer, upon request or signal, for the purpose of inspecting the
motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer as to its equipment and operation, its
manufacturer's serial or engine number or its contents or load, if such
motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is a property-carrying vehicle, or for the
purpose of securing such other information as may be necessary.
37.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
38.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 157-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 157-6
157:201
§ 157-6. Authority of fire company officials to direct traffic.
Officers of the fire company may direct or assist the police in directing
traffic at or in the immediate vicinity of a fire and while so acting shall have
all the authority of police officers.
§ 157-7. Driving through funeral or other processions; manner of
driving in funeral processions.
§ 157-8. Identification of vehicles in funeral processions; right-ofway
of such vehicles.
§ 157-9. Unlawful riding.
No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed
or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an
employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty or to persons riding
within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise.
§ 157-10. Removal and disposition of certain unattended vehicles;
disposition of proceeds.39
A. No operator of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles, persons or
animals comprising a funeral or other authorized procession, except
when otherwise directed by a police officer. This provision shall not
apply to authorized emergency vehicles.
B. Each driver in a funeral procession shall drive as near to the right-hand
edge of the roadway as is practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead
as close as is practicable and safe.
A. All motor vehicles participating in a funeral procession, when
proceeding to any place of burial, shall display illuminated headlamps
thereon and such other identification as the Town Manager may
prescribe.
B. All motor vehicles so designated shall have the right-of-way over all
other vehicles, except fire apparatus, ambulances and police vehicles,
at any street or highway intersection within the town and may proceed
through a stop street or signalized intersection with proper caution and
safety.
A. Whenever any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is found on the
public streets or public grounds unattended by the owner or operator
and constitutes a hazard to traffic or is parked in such manner as to be
in violation of law or whenever any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer
is left unattended for more than ten (10) days upon any public property
or privately owned property other than the property of the owner of
such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer within the town, is abandoned
39.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 157-6 HILLSVILLE CODE § 157-10
157:202
upon such public property or privately owned property without the
permission of the owner, lessee or occupant thereof or is immobilized
on a public roadway by weather conditions or other emergency
situation, any such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer may be removed
for safekeeping by or under the direction of a police officer to a storage
garage or area, provided that no such vehicle shall be so removed from
privately owned premises without the written request of the owner,
lessee or occupant thereof. The person at whose request such motor
vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is removed from privately owned property
shall indemnify the town against any loss or expense incurred by reason
of removal, storage or sale thereof. Each removal shall be reported
immediately to the Chief of Police and notice thereof given to the owner
of the motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer as promptly as possible.
The owner of such vehicle or trailer or semitrailer, before obtaining
possession thereof, shall pay to the town all reasonable costs incidental
to the removal, storage and locating the owner of the motor vehicle,
trailer or semitrailer. Should such owner fail or refuse to pay the cost
or should the identity or whereabouts of such owner be unknown and
unascertainable after a diligent search has been made and after notice
to him at his last known address and to the holder of any lien of record
in the office of the Division of Motor Vehicles against the motor vehicle,
trailer or semitrailer, the Chief of Police may, after holding the motor
vehicle, trailer or semitrailer sixty (60) days and after due notice of
sale, dispose of the same at public sale, and the proceeds from the
sale shall be forwarded by the Chief of Police to the Town Treasurer,
provided that if the value of such motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer is
determined by three (3) disinterested dealers or garagemen to be less
than fifty dollars ($50.) which would be incurred by such advertising
and public sale, it may be disposed of by private sale or junked. The
Town Treasurer shall pay from the proceeds of sale the cost of removal,
storage, investigation as to ownership and liens and notice of sale, and
the balance of such funds shall be held by him for the owner and paid
to the owner upon satisfactory proof of ownership.
B. If no claim has been made by the owner for the proceeds of such sale,
after the nonpayment of the above-mentioned cost of fifty dollars ($50.),
the funds may be deposited to the general fund or any special fund of
the town. Any such owner shall be entitled to apply to the town within
three (3) years from the date of such sale, and if timely application is
made therefor, the town shall pay the same to the owner without
interest or other charges. No claim shall be made nor shall any suit,
action or proceeding be instituted for the recovery of such funds after
three (3) years from the date of such sale.
C. A motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer or part thereof shall be presumed to
be abandoned if it lacks either a current license plate or a current town
license plate or sticker or a valid state safety inspection certificate or
sticker and it has been in a specific location for four (4) days without
being moved.
§ 157-10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 157-11
157:203
§ 157-11. Snow tires and chains required under certain conditions.
§ 157-12. Powers of Town Council.
A. Whenever snow, sleet, hail or freezing rain has caused slippery or
hazardous conditions on any of the public streets of the town, it shall be
unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to obstruct or impede
other vehicular traffic on any such street by reason of failure to have
the driving wheels of the vehicle operated by him equipped with
adequate snow tires or chains.
B. Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be punished by a
fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.), nor more than twenty-five dollars
($25.).
A. The Town Council may designate intersections at which vehicles shall
come to a full stop or yield the right-of-way and may cause to be erected
appropriate signs or markers at such intersections so that an ordinarily
observant person will be aware of the existence of such designation.
B. The Town Council may classify vehicles with reference to parking and
may designate the time, place and manner such vehicles may be
allowed to park on town streets and parking lots and may make and
enforce such additional rules and regulations as parking conditions may
require. When any parking regulation is established pursuant to this
subsection, the Town Council shall cause to be erected appropriate
signs or markers so that an ordinarily observant person who may be
affected by such regulation will be aware of such regulation.
C. The Town Council may cause appropriate signs and markings to be
erected, placed and maintained, designating residence and business
districts, railway crossings and such other signs and markings upon the
sidewalks and streets as may be deemed necessary to carry out the
provisions of this chapter. It shall have the power to regulate traffic by
means of traffic officers, semaphores or other signaling devices on any
portion of the streets where traffic is heavy or continuous or where, in
its judgment, conditions may require, and may prohibit other than oneway
traffic upon certain streets. It may regulate the use of the streets
by processions or assemblages. It may adopt any such regulations not
in conflict with the provisions of this chapter as it shall deem advisable
and necessary and repeal, amend or modify any such regulations.
D. When any regulation is made pursuant to this section and when
appropriate signs or markers have been erected as required by this
section, it shall be unlawful for any person to violate any such
regulation.
§ 157-11 HILLSVILLE CODE § 157-13
157:204
§ 157-13. Arrest for violations of chapter; release on summons and
promise to appear; admitting to bail; violations.40
For provisions dealing with arrests for violations of this chapter, release
on summons and promise to appear, admitting to bail and violations, see
§ 46.2-936, Code of Virginia.
§ 157-14. Issuance of warrant upon failure to comply with
summons; suspension of licenses for failure to appear.41
For provisions dealing with the issuance of a warrant upon failure to comply
with a summons and suspension of licenses for failure to appear, see
§ 46.2-938, Code of Virginia.
§ 157-15. When arresting officer shall take person before judicial
officer in lieu of issuing summons.42
For provisions dealing with when the arresting officer shall take a person
before a judicial officer in lieu of issuing a summons, see § 46.2-940, Code
of Virginia.43
§ 157-16. Compliance with chapter; penalties for violation.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse, fail or neglect to comply
with any of the provisions of this chapter or any rule or regulation
promulgated pursuant thereto.
B. Every person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto, for
which no other penalty is provided, shall, for a first conviction thereof,
be punished by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.) nor more than
one hundred dollars ($100.), or by imprisonment in jail for not less than
one (1) nor more than ten (10) days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment; for a second such conviction within one (1) year, such
person shall be punished by a fine of not less than twenty dollars ($20.)
nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.) or by imprisonment in jail
for not less than one (1) nor more than twenty (20) days, or by both such
fine and imprisonment; for a third or subsequent conviction within one
(1) year, such person shall be punished by a fine of not less than fifty
dollars ($50.) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.) or by
imprisonment in jail for not less than ten (10) days nor more than six (6)
months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
C. Whenever a specific penalty is provided in the Code of Virginia for the
violation of any section of the Code of Virginia adopted by reference by
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
42.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
43.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 20-16, Conditions precedent to issuance of warrant for
violation of parking regulations, which immediately followed this section, was repealed
8-12-1987.
§ 157-13 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 157-16
157:205
§ 157-17. Penalties for four convictions of certain offenses within
ten years.
§ 157-3 of this chapter, the penalty for a violation of such section,
charged on a town warrant or summons, shall be the same as provided
by state statute and shall constitute a traffic infraction as provided
under the Code of Virginia.
A. If any person, having been convicted three (3) times of any offense or
offenses set forth below, within a period of ten (10) years, is again
convicted of any one (1) of such offenses within such five-year period,
he shall, in addition to the penalty otherwise prescribed by law for such
offense, be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.) nor more
than one thousand dollars ($1,000.) and confined in jail not less than
three (3) months nor more than twelve (12) months. The offenses for a
fourth conviction of which such penalties may be imposed are the
following: violations within this state of §§ 18.2-266, 46.1-176, 46.1-191
and 46.1-350, Code of Virginia, within the town of §§ 157-19 and 157-26
of this Code, when charged on a town warrant or summons, or of any
similar ordinance of any county, city or town in the state, and
manslaughter involving the operation of a motor vehicle, voluntary or
involuntary, provided that for the purposes of this section where more
than one (1) manslaughter conviction results from a single act or
omission, then only the first such conviction shall constitute an offense.
B. In addition to the penalties set forth in the preceding subsection, if any
person is convicted of a fourth offense as therein provided, the court in
which such conviction is had shall revoke the operator's or chauffeur's
license of such person for a period of five (5) years.
§ 157-16 HILLSVILLE CODE § 157-17
157:206
ARTICLE II
Operators' Licenses and Vehicle Registration
[Amended 8-8-1984]
§ 157-18. Signing, possession and display.44
For provisions dealing with signing and possession of registration cards,
exhibiting of registration card and operator's etc., licenses and failure to
carry a license or registration card, see § 46.2-104, Code of Virginia.
§ 157-19. Attachment and display of state license plates generally.45
§ 157-20. Display of fictitious, suspended, etc., registration card,
license plate or certificate of title.46
For provisions relating to the display of a fictitious, suspended, etc.,
registration card, license plate or certificate of title, see § 46.2-346, Code of
Virginia.
A. For provisions dealing with the attachment and display of state license
plates, see §§ 46.2-715 and 46.2-716, Code of Virginia.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate upon a street in the town a
pickup or panel truck, tractor truck, trailer or semitrailer with a name
on it other than the owner's or lessee's name thereon; provided,
however, that advertising material thereon for another pursuant to a
valid contract is not prohibited.
44.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
45.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 157-18 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 157-20
157:207
Chapter 160
VEHICLES, INOPERABLE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parades — See Ch. 101.
Parking — See Ch. 104.
Special events — See Ch. 132.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 136.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 157.
Licensing of vehicles — See Ch. 163.
Zoning — See Ch. 171.
§ 160-1. Control and disposition of junk vehicles. [Amended
11-11-1996; 3-25-2013]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep on any
commercial, residential or agricultural property any motor vehicle, trailer
or semitrailer, as defined in § 46.2-100, Code of Virginia, which is unlicensed
or otherwise inoperative and not within a fully enclosed building or
structure or otherwise shielded or screened from view. If a vehicle cover
method is used, the cover must be of a type that is manufactured for that
purpose and covers the entire vehicle.
§ 160-2. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to the following vehicles and owners thereof:
§ 160-3. Removal; disposal.
The Town may remove any such inoperative motor vehicle, trailer or
semitrailer not exempted under § 160-2 of this chapter at any time after
the expiration of 30 days after the owner of the premises is given notice
of his noncompliance with this chapter. The Town may dispose of any such
vehicle so removed after the expiration of another 30 days after giving the
owner notice of the Town's intent to dispose of the vehicle. The cost of any
such removal and disposal shall be chargeable to the owner of the vehicle
or premises and may be collected by the Town as taxes and other levies
are collected and shall constitute a lien against the property from which the
vehicle was removed; the lien to continue until actual payment of such costs
shall have been made to the Town.47
A. Vehicles stored in an enclosed building.
B. Vehicles in the possession of a licensed automobile dealer, salvage
dealer or scrap processor, if screened from public view.
C. Vehicles in an automobile graveyard, as defined and regulated by
§ 33.1-348, Code of Virginia.
§ 157-20 HILLSVILLE CODE § 160-3
157:208
Chapter 163
VEHICLES, LICENSING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parades — See Ch. 101.
Parking — See Ch. 104.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 136.
Taxation — See Ch. 144.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 157.
Inoperable vehicles — See Ch. 160.
§ 163-1. Applicability; vehicle license fee levied.
The provisions of this chapter apply to all motor vehicles, trailers, semitrailers,
motorcycles, and other similar vehicles normally garaged, stored,
or parked within the corporate limits of Hillsville, Virginia. There shall be
levied and assessed a license fee for the Town of Hillsville from the owner
of every motor vehicle owned by residents of the Town. Payment of a local
vehicle registration license fee is required as provided herein, however,
effective 2015 there is no longer any vehicle registration decal to purchase
or display.
§ 163-2. Purpose; definitions.
A. This chapter is adopted for the purpose of providing the necessary
regulation for levying of license taxes and fees on motor vehicles,
trailers, semi-trailers, motorcycles, and other similar vehicles, and to
prescribe penalties for the violations of the same.
B. Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
chapter, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in the Code of
Virginia, 1950 as amended:
Ambulance
Bus
Motor bike
Motor scooter
Motor vehicle
Motorcycle
Semi-trailer
Tractor truck
Trailer
47.Editor's Note: Original Section 4, which contained penalties and immediately followed this
section, was repealed 11-11-1996. For current penalty provisions, see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I.
§ 160-3 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 163-2
157:209
§ 163-3. Vehicles subject to license fee.
There shall be levied and assessed a license tax and fee ("license fee")
on every registered and licensed motor vehicle, trailer, semi-trailer, tractor
truck, motorcycle, and other similar vehicles ("vehicle"), normally garaged,
stored, or parked within the Corporate Boundary of the Town of Hillsville,
Virginia. It shall be presumed that any person who has acquired a valid
current state license plate and/or registration for any vehicle normally
garaged, stored, or parked in the Town, or who lists upon the records of
the Department of Motor Vehicles that such vehicle is kept within the Town
and that any person residing in, or having their place of business within
the Town and owning vehicles, that such vehicles are subject to the Town
vehicle license fee. If it cannot be determined where the vehicle is normally
garaged, stored or parked, then the situs for the Town vehicle license fee
imposed by the Town shall be the domicile of the owner of the vehicle.
Nothing herein shall construe to require a Town vehicle license fee of a
person exempt from the payment of a license fee under the applicable
provisions of state law or on any vehicle normally garaged, stored, or
parked in the County of Carroll.
§ 163-4. Fire Department and Rescue Squad members. [Added
3-13-201748]
The Town shall furnish one vehicle license free of charge to each member
of the Fire Department, and to each member of the County Rescue Squad,
provided that there are no delinquent accounts with the Town.
§ 163-5. License fee year; when payable; assessment. [Amended
6-27-2016]
The license fee year shall commence on January 1st of each year and shall
end on December 31 of each year beginning on January 1, 2015. The fee
is due and payable on or before December 5. The Town Treasurer shall
assess the Town vehicle license fee as such vehicles are registered upon
the records of the Virginia Division of Motor Vehicles and/or based upon
information obtained by the County Commissioner of Revenue, and the
Town Treasurer shall bill the owner of the vehicle at the time personal
property tax bills are sent. Any owner of any vehicle subject to the Town
vehicle license fee who acquires or disposes of any vehicle or otherwise
causes a vehicle to be subject to or exempt from the Town vehicle license fee
at any time during any year shall, within 10 days of such change, notify the
Town Treasurer of such change and, if required, pay the applicable Town
vehicle license fee imposed on such vehicle(s). For owners that sell a vehicle
less than six months of the year and do not replace the vehicle, license fees
may be relieved if proof is presented to the Town Treasurer.
Vehicle
48.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 163-4, Persons moving into Town.
§ 163-2 HILLSVILLE CODE § 163-6
157:210
§ 163-6. Amount of license fee.
Subject to the provisions of this chapter, there shall be assessed an annual
Town vehicle license fee upon each and every registered automobile,
passenger vehicle, bus, motorcycle, motor scooter, motor bike, truck, semitrailer,
ambulance and other similar vehicles an amount that is set annually
as part of the fiscal year. The fee(s) for Calendar Year 2015 are $25 for
each and every automobile, passenger vehicle, and bus; upon each and
every registered trailer, motorcycle, motor scooter, or motor bike the fee
of $16 for Calendar Year 2015; upon each and every truck, semi-trailer,
ambulance and other similar vehicles a fee of $25 for Calendar Year 2015.
No Town license fee shall exceed the amount permitted by the applicable
provisions of state law. There will be no prorating of the Town license fee;
provided; however, that should the current year fee be assessed on a vehicle
which is sold or traded within that year to obtain a replacement vehicle, no
additional fee shall be due on the replacement vehicle for that tax year but
the one fee shall be paid.
§ 163-7. Payment of personal property tax required.
No vehicle shall be licensed until all personal property taxes upon the
vehicle and all delinquent personal property taxes on any vehicle owed
by the owner of such vehicle which has been assessed or are assessable
against the owner by the Town have been paid. No vehicle shall be licensed
until the tangible personal property taxes properly assessed or assessable
by the Town on any tangible personal property taxes used or usable as a
dwelling titled by the Division of Motor Vehicles and owned by the taxpayer
have been paid.
§ 163-8. Violations and penalties.
Every person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
Class 4 Misdemeanor with a fine not to exceed $100. Prepayment of fine,
upon waiver of appearance and plea of guilty, shall not be accepted until
a receipt from the Town Treasurer is produced evidencing payment of the
applicable Town license fee.
§ 163-9. Agreement with Division of Motor Vehicles.
A. The Treasurer is authorized to enter into an agreement with the
Commissioner of the Division of Motor Vehicles whereby the
Commissioner will refuse to issue or renew any vehicle registration of
any applicant therefor who owes the Town of Hillsville any local license
fees issued to the residents of the Town. Before being issued any vehicle
registration, the applicant shall first satisfy DMV that all such local
vehicle license fees have been paid in full.
B. The DMV and Treasurer shall charge a reasonable fee to cover costs of
such enforcement action, and the Treasurer shall add the cost of this
DMV fee to the delinquent tax bill.
§ 163-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 163-9
157:211
Chapter 167
WATER AND SEWER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Returned checks — See Ch. 60.
Drainage control — See Ch. 70.
Solid waste — See Ch. 128.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 136.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 140.
Utilities — See Ch. 153.
Zoning — See Ch. 171.
C. The Treasurer shall notify DMV in the manner provided for in the
agreement with DMV and supply to DMV information necessary to
identify the debtor for whom registration or renewal is to be denied.
§ 163-9 HILLSVILLE CODE § 163-9
157:212
ARTICLE I
Sewer Connections
[Adopted 10-11-1978 as Ch. 8, Art. II, Div. 1, of the 1978 Code]
§ 167-1. Sewer connections for existing structures. [Amended
9-9-1982]
All persons owning land upon which buildings are now erected or which
may be erected in the Town, any part of which land abuts a highway,
street, alley or space in which sewer lines have been constructed for and
on behalf of the owners of the property, shall connect closets, urinals, sinks,
lavatories, laundry tubs, bathtubs and generally all appliances arranged as
outlets for domestic or sanitary water supply or inlets to the sewer at their
own cost within 60 days after the completion of the sewer line or section
thereof, in the section of Town in which the property is located, and after
notice has been given to such property owners by the Town that the sewer
line is ready for service, provided that no person shall be required to so
connect any such building where the distance from the main part of the
building to the nearest sewer line exceeds 200 feet, measured in a straight
line, and further provided that no person shall be required to so connect any
building if the Town Manager of Hillsville deems such a connection to be a
hardship and provides in writing to said person a letter stating the nature of
the hardship and exempting said person from the provisions of this article.
Such exemption may be limited in the discretion of the Town Manager.
§ 167-2. Sewer connections for new buildings.
Each owner of vacant property in the Town who shall erect and build for
occupancy on land, any portion of which abuts upon a highway, street, alley
or space in which the sanitary sewer is located, shall install and make
service connection with the sewer at his own cost and expense, and any and
all property so improved shall not be occupied until after the connection
is made, provided that the exemption allowed in § 167-1 shall apply to any
such building so constructed.
§ 167-3. Supervision of installation of connections.
All connections with the Town sewerage system shall be made under the
supervision of the Town and in accordance with the sewer service and
connection rules and provisions set forth in this article.
§ 167-4. Use of private systems.
There shall be no privies, septic tanks or cesspools constructed or used
in any section of the Town where sanitary sewer has been installed and
where connection can be made with such sewerage system. The use or
maintenance of any such septic tanks, privies or cesspools on such premises
is hereby declared a nuisance.
§ 167-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 167-5
157:213
§ 167-5. Disposition of revenues. [Amended 6-22-1992]
All money and revenue arising from sewerage permit fees, monthly charges,
taxes and fines, when received by the Treasurer of the Town, shall be
deposited in a bank in a combined account fund. After the payment out of
the fund for all of the necessary services and expenses in connection with
the operation, maintenance and administration of the sewer system and for
all purposes in connection therewith, the net balance of the fund shall be
set apart and called a sinking fund and applied to the payment of bonds as
they fall due and to the interest on bonds.
§ 167-6. Service outside Town. [Amended 7-13-1983; 12-9-1987;
11-11-1996]
The owners of property lying outside of the Town who desire to connect
their property with the sewer system constructed and in operation in the
Town shall obtain a permit to do so from the Town Manager, and the work
shall be done under the supervision of the Town and in accordance with the
rules and provisions embodied in this article. Any such person desiring to
connect his property with the sewer system shall first deposit a fee based on
the current fee schedule. Individual situations may be altered or exceptions
may be allowed on approval of the Town Manager and approval of the
Council. All such connections shall be made at the cost and expense of the
property owner and maintained at his cost except as to the portion of the
line which is located within a highway, street or alley within the Town which,
after construction, will be repaired and maintained by the Town and shall
become the property of the Town. Each owner of property connecting with
the sewer system shall pay monthly charges for the use of the sewer system
in the amounts set forth in this article.
§ 167-7. Enforcement. [Amended 11-11-1996]
The Town Manager shall have full power and authority to carry out and
enforce the regulations and provisions of the sewer and connection service
regulations adopted as a part of this article.
§ 167-5 HILLSVILLE CODE § 167-7
157:214
ARTICLE II
Installation of Service Lines
[Adopted 10-11-1978 as Ch. 8, Art. II, Div. 2, of the 1978 Code]
§ 167-8. Permit.
No person shall install, alter or repair any sewer service line intended for
connection to the public sewer until a sewer connection permit has first
been issued, in writing.
§ 167-9. Materials. [Amended 12-9-1987]
All pipe shall be standard strength, Schedule 40 PVC or SDR 35, of not less
than four inches diameter nor more than six inches.
§ 167-10. Line and grade. [Amended 11-11-1996]
All pipe shall be laid to a uniform straight line and grade, both vertical
and horizontal. A minimum grade of one-fourth ( 1/4) inch per foot shall
be maintained unless permission is secured from the Town Manager. All
changes in direction shall be accomplished by use of standard bends, Ybranch.
§ 167-11. Joints and connections. [Amended 12-9-1987]
All joints and connections shall be made watertight. They shall be made in
a ditch free from water, mud or loose dirt and shall be carefully made so as
to ensure complete seal of the pipe joint. The joints shall be glued or O-ring
sealed. Where existing material exiting from a building is not PVC, the joint
will be made using a furnco coupling or concreted joint.
§ 167-12. Backfilling. [Amended 11-11-1996]
No service line, when laid, shall be backfilled until inspected and approved
by the Town.
§ 167-13. Roof drains.
No drain from a roof, paved courtyard or subsoil drainage system shall be
connected to the sanitary sewer system.
§ 167-14. Garages; industrial waste.
A. The sewer from any floor drain, surface drain, pit drain or sink in any
garage for the purpose of storage, servicing or repair of auto vehicles or
in any open service station, which may receive oil or grease, sand or
mud, etc., shall not be connected to the public sewer system except
through an approved garage intercepting basin. The basin shall be
adequately maintained by the owner of the property
§ 167-8 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 167-14
157:215
§ 167-15. Additional connections.
Any property owner desiring an additional connection to the one furnished
by the Town may secure the same by securing a cover installation and by
paying the entire cost of the installation.
§ 167-16. Traps.
§ 167-17. Cleanouts.
There should be installed at the house end of every service line a suitable
means for cleaning and rodding the line. The cleanout may be either wye,
tee or any other means of allowing easy rodding of the service line. The
blank end of any wye or tee used shall be securely plugged with cement
grout so as to prevent ground infiltration.
§ 167-18. Method of connecting to public sewer.
B. No industrial waste or effluents shall be admitted to the sanitary sewer
system by any property owner or tenant thereof until proper application
for a permit to do so has been made to the Town, and proper approval
thereof by a designated authority. [Amended 11-11-1996]
A. No connection shall be made to the Town sewer line unless the same is
adequately trapped by a standard trap depending for its action on a
water seal only. Traps shall not be smaller than three inches in
diameter.
B. No hotel, restaurant, boardinghouse or lunchroom having kitchen
waste shall connect any waste line with the sanitary sewer without first
providing an adequate grease trap, to be approved by the Town, at such
place in the waste line which will ensure the collection of all grease and
other kitchen waste.
A. Inlet to public sewer. An inlet to the public sewer will be furnished by
the Town upon application for service and issuance of a permit. The
inlet shall be furnished at the location desired by the property owner
unless a Y-branch has been previously installed in front of the lot for
which service is requested, in which case the Y-branch shall be used
unless found impracticable by the appropriate Town officer. Connection
to any existing Y shall be made with a standard bend acceptable to the
appropriate Town officer.
B. Tap made by Town. No person may at any time tap or puncture in any
way a main line of the public sewer system. When installing service line,
the ditch shall be opened to the public sewer and the public sewer shall
be uncovered, cleaned off and the Town Manager notified. The Town
will then make the tap, furnishing all necessary cut-ins, Y branches,
labor and materials, after which the line may be connected. [Amended
11-11-1996]
§ 167-14 HILLSVILLE CODE § 167-18
157:216
§ 167-19. Installation of water and sewer lines. [Added 7-13-1983;
amended 12-11-1985; 12-9-1987]
In consideration of fees established by the Hillsville Town Council, the
following procedure will be followed for making connections to the Hillsville
water and sewer systems. Materials shall be as follows:
C. Replacement of streets. All necessary permits shall be secured from the
state highway department or Town before opening ditch in a public
street, and all requirements of the state highway department or Town
shall be observed in backfilling and replacing pavement after line is
completed.
A. Pipe material used from meter to customer service shall be
polyethylene or polybutylene or polyurethane or copper, with a
diameter of pipe not less than meter size, with strength not less than
160 pounds per square inch.
B. Water connections. The Town will:
(1) Determine the best and most economical location for a tap to be
made.
(2) Tap the main line, place all fittings and install the valve.
(3) Stub out up to 10 feet of connector line.
(4) Install meter and meter box.
(5) Connect customer's line to stub out.
(6) Landscape, seed and mulch the area disturbed.
(7) Make initial meter reading and initiate service.
C. Sewer connections. The Town will:
(1) Determine the best and most economical location for a tap to be
made.
(2) Tap the main line and place connection fittings.
(3) Stub out up to five feet of connector line.
(4) Connect customer's line to stub cut.
(5) Initiate service.
D. Any additional water and/or sewer line installation work requested by a
customer and approved by the Town Manager will be billed at a rate
established by the Hillsville Town Council.
§ 167-18 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 167-20
157:217
§ 167-20. Metering. [Added 4-25-1990]
The Town of Hillsville will set water meters for apartment complexes that
have more than six apartments on the following basis: that upon request
by the owner/developer and where the owner/developer will be paying the
bill for water/sewer for all units, the Town will install a master meter(s).
There will be one meter per building where there is more than one building
involved. The owner/developer will be billed the number of minimums
corresponding with the number of units including any office, shop and
community room and any amount over the number of minimum charges as
indicated by the meter(s). On any apartment complex having six or fewer
apartments, the Town will require individual meters for each unit.
§ 167-20 HILLSVILLE CODE § 167-20
157:218
ARTICLE III
Water and Sewer Fees and Charges
[Adopted 10-11-1978 as Ch. 8, Art. III, of the 1978 Code]
§ 167-21. Charges inside and outside Town limits. [Amended
12-11-1985]
A. Subscribers to Town water and/or sewer service residing inside or
outside the Town limits shall pay such water and sewer rates and
connection fees as are established from time to time by the Town
Council.
B. Subscribers to the Town sewer service who are provided water by
Carroll County Public Service Authority shall be charged at a rate equal
to that rate charged to subscribers who are provided water by the
Town's system. Public Service Authority water usage will be determined
by regular meter readings.
C. Any subscriber who can demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Council,
that his sewer usage is less than the amount of metered water may be
granted a variance in the rate charged.
D. Written application for such rate variance shall be submitted to the
Town Council at a regular meeting. Applications should be
accompanied by the applicant's documentation justifying such variance.
Upon application, the Town Council shall consider the request.
§ 167-21 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 167-21
157:219

ARTICLE IV
Sewer Discharge Control
[Adopted 10-25-199949]
§ 167-22. Purpose and policy.
A. This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly
owned treatment works (POTW) for the Town of Hillsville and enables
the Town to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including
the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code § 1251, et seq.), the
General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR Part 403), and the Virginia
Permit Regulation (9-VAC 25-31-10 et seq.). The objectives of this
article are to:
(1) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will
interfere with the operation of the POTW;
(2) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which will
pass through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters
or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW;
(3) Ensure that the quality of the wastewater treatment plant sludge is
maintained at a level which allows its use and disposal in
compliance with applicable statutes and regulations;
(4) Protect both POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater
and sludge in the course of their employment and protect the
general public;
(5) Promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge
from the POTW;
(6) Provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance and improvement of the POTW; and
(7) Enable the Town to comply with its VPDES permit conditions,
sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or
state laws to which the POTW is subject.
B. This article shall apply to all users of the POTW. The article authorizes
the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring,
compliance and enforcement activities; establishes administrative
review procedures; requires industrial user reporting; and provides for
the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from
the program established herein.
49.Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Article IV, Sewer Discharge Control,
adopted 9-22-1982 (Ch. 26 of the 1978 Code), as amended.
§ 167-22 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 167-23
157:221
§ 167-23. Administration.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the Town Manager and Director shall
administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers
granted to or duties imposed upon the Town Manager and Director may be
delegated by the Town Manager or Director to other Town personnel.
§ 167-24. Abbreviation.
The following abbreviations, when used in this article, shall have the
designated meanings:
BOD — Biochemical oxygen demand.
CFR — Code of Federal Regulations.
COD — Chemical oxygen demand.
EPA — United States Environmental Protection Agency.
gpd — Gallons per day.
mg/l — Milligrams per liter.
VPDES — Virginia pollutant discharge elimination system.
O&M — Operation and maintenance.
POTW — Publicly owned treatment works.
RCRA — Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
SIC — Standard industrial classifications.
SWDA — Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. § 6901, et seq.).
TSS — Total suspended solids.
USC — United States Code.
§ 167-25. Definitions.
A. Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated.
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the "Clean Water Act," as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251, et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The Department of Environmental Quality
of the Commonwealth of Virginia.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER —
If the user is a corporation:
The president, secretary, treasurer or a vice president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function or any
other person who performs similar policy or decisionmaking
functions for the corporation.
(a)
(1)
§ 167-23 HILLSVILLE CODE § 167-25
157:222
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure, five days at 20º centigrade, usually expressed as
a concentration (mg/1).
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL
STANDARD — Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits
promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c)
of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which apply to a specific category of
industrial users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N,
Parts 405-471.
COLOR — The optical density at the visual wavelength of maximum
absorption, relative to distilled water. One-hundred-percent
transmittance is equivalent to 0.0 optical density.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — The sample resulting from the combination of
individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an
increment of either flow or time.
CONTROL AUTHORITY — The Town of Hillsville or the Town Council of
Hillsville.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA — The United
States Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the
Regional Water Management Division Director or other duly authorized
official of said agency.
EXISTING SOURCE — Any source of discharge, the construction or
operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of
proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable
The manager of one or more manufacturing, production or
operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having
gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000 (in
second quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents
has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance
with corporate procedures.
(b)
If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner
or proprietor, respectively.
(2)
If the user is a federal, state or local governmental facility: a
director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the
operation and performance of the activities of the government
facility or their designee.
(3)
The individuals described in Subsection (1) to (3) above may
designate another authorized representative if the authorization
is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position
responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which
the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company, and the written
authorization is submitted to the Town.
(4)
§ 167-25 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 167-25
157:223
to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance
with Section 307 of the Act.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream without
regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time, not to
exceed 15 minutes.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE — The introduction of
pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under
Section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act.
INDUSTRIAL USER or USER — A source of indirect discharge.
INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT —
The maximum concentration (or loading) of a pollutant allowed to be
discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete
or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate
and the duration of the sampling event.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with
a discharge or discharges from other sources: inhibits or disrupts the
POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes,
use or disposal; and, therefore, is a cause of a violation of the POTW's
VPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal
in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions
or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local
regulations: Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act,
including Title II, commonly referred to as the "Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act" (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state
sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid
Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control
Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act.
MEDICAL WASTE — Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood
and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts,
contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated
laboratory wastes and dialysis wastes.
NEW SOURCE —
Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there
is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment
standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable
to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated
accordance with that section, provided that:
The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at
a site at which no other source is located; or
(a)
The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces
the process or production equipment that causes the discharge
of pollutants at an existing source; or
(b)
(1)
§ 167-25 HILLSVILLE CODE § 167-25
157:224
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used for cooling which
does not come into direct contact with any raw material intermediate
product, waste product or finished product.
PASS-THROUGH — A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of
the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in
conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a
cause of a violation of any requirement of the Town VPDES permit,
including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.
PERSON — Any individual partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity or any other legal entity; or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns. This definition includes all federal,
state and local governmental entities.
The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In
determining whether these are substantially independent,
factors such as the extent to which the new facility is
integrated with the plant and the extent to which the new
facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the
existing source, should be considered.
(c)
Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results
in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does
not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting
the criteria of Subsection (1)(b) or (c) above but otherwise alters,
replaces or adds to existing process or production equipment.
(2)
Construction of a new source as defined under this subsection has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
Begun or caused to begin as part of a continuous onsite
construction program:
Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
[1]
Significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or
facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly
or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
[2]
(a)
Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in
its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase
or contracts which can be terminated or modified without
substantial loss and contracts for feasibility, engineering and
design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under
this subsection.
(b)
(3)
§ 167-25 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 167-25
157:225
pH — A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in
standard units.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical
wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials,
heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt,
municipal agricultural and industrial wastes and certain characteristics
of wastewater (i.e., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD,
toxicity or odor).
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of introducing such
pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained
by physical, chemical or biological processes; by process changes; or
by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants
unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a
pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS — Prohibitive
discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards and local
limits.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED
DISCHARGES — Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain
substances; these prohibitions appear in § 167-26 of this article.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS OR POTW — A "treatment
works" as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292), which is
owned by the state or municipality. This definition includes any devices
or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and
reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature, and
any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. The
term also means the municipal entity having jurisdiction over the users
and responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the treatment
works.
SEPTIC TANK WASTE — Any sewage from holding tanks, such as
vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers and septic tanks.
SEWAGE — Human excrement and gray water (household showers,
dishwashing operations, etc.).
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER —
(1) A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
(2) A user that:
§ 167-25 HILLSVILLE CODE § 167-25
157:226
SLUG LOAD — Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which
could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in
§ 167-26 of this article, or any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic
nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a
noncustomary batch discharge.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) CODE — A
classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual
issued by the United States Office of Management and Budget, 1987.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting therefrom, including snowmelt.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of or is suspended in water, wastewater or other liquid, and
which is removable by laboratory filtering.
TOWN — The Town of Hillsville or the Town Council of Hillsville.
TOWN MANAGER — The person that has general charge and
management of the administrative affairs and work of the Town, under
control of Town Council.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — One of the 126 pollutants, or combination of
those pollutants, listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA
under the provision of Section 307 (33 U.S.C. § 1317) of the Act.
TREATMENT PLANT EFFLUENT — Any discharge of pollutants from
the POTW into waters of the state.
UTILITIES DIRECTOR OR DIRECTOR — The person designated by the
Town to supervise the operation of the POTW and who is charged with
certain duties and responsibilities by this article, or a duly authorized
representative.
Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process
wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact
cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater);
(a)
Contributes a process waste stream which makes up 5% or
more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity
of the POTW treatment plant; or
(b)
Is designated as such by the Town on the basis that it has
a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement.
(c)
Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in Subsection (2)
has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTWs
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement, the Town may at any time, on its own initiative or in
response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with
procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should
not be considered a significant industrial user.
(3)
§ 167-25 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 167-25
157:227
§ 167-26. Prohibited discharge standards.
WASTEWATER — Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and
sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial
and manufacturing facilities and institutions, whether treated or
untreated, which are contributed to the POTW.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT OR TREATMENT PLANT — That
portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment of sewage and
industrial waste.
B. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive or discretionary. The use of
the singular shall be construed to include the plural and the plural shall
include the singular as indicated by the context of its use.
A. General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced
into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass-through
or interference to normal treatment methods or creates a public
nuisance. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW
whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards
or any other national, state or local pretreatment standards or
requirement.
B. Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced
into the POTW the following pollutants, substances or wastewater.
(1) Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the municipal
wastewater collection and POTW, including, but not limited to,
wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140º F (60º
C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
(2) Wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 12.5 or
otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or
equipment.
(3) Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause
obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference, but in
no case solids greater than 2 inches or 5.1 centimeter(s) in any
dimension.
(4) Pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other
pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW or any related
operations or processes.
(5) Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150º F (65º C), or
which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting
in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the
temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed
104º F (40º C).
§ 167-25 HILLSVILLE CODE § 167-26
157:228
(6) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral
oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through.
(7) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems.
(8) Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the Town in accordance with § 167-31.4 of this
article.
(9) Noxious or malodrous liquids, gases, solids or other wastewater
which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, is
sufficient to create a public nuisance, a hazard to life or to prevent
entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair.
(10)Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to
the treatment plant's effluent thereby violating the Town's VPDES
permit.
(11)Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
(12) Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate,
deionized water, noncontact cooling water and unpolluted
industrial wastewater, any new or existing discharge to the POTW
that could cause any inflow or infiltration, unless specifically
authorized by the Town.
(13) Sludges, screenings or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes.
(14) Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the Town in a
wastewater discharge permit.
(15)Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources,
the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test.
(16) Detergents, surface active agents or other substances which may
cause excessive foaming the POTW.
(17) Fats, oils or greases of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations
greater than 100 mg/l.
(18)Wastewater causing two readings on an explosion hazard meter at
the point of discharge into the POTW or any point in the POTW of
more than 10% or any single reading over 10% of the lower
explosive limit of the meter.
§ 167-26 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 167-26
157:229
§ 167-27. Categorical pretreatment standards.
§ 167-28. Local limits.
(19)Wastewater with a chlorine demand sufficient enough to disrupt
any biological treatment of the POTW.
C. Pollutants, substances or wastewater prohibited by this section shall
not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be
discharged to the POTW.
D. All floor drains located in process or materials storage areas must
discharge to the user's pretreatment facility before connecting to the
POTW.
A. The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I,
Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 are hereby incorporated.
(1) Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in
terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in
wastewater, the Town may impose equivalent concentration or
mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c).
(2) When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the
Town shall impose an alternate limit using the combined waste
stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
(3) A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment
standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and
substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its
discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered
by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard.
(4) A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard
in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15.
B. State pretreatment standards.
(1) State requirements and limitations on pretreatment discharges
shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal
requirements and limitations or those in this article.
(2) The state standards and limitations shall apply in any case where
they are more stringent than the National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards.
A. The Town may apply local limits through issuance of industrial user
permits as provided in §§ 167-31.6 through 167-31.10 of this article.
The Town may apply local limits based on EPA categorical pretreatment
standards, water quality standards or criteria, treatment plant process
inhibitions or sludge disposal standards as necessary to comply with
§ 167-26 HILLSVILLE CODE § 167-28
157:230
§ 167-29. More stringent requirements.
The Town reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater
discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges
to the POTW.
§ 167-30. Dilution.
No industrial user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in
any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute
for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation
unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or
requirement. The Town may impose mass limitations on industrial users
which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is
appropriate.
§ 167-31. Protection of capacity for existing users.
The Town shall not issue a permit for any connection to the Town's
treatment works or treatment facilities unless there is sufficient capacity,
not legally committed to other users, in the treatment works and treatment
facilities to adequately treat the quantity of wastewater for the requested
connection. The Town may permit such a connection if there are legally
binding commitments to the needed capacity.
§ 167-31.1. Pretreatment facilities.
Industrial users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply
with this article and shall achieve compliance with all categorical
pretreatment standards, local limits and the prohibitions set out in § 167-26
above within the time limitations specified by the EPA, the state or the
Town, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance
the general prohibitions, against pass-through, interference and sludge
contamination in 40 CFR Part 403 and 9-VAC 25-31-10 et seq., Part VII.
B. The following pollutant limits are established to protect the POTW. No
person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the
following:
(1) 240 mg/l BOD5.
(2) Hydrogen sulfide (liquid): 1.0 mg/l.
(3) 100 mg/l oil and grease (petroleum or mineral oil products).
(4) 240 mg/l total suspended solids.
C. The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged
to the POTW. The Town may impose mass limitations in addition to or in
place of the concentration based limitations above.
§ 167-28 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 167-31.1
157:231
shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed
plans describing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall
be submitted to the Town for review and shall be acceptable to the Town
before construction of the facilities. The review of such plans and operating
procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of
modifying the facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to
the Town under the provisions of this article.
§ 167-31.2. Additional pretreatment measures.
§ 167-31.3. Accidental discharge/slug control plans.
At least once every two years, the Town shall evaluate whether each user
needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The Town may require
any user to develop, submit for approval and implement such a plan.
Alternatively, the Town may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental
discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:
A. Whenever deemed necessary, the Town may require industrial users to
restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain
wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or
consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from
industrial waste streams and such other conditions as may be necessary
to protect the POTW and determine the industrial user's compliance
with the requirements of this article.
B. The Town may require any person discharging into the POTW to install
and maintain, on his/her property and at his/her expense, a suitable
storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A
wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.
C. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion
of the Town, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater
containing excessive amounts of grease and oil or sand; except that
such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All
interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the Town
and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned and repaired
regularly, as needed, by the user at his expense.
D. Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection
meter.
A. Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;
B. Description of stored chemicals;
C. Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of any accidental or
slug discharge. As required by § 167-31.24 of this article, such
§ 167-31.1 HILLSVILLE CODE § 167-31.3
157:232
§ 167-31.4. Hauled wastewater.
§ 167-31.5. Vandalization of POTW.
No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface, tamper with or prevent access to any structure,
notification must also be given for any discharge which would violate
any of the prohibited discharges in § 167-26 of this article; and
D. Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection
and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials,
loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker
training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures
for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or
measures and equipment for emergency response.
A. Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations
designated by the Town, and at such times as are established by the
Town. Such waste shall not violate §§ 167-26 through 167-31 of this
article or any other requirements established by the Town. The Town
may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge
permits.
B. The Town shall require haulers of industrial waste to obtain wastewater
discharge permits. The Town may require generators of hauled
industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The Town also
may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of
hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of this
article.
C. Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations
designated by the Town. No load may be discharged without prior
consent of the Town. The Town may collect samples of each hauled load
to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The Town may require
the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior
to discharge.
D. Any person(s) discharging waste from a camper or any RV type vehicle
at any site other than a site that is identified for this purpose shall be
deemed in violation of this article, and subject to the sanctions set out
in §§ 167-31.37 through 167-31.53 of this article.
E. Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste tracking form for every
load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of
the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names
and addresses of sources of waste and volume and characteristics of
waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected
waste constituents and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous
wastes.
§ 167-31.3 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 167-31.5
157:233
appurtenance or equipment or other part of the POTW. Any person found
in violation of this requirement shall be subject to the sanctions set out in
§§ 167-31.37 through 167-31.53 of this article.
§ 167-31.6. Wastewater analysis.
When required by the Town a user must submit information on the nature
and characteristics of its wastewater by completing a wastewater survey
within 60 days of the request. The Director is authorized to prepare a form
for this purpose and may periodically require industrial users to update this
information. Failure to complete this survey shall be reasonable grounds for
terminating service to the user and shall be considered a violation of this
article.
§ 167-31.7. Wastewater discharge permit requirements.
A. Permit required; violation of permit.
(1) No user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first
obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the Town, except
that a user that has filed a timely application pursuant to
Subsection B of this article may continue to discharge for the time
period specified therein.
(2) The Town may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge
permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this article.
(3) Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge
permit shall be deemed a violation of this article and subjects the
wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in
§§ 167-31.37 through 167-31.53 of this article. Obtaining a
wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its
obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment
standards or requirements or with any other requirements of
federal, state and local law.
B. Wastewater discharge permitting existing connections. Any user
required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging
wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this article and
who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within 60
days after said date, apply to the Town for a wastewater discharge
permit in accordance with § 167-31.8 of this article, and shall not cause
or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 60 days of the
effective date of this article except in accordance with a wastewater
discharge permit issued by the Town.
C. Wastewater discharge permitting new connections. Any user required
to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or
recommence discharging industrial wastes into the POTW must obtain
a wastewater discharge permit prior to the beginning or recommencing
of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit,
§ 167-31.5 HILLSVILLE CODE § 167-31.7
157:234
§ 167-31.8. Contents of wastewater discharge permit application.
in accordance with § 167-31.8 of this article, must be filed at least
30 days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or
recommence.
D. Wastewater discharge permitting extrajurisdictional industrial users.
(1) The Town may require any existing significant industrial user
located beyond the Town limits to submit a wastewater discharge
permit application, in accordance with § 167-31.8 below, within 30
days of the effective date of this article. New significant industrial
users located beyond the Town limits shall submit such applications
to the Town 90 days prior to any proposed discharge into the POTW.
(2) Alternately, the Town may enter into an agreement with the
neighboring jurisdiction in which the significant industrial user is
located to provide for the implementation and enforcement of
pretreatment program requirements against said industrial user.
A. All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit
a permit application. The Town may require all users to submit as part
of an application the following information:
(1) All information required by § 167-31.19B of this article;
(2) Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or
stored at the facility which are or could accidentally or intentionally
be discharged to the POTW;
(3) Number and type of employees, hours of operation and proposed or
actual hours of operation of the POTW;
(4) Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and
rate of production;
(5) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day);
(6) The site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and
details to show all sewers, floor drains and appurtenances by size,
location and elevation, and all points of discharge;
(7) Time and duration of discharges; and
(8) Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the Town to
evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application.
B. Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be
returned to the user for revision.
§ 167-31.7 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 167-31.9
157:235
§ 167-31.9. Application signatories and certification.
All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be
signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following
certification statement:
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a
system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and
evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person
or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible
for gathering the information, the information submitted is to the best of
my knowledge and belief true, accurate and complete. I am aware that
there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including
the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations."
§ 167-31.10. Decisions on wastewater discharge permit
applications.
The Town will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require
additional information. Within 30 days of receipt of a complete wastewater
discharge permit application, the Town will determine whether or not to
issue a wastewater discharge permit. The Town may deny any application
for a wastewater discharge permit.
§ 167-31.11. Duration of wastewater discharge permit.
A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period,
not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater
discharge permit may be issued for a period of less than five years, at the
discretion of the Town. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a
specific date upon which it will expire.
§ 167-31.12. Contents of wastewater discharge permit.
A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed
reasonably necessary by the Town to prevent pass through or interference,
protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's
effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management
and disposal and protect against damage to the POTW.
A. Wastewater discharge permits must contain:
(1) A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration,
which in no event shall exceed five years;
(2) A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is
nontransferable without prior notification to and approval from the
Town, in accordance with § 167-31.15 of this article, and provisions
for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing
wastewater discharge permit;
§ 167-31.9 HILLSVILLE CODE § 167-31.12
157:236
(3) Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards;
(4) Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and
recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an
identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location,
sampling frequency and sample type based on federal, state and
local law; and
(5) Statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of
pretreatment standards and requirements and any applicable
compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for
compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state or
local law.
B. Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to,
the following conditions:
(1) Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge and/or requirements for flow regulation and
equalization;
(2) Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control or construction of appropriate containment
devices designed to reduce, eliminate or prevent the introduction
of pollutants into the treatment works;
(3) Requirements for the development and implementation of spill
control plans or other special conditions, including management
practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental,
unanticipated or nonroutine discharges;
(4) Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to
reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
(5) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;
(6) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment;
(7) A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit
does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with
all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including
those which become effective during the term of the wastewater
discharge permit; and
(8) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Town to ensure
compliance with this article and state and federal laws, rules and
regulations.
§ 167-31.12 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 167-31.13
157:237
§ 167-31.13. Wastewater discharge permit appeals.
The Town shall provide public notice of the issuance of a wastewater
discharge permit. Any person, including the user, may petition the Town to
reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of its
issuance.
§ 167-31.14. Modification of wastewater discharge permit.
A. Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a
waiver of the administrative appeal.
B. In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater
discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection
and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater
discharge permit.
C. The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be
stayed pending the appeal.
D. If the Town fails to act within 30 days, a request for reconsideration
shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater
discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to
modify a wastewater discharge permit, shall be considered final
administrative action for purposes of judicial review.
E. Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative
wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint
with the General District Court for Carroll County within 30 days of the
final administrative action. (Title 15, § 15.1-85550)
A. The Town may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause,
including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
(1) To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local
pretreatment standards or requirements.
(2) To address significant alterations or additions to the user's
operation, processes or wastewater volume or character since the
time of wastewater discharge permit issuance.
(3) A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or
permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge.
(4) Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat
to the Town's POTW, Town personnel or the receiving waters.
(5) Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge
permit.
50.Editor's Note: Code of Virginia, § 15.1-855, was repealed by the Acts of 1997, c. 587,
effective 12-1-1997.
§ 167-31.13 HILLSVILLE CODE § 167-31.14
157:238
§ 167-31.15. Transfer of wastewater discharge permit.
§ 167-31.16. Revocation of wastewater discharge permit.
(6) Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required
reporting.
(7) Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13.
(8) To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater
discharge permit.
(9) To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new
owner or operator.
B. The filing of a request by the permittee for a wastewater discharge
permit modification does not stay any wastewater discharge permit
condition.
A. Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or
operator only if the permittee gives at least 30 days' advance notice to
the Town and the Town approves the wastewater discharge permit
transfer. The notice to the Town must include a written certification by
the new owner or operator which:
(1) States that the new owner or operator has no immediate intent to
change the facility's operations and processes;
(2) Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
(3) Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing
wastewater discharge permit.
B. Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater
discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer.
A. The Town may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause,
including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
(1) Failure to notify the Town of significant changes to the wastewater
prior to the changed discharge;
(2) Failure to provide prior notification to the Town of changed
condition pursuant to § 167-31.23 of this article;
(3) Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application;
(4) Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
(5) Tampering with monitoring equipment;
§ 167-31.14 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 167-31.16
157:239
§ 167-31.17. Reissuance of wastewater discharge permit.
A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for
wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit
application, in accordance with § 167-31.8 of this article, a minimum of 90
days prior to the expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge
permit.
§ 167-31.18. Regulation of waste receivd from other jurisdictions.
(6) Refusing to allow the Town timely access to the facility premises
and records;
(7) Failure to meet effluent limitations;
(8) Failure to pay fines;
(9) Failure to pay sewer charges;
(10) Failure to meet compliance schedules;
(11) Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater
discharge permit application;
(12) Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted
facility; or
(13) Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement or any
terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this article.
B. Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of
operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge
permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new
wastewater discharge permit to that user.
A. If another municipality or user located within another municipality
contributes wastewater to the POTW, the Town may enter into an
intermunicipal agreement with the contributing municipality.
B. Prior to entering into an agreement described in Subsection A above,
the Town shall request the following information from the contributing
municipality:
(1) A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged
to the POTW by the contributing municipality;
(2) An inventory of all users located within the contributing
municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and
(3) Such other information as the Director may deem necessary.
C. An intermunicipal agreement, as described in Subsection A above, shall
contain the following conditions.
§ 167-31.16 HILLSVILLE CODE § 167-31.18
157:240
§ 167-31.19. Baseline monitoring reports.
(1) A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer
use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this article and local
limits which are at least as stringent as those set out in § 167-28 of
this article. The requirements shall specify that such ordinance and
limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the
Town's ordinance or local limits;
(2) A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised
user inventory on at least an annual basis;
(3) A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation
activities, including wastewater discharge permit issuance,
inspection and sampling and enforcement, will be conducted by the
contributing municipality; which of these activities will be
conducted by the Town; and which of these activities will be
conducted jointly by the contributing municipality and the Town;
(4) A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the
Town with access to all information that the contributing
municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities;
(5) Limits on the nature, quality and volume of the contributing
municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the
POTW;
(6) Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's
discharge;
(7) A provision ensuring the Town access to the facilities of users
located within the contributing municipality's jurisdictional
boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling and any other
duties deemed necessary by the Town; and
(8) A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of
the intermunicipal agreement.
A. Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical
pretreatment standard or the administrative decision on a category
determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing
categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to
the POTW shall submit to the Town a report which contains the
information listed in Subsection B below. At least 90 days prior to
commencement of their discharge, new sources and sources that
become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an
applicable categorical standard shall submit to the Town a report which
contains the information listed in Subsection B below. A new source
shall also be required to report the method of pretreatment it intends to
use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source shall also
give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be
discharged.
§ 167-31.18 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 167-31.19
157:241
B. Users described above shall submit the information set forth below:
(1) Identifying information: the name and address of the facility,
including the name of the operator and owner.
(2) Environmental permits: a list of any environmental control permits
held by or for the facility.
(3) Description of operations: a brief description of the nature, average
rate of production and standard industrial classifications of the
operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should
include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of
discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes.
(4) Flow measurement: information showing the measured average
daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from
regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to
allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR
403.6(e).
(5) Measurement of pollutants.
(a) The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process.
(b) The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration and/or mass, where required by the standard or
by the Town, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each
regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum and longterm
average concentrations or mass, where required, shall be
reported. The sample shall be representative of daily
operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with
procedures set out in § 167-31.29 of this article.
(c) Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures
set out in § 167-31.30 of this article.
(6) Certification: a statement reviewed by the user's authorized
representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating
whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent
basis and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance, O
and M, and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the
pretreatment standards and requirements.
(7) Compliance schedule: if additional pretreatment and/or O and M
will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest
schedule by which the user will provide such additional
pretreatment and/or O and M. The completion date established for
the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule
pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in
§ 167-31.20 of this article.
§ 167-31.19 HILLSVILLE CODE § 167-31.19
157:242
§ 167-31.20. Compliance schedule progress report.
The following conditions shall apply to the schedule required by
§ 167-31.19B(7) of this article.
§ 167-31.21. Report on compliance with categorical pretreatment
standard deadline.
Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user
subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to
the Town a report containing the information described in § 167-31.19B(4)
through (6) of this article. For users subject to equivalent mass or
concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40
CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's
long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge
per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall
include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling
period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance
with § 167-31.9 of this article.
§ 167-31.22. Periodic compliance reports.
(8) Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be
signed and certified in accordance with § 167-31.9 of this article.
A. The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for
the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the
user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (Such events
include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing
preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components,
commencing and completing construction and beginning and
conducting routine operation.);
B. No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months;
C. The user shall submit a progress report to the Town no later than 14
days following each date in the schedule and the final date of
compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with
the increment of progress, the reason for any delay and, if appropriate,
the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule;
and
D. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress
reports to the Town.
A. All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the
Town, but in no case less than twice per year (in June and December),
§ 167-31.19 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 167-31.22
157:243
§ 167-31.23. Report of changed conditions.
Each user must notify the Town of any planned significant changes to the
user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality or volume
of its wastewater at least 30 days before the change.
§ 167-31.24. New or increased discharges.
All industrial users shall promptly notify the POTW in advance of any new
or increased discharge. The Town may deny or condition new or increased
contributions of pollutants or changes in the nature of pollutants to the
POTW by industrial users where such contributions do not meet applicable
pretreatment standards and regulations or where such contributions would
cause the POTW to violate its VPDES permit.
§ 167-31.25. Reports of potential problems.
submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants
in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and
the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the
reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and
certified in accordance with § 167-31.9 of this article.
B. All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge.
Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean and maintained in good working order at
all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good
working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample
results are unrepresentative of its discharge.
C. If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors
any pollutant more frequently than required by the Town, using the
procedures prescribed in § 167-31.30 of this article, the results of this
monitoring shall be included in the report.
A. The Town may require the user to submit such information as may be
deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the
submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under
§ 167-31.8 of this article.
B. The Town may issue a wastewater discharge permit under § 167-31.10
of this article or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under
§ 167-31.14 of this article in response to changed conditions or
anticipated changed conditions.
C. For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are
not limited to, flow increases of 20% or greater and the discharge of any
previously unreported pollutants.
A. In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental
discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a
noncustomary batch discharge or a slug load, that may cause potential
§ 167-31.22 HILLSVILLE CODE § 167-31.25
157:244
§ 167-31.26. Reports from unpermitted users.
All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide
appropriate reports to the Town as the Town may require.
§ 167-31.27. Notice of violation; repeat sampling and reporting.
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify
the Town within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall
also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat
analysis to the Town within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation.
The user is not required to resample if the POTW is monitoring at the user's
facility at least once a month or if the POTW samples between the user's
initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling.
§ 167-31.28. Discharge of hazardous waste.
The Town does not accept the discharge of hazardous waste into the POTW.
§ 167-31.29. Analytical requirements.
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as
part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be
performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part
136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment
standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical
techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be
performed in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA.
§ 167-31.30. Sample collection.
problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify
the Town of the incident. This notification shall include the location
of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and
corrective actions taken by the industrial user.
B. Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived
by the Town, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of
the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent
similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user
of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as
a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources or any other damage
to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any
fines, penalties or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this
article.
C. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of
a discharge described in Subsection A above. Employers shall ensure
that all employees who may cause such a discharge to occur are advised
of the emergency notification procedure.
§ 167-31.25 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 167-31.30
157:245
§ 167-31.31. Timing.
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of
the report shall govern.
§ 167-31.32. Recordkeeping.
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall retain
and make available for inspection and copying all records of information
obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this article and
any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring
activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements.
Records shall include the date, exact place, method and time of sampling
and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses
were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques
or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall
remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be
automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the
user or the Town or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer
retention period by the Town.
§ 167-31.33. Right of entry; inspection and sampling.
The Town shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine
whether the user is complying with all requirements of this article and any
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow
the Town ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
inspection sampling, records examination and copying and the performance
of any additional duties.
A. Except as indicated in Subsection B below, the user must collect
wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection
techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the
Town may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a
minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this
will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In
addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with
instantaneous discharge limits.
B. Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides
and volatile organic chemicals must be obtained using grab collection
techniques.
A. Where a user has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user
shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that,
upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the Town,
state and EPA will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes
of performing specific responsibilities.
§ 167-31.30 HILLSVILLE CODE § 167-31.33
157:246
§ 167-31.34. Search warrants.
If the Town has been refused access to a building, structure or property or
any part thereof and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that
there may be a violation of this article or that there is a need to inspect
and/or sample the Town designed to verify compliance with this article or
any permit or order issued hereunder or to protect the overall public health,
safety and welfare of the community, then the Town may seek issuance of a
search warrant from the appropriate authorities.
§ 167-31.35. Confidential informaiton.
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater
discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits and
monitoring programs and from the Town's inspection and sampling
activities shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the
user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the Town that the release of such information would divulge information,
processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets
under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of
submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated
B. The Town, state and EPA shall have the right to set up on the user's
property or require installation of such devices as are necessary to
conduct sampling and/or metering of the quality and/or quantity of the
user's discharge into the POTW. The Town reserves the right to use the
data from such devices for billing the user. Any device used for billing
shall be calibrated and maintained as outlined in Subsection C.
C. The Town may require the user to monitoring equipment as necessary.
The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained
at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its
own expense. All devices used by the user to measure wastewater flow
and/or quality shall be calibrated at the manufacturer's interval or at
intervals specified by the Town to ensure their accuracy. The user shall
submit to the Town a copy of the calibration record(s) within 30 days of
the calibration date. Failure to comply with any of these requirements
may result in the Town rejecting the information provided by the
monitoring equipment for any reporting or billing purpose, until the
requirements of this article are satisfied. The Town reserves the right to
have a qualified technician of its own choosing perform spot
calibrations. If the spot calibrations indicate an error greater than 5%,
the calibration will be at the user's expense.
D. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by
the user at the written or verbal request of the Town and shall not be
replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user.
E. Unreasonable delays in allowing the Town access to the user's premises
shall be a violation of this article.
§ 167-31.33 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 167-31.35
157:247
by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held
confidential the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or
secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public,
but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental
agencies for uses related to the VPDES program or pretreatment program
and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report.
Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other effluent data as
defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information
and will be available to the public without restriction.
§ 167-31.36. Publication of industrial users in significant
noncompliance.
The Town shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published
in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of the users which,
during the previous 12 months were in significant noncompliance with
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant
noncompliance shall mean:
A. Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those
in which 66% or more of wastewater measurements taken during a sixmonth
period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the
same pollutant parameter by any amount;
B. Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each
pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the
product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by
the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease and 1.2
for all other pollutants except pH);
C. Any other discharge violation that the Town believes has caused, alone
or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through,
including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general
public;
D. Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to
the public or to the environment or has resulted in the Town's exercise
of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
E. Failure to provide within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction
or attaining final compliance;
F. Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any required
reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance
with categorical pretreatment standards and deadlines, periodic selfmonitoring
reports and reports on compliance with compliance
schedules;
G. Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
§ 167-31.35 HILLSVILLE CODE § 167-31.36
157:248
§ 167-31.37. Notification of violation.
When the Town finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any
provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Town
may serve upon said user a written notice of violation. Within 30 days of
the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the
satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required
actions, shall be submitted by the user to the Town. Submission of this plan
in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occur before or
after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the
authority of the Town to take any action, including emergency actions or
any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation.
§ 167-31.38. Consent orders.
The Town may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary
compliance or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any
user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific
action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a
time period also specified by the document. Such documents shall have
the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant
to §§ 167-31.40 and 167-31.41 of this article and shall be judicially
enforceable.
§ 167-31.39. Show cause hearing.
The Town may order a user which has violated or continues to violate any
provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder or any other pretreatment standard or requirement to appear
before the Town and show cause why the proposed enforcement action
should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time
and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons
for such action and a request that the user show cause why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall
be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt
requested) at least 10 days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served
on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not
be a bar against or prerequisite for taking any other action against the user.
§ 167-31.40. Compliance orders.
When the Town finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any
provision of this article a wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Town
may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that
the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does
H. Any other violation(s) which the Town determines will adversely affect
the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.
§ 167-31.36 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 167-31.40
157:249
not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be
discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related
appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders may
also contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including
additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize
the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order
may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment
standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of
liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a
compliance order shall not be a bar against or a prerequisite for taking any
other action against the user.
§ 167-31.41. Cease and desist orders.
§ 167-31.42. Administrative fines.
A. When the Town finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any
provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder or any other pretreatment standard or requirement or that
the user's past violations are likely to recur, the Town may issue an
order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and
directing the user to:
(1) Immediately comply with all requirements; and
(2) Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation,
including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
B. Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against or a
prerequisite for taking any other action against the user.
A. When the Town finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any
provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the
Town may fine such user in an amount not to exceed $2,500. The Town
also retains the option to impose a surcharge on any user that violates
any provision of this article. The surcharge shall be applied to the user's
sewer bill covering the date(s) in which the violation occurred. The
surcharge amount is solely at the discretion of the Town and may be a
percentage up charge of the user's bill. In the event of repeated similar
violations, the surcharge may be incremental with each repeat
violation. Such fines or surcharges shall be assessed on a per-violation,
per-day basis. In the case of monthly or other long-term average
discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period
of violation.
B. Unpaid charges, fines and penalties shall, after 30 calendar days, be
assessed an additional penalty of 10% of the unpaid balance, and
interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of 1% per month. A lien against
§ 167-31.40 HILLSVILLE CODE § 167-31.42
157:250
§ 167-31.43. Emergency suspensions.
§ 167-31.44. Termination of discharge.
the user's property will be sought for unpaid charges, fines and
penalties.
C. Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written appeal for the
Town to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount
within 30 days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit,
the Town Council shall consider the appeal at the next regularly
scheduled Council meeting. In the event that the user's appeal is
successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto,
shall be returned to the user. The Town may add the costs of preparing
administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the
fine.
D. Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against or a
prerequisite for taking any other action against the user.
A. The Town may immediately suspend a user's discharge after informal
notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an
actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or
cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or
welfare of persons. The Town may also immediately suspend a user's
discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to
interfere with the operation of the POTW or which presents or may
present an endangerment to the environment.
(1) Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately
stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a users failure to
immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the
Town may take such steps as deemed necessary, including
immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or
minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream or
endangerment to any individuals. The Town may allow the user to
recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the Town that the period of endangerment has
passed, unless the termination proceedings in § 167-31.44 of this
article are initiated against the user.
(2) A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written
statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and
the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the Town,
prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under
§§ 167-31.39 or 167-31.44 of this article.
B. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior
to any emergency suspension under this section.
§ 167-31.42 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 167-31.44
157:251
§ 167-31.45. Injunctive relief.
When the Town finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any
provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Town
may petition the Carroll County General District Court through the Town's
Attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as
appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the
wastewater discharge permit, order or other requirement imposed by this
article on activities of the user. The Town may also seek such other action
as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief including a requirement
for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive
relief shall not be a bar against or a prerequisite for taking any other action
against a user.
§ 167-31.46. Violations and penalties.
A. In addition to the provisions in § 167-31.16 of this article, any user who
violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination.
(1) Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
(2) Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
(3) Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge;
(4) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose
of inspection, monitoring or sampling; or
(5) Violation of the pretreatment standards in §§ 167-26 through
167-31 of this article.
B. Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge
and be offered an opportunity to show cause under § 167-31.39 of this
article why the proposed action should not be taken.
C. Exercise of this option by the Town shall not be a bar to or a
prerequisite for taking any other action against the user.
A. Civil penalties.
(1) A user who has violated or continues to violate any provision of this
article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder
or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable
to the Town for a maximum civil penalty of $2,500 per violation per
day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge
limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the
violation.
(2) The Town may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs and
other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including
§ 167-31.44 HILLSVILLE CODE § 167-31.46
157:252
§ 167-31.47. Remedies to be nonexclusive.
The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The Town may
take any, all or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant
user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in
accordance with the Town's enforcement response plan. However, the Town
may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant.
Further, the Town is empowered to take more than one enforcement action
against any noncompliant user.
sampling and monitoring expenses and the cost of any actual
damages incurred by the Town.
(3) In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into
account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to,
the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and
duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the
user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance
history of the user and any other factor as justice requires.
(4) Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against or a
prerequisite for taking any other action against a user.
B. Criminal prosecution.
(1) A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this
article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder
or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor, punishable by a fine
of not more than $2,500 per violation per day or imprisonment for
not more than 12 months in jail, or both.
(2) A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into
the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor and be subject
to a penalty of not more than $2,500 or be subject to imprisonment
for not more than 12 months in jail, or both. This penalty shall be in
addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property
damage available under state law.
(3) A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations
or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other
documentation filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this
article, wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or
who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any
monitoring device or method required under this article shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor and be punished by
a fine of not more than $2,500 per violation, per day, or
imprisonment for not more than 12 months in jail, or both.
§ 167-31.46 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 167-31.48
157:253
§ 167-31.48. Performance bonds.
The Town may decline to reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user
which has failed to comply with the provisions of this article, a previous
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such user first files a
satisfactory bond, payable to the Town, in a sum not to exceed a value
determined by the Town to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance.
§ 167-31.49. Liability insurance.
The Town may decline to reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any
user who has failed to comply with any provision of this article, a previous
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user first submits proof
that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair
damage to the POTW caused by its discharge.
§ 167-31.50. Water supply severance.
Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this
article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder or any
other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may
be severed. Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has
satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply.
§ 167-31.51. Violation to be public nuisance.
A violation of any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated
as directed by the Town. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall
be subject to the provisions of the Town Code, Chapter 97, governing
such nuisances, including reimbursing the Town for any costs incurred in
removing, abating or remedying said nuisance.
§ 167-31.52. Informant rewards.
The Town is authorized to pay up to $1,000 for information leading to the
discovery of noncompliance by a user. In the event that the information
provided results in a civil penalty (or an administrative fine) levied against
the user, the Town may disperse up to 50% of the collected fine or penalty to
the informant. However, a single reward payment may not exceed $1,000.
§ 167-31.53. Contractor listing.
Users which have not achieved consistent compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements are not eligible to receive a
contractual award for the sale of goods or services to the Town. Existing
contracts for the sale of goods or services to the Town held by a user found
§ 167-31.48 HILLSVILLE CODE § 167-31.53
157:254
to be in significant noncompliance with pretreatment standards may be
terminated at the discretion of the Town.
§ 167-31.54. Upsets.
A. For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident
in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the
reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include
noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly
designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of
preventive maintenance or careless or improper operation.
B. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the
requirements of Subsection C are met.
C. A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall
demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating
logs or other relevant evidence that:
(1) An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
(2) The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation
and maintenance procedures; and
(3) The user has submitted the following information to the Town
within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (If this information
is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within
five days):
(a) A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
(b) The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times
or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is
expected to continue; and
(c) Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
D. In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
E. Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any
claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance
with categorical pretreatment standards.
F. Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary
to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
§ 167-31.53 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 167-31.54
157:255
§ 167-31.55. Prohibited discharge standards.
A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought
against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in § 167-26A of
this article or the specific prohibitions in § 167-26B(1) through (19) of this
article if it can prove that it did not know or have reason to know that
its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources,
would cause pass-through or interference and that either:
§ 167-31.56. Bypass.
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This
requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the
primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or
fails.
A. A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in
compliance with each limit directly prior to and during the passthrough
or interference; or
B. No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in
nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the Town
was regularly in compliance with its VPDES permit, and in the case of
interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal
requirements.
A. Terms defined.
(1) "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of waste streams from
any portion of a user's treatment.
(2) "Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to
property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to
become inoperable or substantial and permanent loss of natural
resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the
absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean
economic loss caused by delays in production.
B. A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it
also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These
bypasses are not subject to the provision of Subsections C and D of this
section.
C. Notification of bypass.
(1) If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit
prior notice to the Town, at least 10 days before the date of the
bypass, if possible.
(2) A user shall submit oral notice to the Town of an unanticipated
bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24
§ 167-31.54 HILLSVILLE CODE § 167-31.56
157:256
§ 167-31.57. Wastewater treatment rates.
Wastewater treatment rates may be adopted and changed as deemed
necessary by the Town's governing body.
§ 167-31.58. Pretreatment charges and fees.
The Town may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting
up and operating the Town's pretreatment program which may include:
hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written
submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the
user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall
contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration
of the bypass, including exact dates and and times, if the bypass
has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to
continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and
prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The Town may waive the
written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been
received within 24 hours.
D. Approval of bypass.
(1) Bypass is prohibited, and the Town may take enforcement action
against a user for a bypass unless:
(a) Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury
or severe property damage;
(b) There was no feasible alternative to the bypass, such as the use
of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes
or maintenance during normal periods of equipment
downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup
equipment should have been installed in the exercise of
reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which
occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or
preventive maintenance; and
(c) The user submitted notices as required under Subsection C of
this section.
(2) The Town may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its
adverse effects, if the Town determines that it will meet the three
conditions listed in Subsection D(1) of this section.
A. Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications, including the cost
of processing such applications;
B. Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures, including
the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge and reviewing
monitoring reports submitted by users;
§ 167-31.56 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 167-31.58
157:257
C. Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures
and construction;
D. Fees for filing appeals; and
E. Other fees as the Town may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters
covered by this article and are separate from all other fees, fines and
penalties chargeable by the Town.
§ 167-31.58 HILLSVILLE CODE § 167-31.58
157:258
ARTICLE V
Cross-Connection Control and Backflow Prevention
[Adopted 8-8-1984 (Ch. 32 of the 1978 Code)]
§ 167-32. Adoption of standards. [Amended 2-27-2017]
The Town of Hillsville hereby adopts by reference Article 4, Cross-
Connection Control and Backflow Prevention Control in Waterworks,
Commonwealth of Virginia Waterworks Regulations in conjunction with The
Town of Hillsville Cross Connection Control Program Guidelines.
§ 167-33. Definitions. [Amended 11-11-1996]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BACKFLOW — The flow of contaminants, pollutants, process fluids, used
water, untreated waters, chemicals, gases and nonpotable waters into any
part of a waterworks.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE — Any approved device, method or type
of construction intended to prevent backflow into a waterworks.
CONSUMER — The owner or person in control of any premises supplied by
or in any manner connected with waterworks.
CONSUMER'S WATER SYSTEM — Any water system located on the
consumer's premises, supplied by or in any manner connected to a
waterworks.
CONTAMINATION — Any introduction into pure water of microorganisms,
wastes, wastewater, undesirable chemicals or gases.
CROSS-CONNECTION — Any connection or structural arrangement, direct
or indirect, to the waterworks whereby backflow can occur.
HEALTH HAZARD — Any condition, device or practice in a waterworks or
its operation that creates or may create a danger to the health and wellbeing
of the water consumer.
POLLUTION — The presence of any foreign substance (chemical, physical,
radiological or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to
constitute an unnecessary risk or impair the usefulness of the water.
POLLUTION HAZARD — A condition through which an aesthetically
objectionable or degrading material may enter the waterworks or a
consumer's water system.
PURE WATER or POTABLE WATER — Water fit for human consumption and
use which is sanitary and normally free of minerals, organic substances
and toxic agents in excess of reasonable amounts for domestic usage in
the area served and normally adequate in supply for the minimum health
requirement of the persons served.
§ 167-32 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 167-33
157:259
REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE —
A device containing a minimum of two independently acting check valves
together with an automatically operated pressure differential relief valve
located between the two check valves. During normal flow and at the
cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two checks shall be
less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the
differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to
maintain the pressure between the check valves at less than the supply
pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shutoff valves located at
each end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with properly located
test cocks. These devices must be of the approved type.
SERVICE CONNECTION — The terminal end of a service line from the
waterworks. If a meter is installed at the end of the service, then "service
connection" means the downstream end of the meter.
SYSTEM HAZARD — A condition posing an actual, or threat of, damage to
the physical properties of the waterworks or a consumer's water system.
USED WATER — Any water supplied by a water purveyor from waterworks
to a consumer's water system after it has passed through the service
connection.
WATER PURVEYOR — An individual, group of individuals, partnership,
firm, association, institution, corporation, municipal corporation, county or
authority which supplies water to any person within this state from or by
means of any waterworks.
WATERWORKS — All structures and appliances used in connection with
the collection, storage, purification and treatment of water for drinking
or domestic use and the distribution thereof to the public or residential
consumers.
§ 167-34. Inspections. [Amended 2-27-2017]
It shall be the duty of the Town of Hillsville to cause inspections to be
made of properties served by the waterworks where cross-connection with
the waterworks is deemed possible. Such inspections shall be performed
annually. The owner of a backflow prevention device shall hire a certified
backflow prevention tester to do this inspection and report the results to
the Town of Hillsville. A certified report by the tester will be accepted.
The frequency of inspections and reinspections, based on potential health
hazards involved, shall be established by the Town of Hillsville in the Cross-
Connection Control and Backflow Prevention Program and as approved by
the Virginia Department of Health. Frequency of inspections shall not be
less than annually.
§ 167-35. Right of entry.
The representative of the Town of Hillsville shall have the right to enter at
any reasonable time properties served by a connection to the waterworks
of the Town of Hillsville for the purpose of inspecting the piping system
or systems for cross-connections. Upon request, the owner or occupants of
§ 167-33 HILLSVILLE CODE § 167-35
157:260
property served shall furnish to the inspection agency pertinent information
regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The refusal of
such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed
evidence of the presence of cross-connections.
§ 167-36. Denial of service. [Amended 2-27-2017]
The water purveyor may deny or discontinue the water service to a
consumer if the required backflow prevention device is not installed. If it
is found that the device(s) has been removed or bypassed or if the crossconnection
exists on the premises, if the device has not been and passed
an annual inspection, or if the pressure in the waterworks is lowered below
10 psi gauge, the purveyor shall take positive action to ensure that the
waterworks is adequately protected at all times. Water service to such
premises shall not be restored until the deficiencies have been corrected
or eliminated in accordance with Commonwealth of Virginia Waterworks
Regulations and to the satisfaction of the purveyor.
§ 167-37. Protection of potable water. [Amended 11-11-1996]
The potable water made available on the properties served by the
waterworks shall be protected from possible contamination or pollution by
enforcement of this article and applicable plumbing regulations as provided
in the statewide plumbing regulations. Any water outlet which could be
used for potable or domestic purposes and is not supplied by the potable
system must be labeled as "Water Unsafe for Drinking" in a conspicuous
manner.
§ 167-38. Provisions to be supplemental.51 [Amended 11-11-1996]
This article is a supplement to the applicable plumbing regulations as
provided in the Statewide Uniform Building Code.52
51.
52.Editor's Note: Original Section 7, which immediately followed this section and contained
penalty provisions, was repealed 11-11-1996. For current penalty provisions, see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 167-35 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 167-38
157:261

ARTICLE VI
Water Conservation and Emergencies
[Adopted 10-22-1986 (Ch. 36 of the 1978 Code)]
§ 167-39. Findings and intent.
The Town Council of Hillsville, Virginia, hereby finds and determines that
water conservation provides for the greatest public benefit through
beneficial reduction in water use or water loss and ensures the continued
availability of safe and clean water to the residents of the Town of Hillsville,
when it is necessary to reduce the demand for water in the manner
hereinafter set forth.
§ 167-40. Restrictions applicable to stages of emergency.
Should the Town Council find that a water supply emergency exists, any of
the following stages which restricts or prohibits the following uses of water
shall apply:
A. Stage I. The voluntary restriction of water use for the following:
(1) The use of water to wash down sidewalks, walkways, driveways,
parking lots, tennis courts or other hard-surfaced area, building or
structure.
(2) The use of water to wash automobiles, trucks, trailers or any other
type of mobile equipment, except in facilities operating with a
water recycling system.
(3) The watering of shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass, plants or other
vegetation, except when using recycled water.
(4) The use of water in the operation of any ornamental fountain or for
scenic and recreational ponds and lakes, except for the minimum
amount required to support fish life.
(5) The use of water from fire hydrants for construction purposes or
any purpose other than fire fighting.
(6) The use of water to fill or refill swimming pools.
(7) The serving of drinking water in restaurants unless requested by
customers.
B. Stage II. The prohibition of water use for the following:
(1) The use of water to wash down sidewalks, walkways, driveways,
parking lots, tennis courts or other hard-surfaced area, building or
structure.
(2) The use of water to wash automobiles, trucks, trailers or any other
type of mobile equipment, except in facilities operating with a
water recycling system.
§ 167-39 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 167-40
157:263
§ 167-41. Notification of emergency.
The above restrictions, or any of the above, shall become effective within 24
hours after their being printed in any newspaper of general circulation in
the Town of Hillsville and/or broadcast over any radio or television station
serving the Town of Hillsville. These restrictions shall be terminated upon
(3) The watering of shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass, plants or other
vegetation, except when using recycled water.
(4) The use of water in the operation of any ornamental fountain or for
scenic and recreational ponds and lakes, except for the minimum
amount required to support fish life.
(5) The use of water from fire hydrants for construction purposes or
any purpose other than fire fighting.
(6) The use of water to fill or refill swimming pools.
(7) The serving of drinking water in restaurants unless requested by
customers.
(8) New water service connections.
C. Stage III. The prohibition of water use for the following:
(1) The use of water to wash down sidewalks, walkways, driveways,
parking lots, tennis courts or other hard-surfaced area, building or
structure.
(2) The use of water to wash automobiles, trucks, trailers or any other
type of mobile equipment, except in facilities operating with a
water recycling system.
(3) The watering of shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass, plants or other
vegetation, except when using recycled water.
(4) The use of water in the operation of any ornamental fountain or for
scenic and recreational ponds and lakes, except for the minimum
amount required to support fish life.
(5) The use of water from fire hydrants for construction purposes or
any purpose other than fire fighting.
(6) The use of water to fill or refill swimming pools.
(7) The serving of drinking water in restaurants unless requested by
customers.
(8) New water service connections.
(9) The use of water by schools, commercial and industrial users
whereby this use threatens the supply for essential human needs.
§ 167-40 HILLSVILLE CODE § 167-41
157:264
finding that the water shortage is over and the emergency situation no
longer exists.53
53.Editor's Note: Original Section 2, which immediately followed this section and contained
penalty provision, was repealed 11-11-1996. For current penalty provisions, see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 167-41 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 167-41
157:265
Chapter 170
WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 48.
Utilities — See Ch. 153.
Zoning — See Ch. 171.
§ 170-1. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the placement, construction
and modification of small wind energy systems while promoting the safe,
effective and efficient use of small wind energy systems and not
unreasonably interfering with the development of independent renewable
energy sources.
§ 170-2. Applicability.
The requirements set forth in this chapter shall govern the siting of wind
energy systems used to generate electricity or perform work which may
be connected to the utility grid pursuant to Virginia's net metering laws
(§ 56-594 of the Code of Virginia, 1950, as amended), serve as an
independent source of energy, or serve in a hybrid system.
§ 170-3. Siting and construction requirements.
The requirements for siting and construction of all small wind energy
systems regulated by this chapter shall include the following:
A. Small wind energy towers shall maintain a galvanized steel finish,
unless FAA standards require otherwise, or if the owner is attempting
to conform the wind energy tower to the surrounding environment and
architecture, in which case it may be painted to reduce visual
obtrusiveness. A photo simulation may be required.
B. Small wind energy systems shall not be artificially lighted unless
required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or appropriate
authority.
C. Small wind energy towers shall not have any signs, writing, or pictures
that may be construed as advertising.
D. Small wind energy systems shall not exceed 60 decibels, as measured at
the closest property line. The level, however, may be exceeded during
short-term events such as severe windstorms.
E. The applicant shall provide evidence that the proposed height of the
small wind energy system tower does not exceed the height
recommended by the manufacturer or distributor of the system.
§ 167-41 HILLSVILLE CODE § 170-3
157:266
§ 170-4. Administrative review process.
§ 170-5. Compliance with federal and state requirements.
F. The applicant shall provide evidence that the provider of electric utility
service to the site has been informed of the applicant's intent to install
an interconnected customer-owned electricity generator, unless the
applicant intends, and so states on the application, that the system will
not be connected to the electricity grid. This action shall not construe
approval for net metering by the electric utility.
G. The applicant shall provide information demonstrating that the system
will be used primarily to reduce on-site consumption of electricity.
H. The wind energy tower height shall not exceed a maximum height of 35
feet.
I. The minimum distance between the ground and any protruding blades
utilized on a small wind energy system shall be 15 feet, as measured at
the lowest point of the arc of the blades. The supporting wind energy
tower shall also be enclosed with a six-foot-tall fence or the base of the
wind energy tower shall not be climbable for a distance of 12 feet.
J. The applicant shall provide proof of adequate liability insurance for a
small wind energy system. Whether or not the applicant is participating
in the net metering program, the applicant shall meet the insurance
coverage requirements set forth in Virginia Administrative Code 20
VAC 5-315-60.
K. The small wind energy system generators and alternators shall be
constructed so as to prevent the emission of radio and television signals
and shall comply with the provisions of Section 47 of the Federal Code
of Regulations, Part 15 and subsequent revisions governing said
emissions.
A. The installation of a small wind energy system in Agricultural A-1, and
Industrial District, shall be considered, provided that all requirements
of these standards are met.
B. Applications shall be permitted by right and be reviewed and
considered for approval by the Zoning Administrator or his designee.
C. Upon receipt of an application for a small wind energy system the Town
shall send written notification to all adjoining landowners. A decision on
the application shall not be made within 30 days of the receipt of the
application. Applications requiring a special use permit shall meet all
state code requirements for public notification.
A. Compliance with Uniform Statewide Building Code. Building permit
applications for wind energy systems shall be accompanied by standard
drawings of the wind turbine structure, including the wind energy
tower, base, and footings. An engineering analysis of the wind energy
§ 170-3 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 170-5
157:267
§ 170-6. Setbacks.
The wind energy system shall be set back a distance at least equal to
110% of the structure height from all adjacent property lines and a distance
equal to at least 150% of the structure height from any dwelling inhabited
by humans on neighboring property. These setbacks may be reduced by
notarized consent of the owner of the property on which the requested
wind energy system is to be erected and the adjacent landowner whose
property line or dwelling falls within the specified distance. Additionally,
such adjacent landowner must execute a deed of easement for the benefit of
the property on which the wind energy system is to be erected prohibiting
construction of any new structure on such adjacent property within the
specified easement. Wind energy systems shall meet all setback
requirements for primary structures for the zoning district in which the
wind energy system is located in addition to the requirements set forth
above. Additionally, no portion of the small wind energy system, including
guy wire anchors, may extend closer than 10 feet to the property line.
§ 170-7. Removal of defective or abandoned systems.
Any wind energy system found to be unsafe by the building official shall be
repaired by the owner to meet federal, state and local safety standards or
removed within six months. Any wind energy system that is not operated for
a continuous period of 24 months shall be considered abandoned, and the
owner of the system shall remove the turbine within 90 days of receipt of
notice from the Town instructing the owner to remove the abandoned wind
energy system.
§ 170-8. Failure to comply; remedies; liens.
Should such notice and order fail to result in compliance with this chapter,
the Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to bring legal action to
tower showing compliance with the Uniform Statewide Building Code
and certified by a licensed professional engineer shall also be
submitted.
B. Compliance with FAA regulations. Wind energy systems shall comply
with applicable FAA regulations, including any necessary approvals for
installations close to airports.
C. Compliance with National Electric Code. Building permit applications
for wind energy systems shall be accompanied by a line drawing of the
electrical components in sufficient detail to allow for a determination
that the manner of installation conforms to the National Electrical
Code.
D. Compliance with regulations governing energy net metering. Wind
energy systems connected to the utility grid shall comply with the
Virginia Administrative Code 20 VAC 5-315, Regulations Governing Net
Energy Metering.
§ 170-5 HILLSVILLE CODE § 170-8
157:268
ensure compliance with the appropriate action or proceeding. The Zoning
Administrator shall have the authority to initiate criminal or civil
proceedings as provided for by the laws of the commonwealth. The Town
shall have the right to contract the work to be completed to comply with
the Town's Code, the cost of which shall be chargeable to and paid by the
owner of said property. Every charge authorized by this chapter with which
the owner of any such property shall have been assessed and which remains
unpaid shall constitute a lien against such property, and the Treasurer shall
file with the Clerk of the County Circuit Court a statement of the lien claim.
Release of such lien shall be executed by the Treasurer upon presentation
of evidence that the amount of the lien and cost involved have been paid to
the Town.
Chapter 171
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements — See Ch. 38.
Animals — See Ch. 42.
Building construction — See Ch. 48.
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 56.
Drainage control — See Ch. 70.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 76.
Nuclear waste — See Ch. 93.
Nuisances — See Ch. 97.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 108.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 112.
Special sales — See Ch. 121.
Special events — See Ch. 132.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 140.
Utilities — See Ch. 153.
Water and sewer — See Ch. 167.
§ 170-8 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 170-8
157:269

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 171-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of Hillsville,
Virginia." The map portion may be cited separately as the "Zoning Map of
Hillsville, Virginia."54
§ 171-2. Authority.
This chapter and map are adopted according to the authority of Title 15.1,
Chapter XI, Article 8, §§ 15.1-486 through 15.1-498 et seq., Code of Virginia
1950 (as amended). As specified therein, the Town of Hillsville is authorized
to provide for the establishment of districts within the corporate limits in
which the town may regulate, restrict, permit, prohibit and determine:
§ 171-3. Matters considered in applying zoning.
Pursuant to the requirements of § 15.1-490, Code of Virginia 1950, as
amended, the regulations contained in this chapter and the districts
established by this chapter have been drawn and applied with consideration
for:
A. The use of land, building, structures and other premises for
agricultural, business, industrial, residential, flood protection and other
specific uses.
B. The size, height, area, bulk, location, erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair, maintenance, razing or removal of
structures.
C. The areas and dimensions of land, water and air space to be occupied
by buildings, structures and uses and of courts, yards and other open
spaces to be left unoccupied by uses and structures, including the
establishment of minimum lot sizes based on whether a public or
community water supply or sewer system is available and used.
D. The excavation or mining of soil or other natural resources.
A. The existing use and character of property.
B. The Comprehensive Plan of the town.
C. The suitability of property for various uses.
D. Trends of growth or change in the town.
54.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file and available for inspection in the office of the
Town Manager.
§ 171-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-3
157:271
§ 171-4. Jurisdiction.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all land within the corporate
limits of the Town of Hillsville, Virginia.
§ 171-5. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to classify the territory of the town into
zoning districts for the general purpose of promoting the health, safety and
general welfare of the public and of further accomplishing the objectives of
§ 15.1-427, Code of Virginia 1950, as amended.
§ 171-6. Purpose.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 15.1-489, Code of Virginia 1950, as
amended, this chapter is designed to give reasonable consideration to each
of the following purposes, where applicable:
E. Current and future requirements of the town as to land for various
purposes as determined by population and economic studies and other
studies carried out through the Comprehensive Plan.
F. Transportation requirements of the town and requirements for airports,
housing, schools, parks, playgrounds, recreation areas and other public
services.
G. Conservation of natural resources, preservation of floodplains and
preservation of agricultural and forestal land.
H. Conservation of properties and their values.
I. Encouragement of the most appropriate use of land throughout the
town.
A. To provide for adequate light, air, convenience of access and safety
from fire, flood, crime and other dangers.
B. To reduce or prevent congestion in the public streets.
C. To facilitate the creation of a convenient, attractive and harmonious
community.
D. To facilitate the provision of adequate police and fire protection,
disaster evacuation, civil defense, transportation, water, sewerage,
flood protection, schools, parks, forests, playgrounds, recreational
facilities, airports and other public requirements.
E. To protect against destruction of or encroachment upon historic areas.
F. To protect against one or more of the following: overcrowding of land,
undue density of population in relation to the community facilities
existing or available, obstruction of light and air, danger and congestion
§ 171-3 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-6
157:272
in travel and transportation or loss of life, health or property from fire,
flood, panic or other dangers.
G. To encourage economic development activities that provide desirable
employment and enlarge the tax base.
H. To provide for the preservation of agricultural and forest lands and
other lands of significance for the protection of the natural
environment. [Amended 6-27-2016]
I. To protect approach slopes and other safety areas of licensed airports,
including United States government and military air facilities.
J. To promote the creation and preservation of affordable housing suitable
for meeting the current and future needs of the town as well as a
reasonable proportion of the current and future needs of the Mount
Rogers Planning District.
K. To protect surface water and groundwater, as defined in § 62.1-255,
Code of Virginia.
L. To ensure delinquent taxes are satisfied, as provided in § 15.2-2286,
Code of Virginia. [Added 6-27-2016]
§ 171-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-6
157:273

ARTICLE II
Definitions and Word Usage
§ 171-7. Word usage.
Definitions and general rules of interpretation contained in this Article shall
apply throughout this chapter, unless a specific meaning to the contrary
is prescribed elsewhere in this chapter. Terms not defined herein shall
be interpreted according to such normal dictionary meaning or customary
usage as is appropriate to the context. The following general rules shall
apply throughout this chapter as they are appropriate to the context.
§ 171-8. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY — An activity or structure that is customarily associated with
and is appropriately incidental and subordinate to a principal activity and/
or structure and located on the same lot, except as provided for under the
provisions of accessory off-street parking.
AGRICULTURAL USES — Any activity or structure that is customarily
associated with and is appropriately incidental and subordinate to the
cultivation, breeding or maintenance of hay, grasses and other feed
products; forest products; horses, cattle, sheep, goats and poultry; and
greenhouses.
ALLEY — A public way intended to provide only secondary vehicular access
to abutting properties.
AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARD — Any lot or place which is exposed to the
weather upon which more than five unlicensed motor vehicles of any kind,
incapable of being operated, are placed.
A. The word "shall" is mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive.
B. The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number
includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular.
C. The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended, designed
or arranged to be used or occupied."
D. The words "building" or "structure" include any part thereof, and the
word "building" includes the word "structure."
E. The word "lot" includes the words "part" and "parcel."
F. The word "land" includes the words "water" and "marsh."
G. All references to public officials, agencies and bodies are those of the
Town of Hillsville, Virginia.
§ 171-7 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-8
157:275
AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE — Establishments for the primary purpose of
servicing, cleaning, repairing, selling or renting motor vehicles, and
including auto service stations and self-service gasoline stations.
BASEMENT — The bottom floor of a building which is more than 12 inches
but not more than one-half ( 1/2) of its height below average level of the
adjoining ground [as distinguished from a cellar, which is more than onehalf
( 1/2) below such level].
BUILDING — A structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof or
other covering and designed or used for the shelter or enclosure of persons,
animals or property of any kind.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the highest point on a
structure, excepting any chimney or antenna on a building, to the average
ground level of the grade where the walls or other structural elements
intersect the ground.
BULK — Describes the size of buildings or other structures and their
relationship to each other, to open areas and to lot lines, therefore
including:
CELLAR — See "basement."
CLINIC — An establishment where persons are given medical, surgical or
dental treatment, with no patients lodged overnight.
COMMUNITY EDUCATION — Structure or location where knowledge is
taught.
COMMUNITY FACILITY — Any use other than a utility facility, as defined
in this Article, operated by a governmental agency, public authority or
nonprofit organization and intended for the purpose of providing services to
the general public.
COMPLETELY ENCLOSED — Refers to a building or other structure having
a roof and separated on all sides from the adjacent open area or from other
buildings or other structures by exterior walls or party walls, pierced only
by windows or entrance and exit doors normally provided for persons, goods
or vehicles.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use specified in this chapter as permitted in
a particular district only upon approval of a conditional use permit by
The size (including height and floor area) of buildings or other
structures.
A.
The area of the lot upon which a residential building is located, and the
number of dwelling units within each building in relation to the area of
the lot.
B.
The location of exterior walls of buildings or other structures in relation
to lot lines, to other walls of the same building or to other structures.
C.
All open areas relating to buildings or other structures and their
relationship thereto.
D.
§ 171-8 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-8
157:276
the Town Council in accordance with the provisions of Article XVI of this
chapter. "Conditional use" shall mean the same as special exception, as
defined in § 15.1-430, Code of Virginia 1950, as amended.
CONSTRUCTION SALES AND SERVICE — Any establishment involved in
the sale of materials for the erection of structures.
CURB LEVEL — The mean of the elevations of the side lot lines extended to
the street line.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, the
placement of mobile homes, streets and other paving, utilities, filling,
grading, excavation, mining, dredging or drilling operations.
DWELLING, INCIDENTAL — A dwelling unit located within a building in
which the principal activity is a retail, office, personal service or other
permitted commercial use, when such dwelling unit is located above, below
or to the rear of ground floor space devoted to such commercial use and
when the total amount of floor area of the building devoted to such dwelling
units does not exceed the amount of floor area devoted to other permitted
uses.
DWELLING, MODULAR HOME — A single-family dwelling unit that is
constructed basically as a conventionally built wood frame house except
it is built at a factory and is transported to the site on which it will be
permanently located. The modular home may not have a permanent steel
chassis.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building containing three or more dwelling
units. The term includes cooperative apartments, condominiums and the
like. For purposes of these regulations, regardless of how rental units are
equipped, any multifamily dwelling in which units are available for rental
partly on a monthly basis and partly for a shorter time period, but with
less than 30% of the living units under the same ownership or management
on the same lot being occupied on a less-than-monthly basis, shall be
considered as a semitransient residential activity.
DWELLING, OTHER — A dwelling unit located within a structure in which
the principal activity is a commercial, professional or general personal
service activity.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED — A building which is completely
separated from any other principal building and which contains a dwelling
unit for occupancy by only one family. A "single-family detached dwelling"
shall include a group home or a family day home, as defined in this Article.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A detached residential building containing
two dwelling units, designed for occupancy by not more than two families.
DWELLING UNIT — A room or rooms connected together, constituting a
separate independent housekeeping establishment for one family only, for
owner occupancy or for rental, lease or other occupancy on a weekly or
longer basis, physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units
and containing independent cooking and sleeping facilities.
§ 171-8 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-8
157:277
FAMILY — An individual or a group of two or more persons related by
blood, marriage or adoption, together with not more than three additional
persons not related by blood, marriage or adoption, living together as a
single housekeeping unit.
FAMILY DAY HOME — A facility as defined in § 63.1-195, Code of Virginia,
and which is operated for the purpose of providing care for not more than
five children separated from their parents or guardians during a portion
of the day, exclusive of the provider's own children and any children who
reside in the home.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION — Banks and savings and loan institutions.
FLOOD — A general and temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
A one-hundred-year flood is a flood that, on the average, is likely to occur
once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one-percent chance of occurring each
year, although the flood may occur in any year.)
FLOODPLAIN —
FLOOR AREA — The total of the gross areas of all floors, including usable
basements and cellars, below the roof and within the outer surface of
the main walls of principal or accessory buildings or the center lines of
party walls separating such buildings or portions thereof, but excluding the
following:
GROUP HOME — A residential facility in which not more than eight
mentally ill, mentally retarded or other developmentally disabled persons
reside, with one or more resident counselors or other staff persons, the
purpose of such facility being to provide to its occupants the benefits of
normal residential surroundings to achieve optimal assimilation into the
community. The term "group home" shall include family care homes, foster
homes and other residential facilities for which the Virginia Department
of Mental Health, Mental Retardation and Substance Abuse Services, is
the licensing authority, but shall not include residential treatment centers
or other facilities, the principal purpose of which is to provide emergency
shelter or to provide diagnostic or treatment services for persons currently
suffering illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance as defined in
§ 54.1-3401, Code of Virginia.
A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream or
watercourse which is subject to partial or complete inundation; or
A.
An area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of
surface waters from any source.
B.
Areas used for off-street parking spaces or loading berths, driveways
and maneuvering aisles relating thereto required in this chapter.
A.
In the case of nonresidential facilities: arcades, porticoes and similar
open areas which are located at or near street level, which are
accessible to the general public and which are not designed or used as
sales, display, storage, service or production areas.
B.
§ 171-8 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-8
157:278
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation conducted in a dwelling unit,
provided that:
HOSPITAL — An institution rendering medical, surgical, obstetrical or
convalescent care, including nursing homes, homes for the aged and
sanatoriums.
INCIDENTAL ALTERATIONS —
Only one person other than members of the family residing on the
premises shall be engaged in such occupation.
A.
The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly
incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its
occupants, and not more than 25% of the floor area of the dwelling unit
shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation.
B.
There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building
or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home
occupation other than one sign, not exceeding four square foot in
area, nonilluminated, and mounted flat against the wall of the principal
building.
C.
D. No home occupation shall be conducted in any accessory building.
There shall be no group instruction or group assembly, no housing of
persons for compensation, no repair of vehicles or internal combustion
engines and no product offered for sale on the premises, and beauty
shops, barbershops and similar personal service businesses shall not be
considered "home occupations."
E.
No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater
volumes than would normally be expected in a residential
neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of
such home occupation shall be met off the street and other than in a
required front yard.
F.
No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference
detectable to the normal senses off the lot, if the occupation is
conducted in a single-family dwelling, or outside the dwelling unit if
conducted in other than a single-family dwelling.
G.
Changes or replacements in the nonstructural parts of a building or
other structure without limitations to the following examples:
Alteration of interior partitions to improve livability in a
nonconforming residential building, provided that no additional
dwelling units are created.
(1)
A minor addition to the exterior of a residential building, such as
an open porch.
(2)
A.
§ 171-8 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-8
157:279
JUNKYARD — The use of any area of land lying within 100 feet of a state
highway or the use of more than 200 square feet of land area in any location
for the storage, keeping or abandonment of junk, including scrap metals or
other scrap materials. This term includes the term "automobile graveyard."
KENNEL — A place prepared to house, board, breed, handle or otherwise
keep or care for dogs, cats or other small animals for sale or in return for
compensation.
LANDSCAPING — The planting and maintenance of trees, shrubs, lawns
and other ground cover or materials, provided that terraces, fountains,
retaining walls, street furniture, sculptures or other art objects and similar
accessory features may be included as "landscaping" if integrally designed.
LIBRARY — A building primarily used to store and allow access to books,
films, maps and other educational material.
LOT — A parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning
requirements for use, coverage and area and to provide such yards and
other spaces as required by this chapter. A "lot" shall have frontage on an
approved public street and shall either be shown on a plat of record or be
considered as a unit of property described by metes and bounds.
LOT AREA — The entire area of a lot.
LOT COVERAGE — That portion of a lot which, when viewed directly from
above, would be covered by a building or any part of a building.
LOT FRONTAGE — The front of a lot shall be the portion nearest the
street. For the purposes of determining yard requirements on corner lots
and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered
"frontage," and yards shall be provided as indicated in this chapter.
LOT LINE — A line marking the boundary of a lot.
LOT MEASURES —
Alterations of interior non-load-bearing partitions in all other types
of buildings or other structures.
(3)
Replacement of or minor changes in capacity of utility pipes, ducts
or conduits.
(4)
Changes or replacements in the structural parts of a building or other
structure, limited to the following examples or others of similar
character or extent:
(1) Making windows or doors in exterior walls.
(2) Replacement of building facades having non-load-bearing capacity.
Strengthening the floor load-bearing capacity, in not more than
10% of the total floor area, to permit the accommodation of
specialized machinery or equipment.
(3)
B.
LOT DEPTH — The average horizontal distance between the front and
rear lot lines.
A.
§ 171-8 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-8
157:280
LOT OF RECORD — A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the
Clerk's office of the Circuit Court, or a lot whose existence, location and
dimensions have been legally recorded or registered in a deed prior to the
enactment of this chapter.
LOT TYPES — The diagram (Figure 1) which follows illustrates terminology
used in this chapter with reference to corner lots, interior lots, reversed
frontage lots and through lots:
In this diagram:
A = CORNER LOT — A lot located at the intersection of two or more
streets. A lot abutting on a curved street or streets shall be considered a
"corner lot" if straight lines drawn from the foremost points of the side lot
lines to the foremost points of the lot meet at an interior angle of less than
135º. See lots marked A (1) in the diagram.
B = INTERIOR LOT — A lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage
on a street.
C = THROUGH LOT — A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more
than one street. Through lots abutting two streets may be referred to as
double frontage lots.
D = REVERSED FRONTAGE LOT — A lot on which the frontage is at right
angles or approximately right angles (interior angle less than 135º to the
general pattern in the area.) A reversed frontage lot may also be a corner
lot (A-D in the diagram), an interior lot (B-D) or a through lot (C-D).
MANUFACTURED HOME — Any structure complying with the federal
manufactured housing construction and safety standards, which is
transportable in one or more sections; is eight body feet or more in width
and 40 body feet or more in length in the traveling mode or is 320 or
more square feet when erected on a site; is built on a permanent chassis; is
designed to be used for dwelling purposes by one family, with or without a
permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities; and which
LOT WIDTH — The minimum horizontal distance between the side
lot lines as measured at the setback line. On a corner lot, width is
measured along the frontage with the least dimension.
B.
§ 171-8 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-8
157:281
includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems to
be utilized in the structure.
MANUFACTURING —
MOBILE HOME — "Manufactured home," as defined in this Article.
MOBILE HOME PARK — An area where 10 or more mobile homes or trailers
can be and are intended to be parked, designed or intended to be used as
temporary or permanent living facilities for two or more families.
MOBILE HOME SPACE — A plot of ground within a mobile home park,
designed to accommodate one mobile home, and which has water, sewer
and electricity available at the space.
MOBILE HOME STAND — That part of an individual mobile home space
which has been reserved for the placement of the mobile home.
MOBILE UNIT, COMMERCIAL OR OFFICE — A detached, manufactured
unit with a permanent steel chassis arriving at the site where it is to be used
for commercial, professional, office or general personal service use as a
complete unit ready for occupancy except for minor or incidental unpacking
and assembly operations, location of foundation supports, connections to
utilities and the like; excluding mobile home dwelling and travel trailer.
MODULAR UNIT, COMMERCIAL OR OFFICE — A building that is
manufactured off-site and is transported to the site on which it will be
permanently located. It is constructed basically as a conventionally built
structure and meets the state requirements for industrialized building unit.
The use of the modular unit is restricted within each zoning district to only
those uses listed in Article VIII as either a permitted use or a conditional
use.
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL — Establishment in which goods are produced
without the use of a machine shop or the chemical processing of
materials. Light industrial activities include but are not limited to the
assembly, completion and/or packaging of small items of component
parts such as assembly and sewing of garments or other types of
assembly, bottling of beverages or packaging of completed items.
Specifically excluded are uses which would be classified as hazardous
industries.
A.
HEAVY INDUSTRIAL — Establishments in which goods are generally
mass produced from raw materials on a large scale through use of
an assembly line, usually for sale to wholesalers or other industrial or
manufacturing uses. Included in this use type are industries involved
in processing and/or refining raw materials such as chemicals, rubber,
wood or wood pulp, forging, casting, melting, refining, extruding,
rolling, drawing and/or alloying ferrous metals, dyeing operations and
the manufacture of large durable goods such as furniture, autos,
manufactured homes or other motor vehicles. Specifically excluded are
uses which would be classified as hazardous industries.
B.
§ 171-8 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-8
157:282
MOTEL, MOTOR HOTEL, MOTOR LODGE — The same as "transient
lodging."
NONCONFORMING —
PLACE OF WORSHIP — Structure or location where services or rites are
held showing reverence for a deity.
PRINCIPAL ACTIVITY — An activity which fulfills a primary function of an
establishment, institution, household or other entity.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A building which contains the principal activity or
use.
PRIVATE RECREATION FACILITY — Swimming pools, tennis courts and
other outdoor recreation facilities for use primarily by the lot owner.
PUBLIC LANDFILL — An area designated for the disposal of solid waste
by members of the general public, operated with a permit granted by and
pursuant to the laws and regulations of the Commonwealth of Virginia and
other applicable authorities.[Added 5-10-2004]
RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT, MAJOR — For purposes of this chapter,
"major recreational equipment" includes boats and boat trailers, travel
trailers, tent trailers, pickup campers or coaches (designed to be mounted
on automotive vehicles), motorized dwellings and the like.
REQUIRED YARD — That portion of a lot that is required by the specific
district regulation to be open from the ground to the sky and may contain
only explicitly listed obstructions.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING — A building having one or more
nonconforming features.
A.
NONCONFORMING FEATURE — A feature of a use, as distinguished
from the use itself, or a feature of a building, which feature was lawfully
existing at the effective date of this chapter or subsequent amendment
thereto, and does not conform with the requirements established by
this chapter or any amendment thereto. Features of uses or buildings
shall be construed to include density, lot area, lot dimensions, yards,
open spaces, height, bulk, number of occupants, screening,
landscaping, lighting and off-street parking and loading requirements.
A building having any such nonconforming feature may be referred to
as a nonconforming building.
B.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — A sign which was lawfully existing at the
effective date of this chapter or subsequent amendment thereto and
which does not conform with the area, height, location, placement,
type, number or other regulation pertaining to signs set forth in this
chapter or subsequent amendment thereto.
C.
NONCONFORMING USE — A principal or accessory use of land or of
a building, which use was lawfully existing at the effective date of this
chapter or subsequent amendment thereto and is not a permitted use
under the provisions of this chapter or any amendment thereto.
D.
§ 171-8 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-8
157:283
RESIDENCE — A building or part of a building containing one or more
dwelling units or rooming units, including single-family or two-family
houses, multiple dwellings, boarding or rooming houses or apartment
hotels. However, "residences" do not include:
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT — The A-1 Agricultural/Residential District, the
R-1 Medium-Density Residential District, the R-2 Multifamily Residential
District and the MHP Mobile Home Park Residential District established by
this chapter.
RESTAURANT — An establishment where food is ordered, prepared and
served for pay.
RETAIL STORES AND SHOPS — Buildings for display and retail sale of
merchandise or for the rendering of personal services (but specifically
exclusive of coal, wood and lumber yards), such as the following examples:
drugstores, newsstands, food stores, candy shops, dry goods and notions
stores, antique stores and gift shops, hardware stores, household appliance
stores, furniture stores, optician, music or radio stores, tailor shops, bakery
shops and beauty shops.
SEMITRANSIENT RESIDENTIAL ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment
where lodging is provided for compensation partly on a monthly or longer
basis and partly for a shorter time period, but with less than 30% of the
living units under the same ownership or management on the same lot
being occupied on a less than monthly basis; but excluding institutional
living arrangements involving the provision of specific kinds of forced
residences, such as nursing homes, orphanages, asylums and prisons.
SETBACK LINE — A line running parallel to the street which establishes the
minimum distance the principal building must be setback from the street
line.
SIGN —
Such transient accommodations as hotels, motels, tourist homes or
similar establishments.
A.
Dormitories, fraternity or sorority houses, monasteries, convents or
similar establishments containing group living or sleeping
accommodations.
B.
Nursing, rest homes or other sleeping or living accommodations in
community facility buildings or portions of buildings used for
community facilities.
C.
That part of a mixed building used for any nonresidential purposes,
except where such are uses accessory to residential uses.
D.
Any writing (including letter, word or numeral); pictorial presentation
(including illustration or decoration); emblem (including device, symbol
or trademark); flag (including banner or pennant); or any other figure
of similar character, which:
A.
§ 171-8 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-8
157:284
SIGN, CIVIC — A sign identifying the nature of activity and other pertinent
information for any community facility activity.
SIGN, REALTY — A sign indicating pertinent information regarding
property for sale, lease or rent.
SIGN, RESIDENTIAL — An accessory sign which indicates the name and/or
address of the occupant or a permitted home occupation.
STORY — A portion of a building between the surface of any floor and the
surface of the floor next above it or, if there is not floor above it, the space
between such floor and the ceiling next above it, provided that the following
shall not be deemed a "story":
STREET — A publicly maintained right-of-way, other than an alley, which
affords a primary means of access to abutting property. The word "street"
shall include the words "road," "highway" and "thoroughfare."
STREET LINE — The property line which bounds the right-of-way set aside
for use as a street. Where sidewalks exist and the location of the property
line is questioned, the edge of the sidewalk farthest from the traveled street
shall be considered as the "street line."
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
a permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having
a permanent location on the ground. This includes but is not limited to
buildings, towers, smokestacks and overhead transmission lines.
Is a structure or any part thereof or is attached to, painted on or in
any other manner represented on a building or other structure;
(1)
(2) Is used to announce, direct attention or advertise; and
(3) Is visible from outside a building.
A sign shall include writing, representation or other figure of similar
character within a building only when illuminated and located within a
window.
B.
The area of a sign area shall consist of the area occupied by the
message portion of the sign, together with all other elements that
form an integral part of the display, including background, borders and
structural trim. The area of a double-faced sign shall be the area of the
largest single face, provided that the interior angle formed by the two
faces does not exceed 30º.
C.
A basement or cellar if the finished floor level directly above it is not
more than six feet above the average adjoining elevation of finished
grade.
A.
An attic or similar space under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall
plates or any exterior walls of which are not more than two feet above
the floor of such space.
B.
§ 171-8 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-8
157:285
TRANSIENT LODGINGS — A building or a group of buildings in which
sleeping accommodations are offered to the public and intended primarily
for rental to transients with daily charge.
TRAVEL TRAILER — A travel trailer, pickup camper, converted bus, tenttrailer,
tent or similar device used for temporary portable housing or a unit
which:
USE — The purpose for which land or water or a structure thereon is
designed, arranged and intended to be occupied or utilized or for which it
is occupied or maintained.
USE AND OCCUPANCY PERMIT — A written permit issued by the Zoning
Administrator required before occupying or commencing to use any
building or other structure or any lot.
USE, PUBLIC — Any use that is under control of a unit of general purpose
government or governmental agency.
USE, RECREATION — Any use of land or water and facilities provided for
the enjoyment of the general public.
UTILITY FACILITY — Any structure involved in the transport of electricity,
water, sewage or broadcasting.
VARIANCE — A reasonable deviation from those provisions regulating the
size or area of a lot or parcel of land, or the size, area, bulk or location
of a building or structure when the strict application of this chapter would
result in unnecessary or unreasonable hardship to the property owner, and
such need for a variance would not be shared generally by other properties,
and provided that such variance is not contrary to the intended spirit and
purpose of this chapter and would result in substantial justice being done.
WAREHOUSE TYPE 1 — A completely enclosed structure to be used for
the purpose of storing industrial or commercial goods; an industrial or
commercial warehouse. The following restrictions apply to this type of
warehouse:[Added 6-14-2004]
Can operate independent of connections to external sewer, water and
electrical systems;
A.
Contains water storage facilities and may contain a lavatory, kitchen
sink and/or bath facilities; and/or
B.
Is identified by the manufacturer as a travel trailer and/or is designed
as a travel trailer.
C.
A. This warehouse must be located in Industrial Zoning District.
Units shall be arranged such that loading and unloading of goods is
performed entirely off of public streets and rights-of-way.
B.
The warehouse is used primarily for the purpose of supporting
industrial operation by storing industrial goods.
C.
D. Could be used as distribution warehouse.
§ 171-8 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-8
157:286
WAREHOUSE TYPE 2 — A completely enclosed structure to be used for the
purpose of storing wares, merchandise, or personal goods; not considered
an industrial warehouse. The following restrictions apply to this type of
warehouse:[Added 6-14-2004]
WHOLESALE SALES — Any establishment involved with the sale of
merchandise to retail establishments.
YARD — An open space on the same lot with a principal building, open,
unoccupied and unobstructed by buildings from the ground to the sky
except as otherwise provided in this chapter. The measurement of a yard
shall be construed as the minimum horizontal distance between the lot lines
and any part of the building, such as roof overhang.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending along the full length of a front lot line.
In the case of a corner lot, a yard of at least the full depth required for
a front yard in these regulations, and extending along the full length of a
street line shall be considered a "front yard." At least two such yards shall
be designated for each corner lot; at least one such yard shall be designated
for each through lot.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending for the full length of a rear lot line.
Paved drive and parking required. Heavy-duty pavement required
where freight trucks travel.
E.
Located in General Commercial and Core Commercial Zoning Districts.
[Amended 2-11-2013]
A.
While individual units may be individually or commercially leased,
individual units cannot be used as a means for operating an individual
business.
B.
C. The structure shall not contain fewer than 10 units.
D. The maximum size per unit is 500 square feet of floor area.
Each unit must be self-contained with a door. No products are to be
stored in public view. Outside storage of items is prohibited.
E.
Units shall be arranged such that loading and unloading of goods is
performed entirely off of public streets and rights-of-way.
F.
Off-street parking must be supplied at a rate of one space per 500
square feet of total warehouse area.
G.
Each unit must contain a means of ingress and egress separate from
another unit.
H.
While a sign advertising the structure as a whole will be allowed, no
individual advertising signs are allowed.
I.
J. Storage of hazardous, toxic, explosive, or illegal materials is prohibited.
K. Paved drive and parking required.
§ 171-8 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-8
157:287
YARD, SIDE — A yard extending along a side lot line from the required
front yard to the required rear yard. In the case of a corner lot, any yard
which abuts a street line and which is not designated a front yard shall be
considered a "side yard." In the case of a through lot, side yards shall extend
between the required front yards.
ZONING PERMIT — A written permit issued by the Zoning Administrator
which is required before commencing any construction, reconstruction,
alteration of any building or other structure or before establishing,
extending or changing any activity or use on any lot.
§ 171-8 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-8
157:288
ARTICLE III
Legal Status Provisions
§ 171-9. Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, morals and general welfare of the residents of Hillsville.
§ 171-10. Relationship to other laws and private restrictions.
§ 171-11. Provisions to be cumulative.
The provisions of this chapter are cumulative with additional limitations
imposed by all other laws and ordinances previously passed or which may
be passed after the adoption of this chapter, governing any subject matter
appearing in this chapter.
§ 171-12. Provisions not to constitute permit.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to be a consent, license
or permit to use any property or to locate, construct or maintain any
building, structure or facility or to carry on any trade, industry, occupation
or activity.
§ 171-13. Scope.
A. Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this chapter upon
the use of land or buildings or upon the height or bulk of buildings are
either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions
imposed by any other provision of this chapter or of any other law,
resolution, ordinance, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations
which are more restrictive shall apply.
B. This chapter is not intended to override any easement, covenant or any
other private agreement, provided that where the regulations of this
chapter are more restrictive (or impose higher standards or
requirements) than such easements, covenants, or other private
agreements, the requirements of this chapter shall govern.
A. Compliance with provisions of chapter. Except as provided in §§ 171-14
and 171-15 of this Article, no building, structure or land shall hereafter
be used or occupied and no building or structure or part thereof shall
hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, expanded,
converted to another use or structurally altered except in conformity
with all of the regulations specified for the district in which such
building, structure or land is located and with all other applicable
provisions of this chapter.
B. Reduction from requirements of chapter. No lot area, yard, open space,
parking space or other feature required by this chapter shall be
§ 171-9 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-13
157:289
§ 171-14. Existing uses, buildings and structures.
Uses, buildings and structures lawfully existing at the effective date of this
chapter or subsequent amendment thereto may be continued subject to the
provisions of Article XV of this chapter pertaining to nonconforming uses
and features.
§ 171-15. Permits issued prior to ordinance.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to require any change
in plans, construction or intended use of any building or structure for which
a zoning permit, building permit or certificate of use and occupancy was
lawfully issued prior to the effective date of this chapter or subsequent
amendment thereto, provided that construction is commenced or occupancy
occurs prior to the expiration of such permit or certificate as specified by
the provisions of this chapter or other applicable laws. In any case where a
zoning permit, building permit or certificate of use and occupancy expires
or ceases to be valid or where construction is abandoned for a period of 12
consecutive months or longer, further construction and use shall conform
with applicable provisions of this chapter.
§ 171-16. Lots recorded previously recorded.
Any lot of record which was lawfully established prior to the effective
date of this chapter or subsequent amendment thereto and which does
not conform with the requirements for minimum lot area or lot width for
the district in which the lot is located may be devoted to single-family
dwelling use if such use is normally permitted in the district, provided that
all other applicable provisions of this chapter and other ordinances and
health regulations are met.
reduced or eliminated except in conformity with the regulations
established by this chapter. Any such reduction resulting from a taking
for public purpose by a governmental authority shall not be considered
to be a violation of this chapter. Any property so affected by such taking
shall be subject to the applicable provisions of Article XV of this chapter
pertaining to nonconforming uses and features.
C. Requirements to be met for each building or use. No part of any lot,
yard, area, open space, parking space or other feature required for a
building, structure or use shall be considered as lot, yard, area, open
space, parking space or other feature for any other building, structure
or use, except as may be specifically permitted by this chapter.
§ 171-13 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-16
157:290
ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 171-17. Designation of Zoning Administrator.
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the
Zoning Administrator, who shall be designated by the Town Council and who
may hold other appointed office in the town. The Zoning Administrator may
be provided with the assistance of other persons at the direction of the Town
Council.
§ 171-18. Duties of Zoning Administrator.
The Zoning Administrator shall have all necessary authority on behalf of the
Town Council to administer and enforce this chapter and to carry out the
duties prescribed in this Article and elsewhere in this chapter. It shall be
the responsibility of all other appointed officers and employees of the town
to cooperate with the Zoning Administrator in the execution of his or her
duties.
A. Conclusions and findings. The Zoning Administrator shall have the
authority to make conclusions of law and findings of fact, with
concurrence of the Town Attorney, in connection with the
administration, application and enforcement of this chapter in specific
cases.
B. Interpretation of ordinance. Subject to appeal to the Board of Zoning
Appeals as provided in Article XVIII of this chapter, the Zoning
Administrator shall be the final authority in the interpretation of the
provisions of this chapter.
C. Review and approval of zoning permits. The Zoning Administrator shall
review all applications for zoning permits required by § 171-19 of this
Article and shall approve or disapprove each zoning permit based on
compliance or noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter.
D. Issuance of certificates of zoning compliance. The Zoning Administrator
shall review all requests for certificates of zoning compliance required
by § 171-20 of this Article and shall issue such certificates when the
provisions of this chapter are met.
E. Enforcement and correction of violations. The Zoning Administrator
shall use his or her best efforts to prevent violations of this chapter and
to detect and secure the correction of violations in accordance with the
provisions of Article V of this chapter.
F. Other duties. The Zoning Administrator shall have such additional
duties as described in this chapter regarding site plan review in Article
XI; conditional use permits in Article XVI; variances and appeals in
Articles XVII and XVIII; and amendments in Articles XIX and XX.
§ 171-17 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-18
157:291
§ 171-19. Zoning permits. [Amended 10-23-1995]
G. Records and map. The Zoning Administrator shall maintain the Official
Zoning Map55 as described in § 171-30 and shall maintain records of all
official actions taken with respect to administration and enforcement of
this chapter and shall retain copies of all zoning permit applications,
certificates of zoning compliance and other plans and related
information as a permanent record.
A. Zoning permit required.
(1) No building or other structure shall be constructed, erected,
enlarged, structurally altered, moved or converted to accommodate
a different use, nor shall any use of land, buildings or structures be
established, changed to a different use or expanded to occupy a
greater area, nor shall any permanent sign be erected or installed
until a zoning permit for such building structure, use or sign has
been issued by the Zoning Administrator.
(2) No land disturbing activity requiring a land disturbing permit
under the provisions of the Erosion and Sediment Control
Ordinance applicable within the town shall occur until a zoning
permit which includes authorization for such activity has been
issued by the Zoning Administrator. This provision shall not be
construed to exempt any land disturbing activity from the
requirements of Chapter 70, Drainage Control.
(3) In any case where a zoning permit has been issued for
construction, erection, enlargement, structural alteration, moving
or conversion of a building or other structure and there is no
change in use from that which is specified on the zoning permit, an
additional zoning permit shall not be required for the use of the
building or structure upon completion of such construction or other
work.
B. Application for zoning permits. Every application for a zoning permit
shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator by the owner of the
property involved or by an agent of the owner or tenant of the property,
with the written consent of the owner. Applications shall be submitted
on forms provided by the Zoning Administrator and shall include all
information necessary for the Zoning Administrator to determine
compliance or noncompliance with this chapter.
C. Plans required for zoning permit. Except as provided in Subsections D
and E, every application for a zoning permit shall be accompanied by
three copies of a plan drawn to scale and showing: [Amended
10-23-1995]
55.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file and available for inspection in the office of the
Town Manager.
§ 171-18 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-19
157:292
(1) The location, boundaries and dimensions of the property, including
existing and proposed easements.
(2) Existing buildings and structures to remain.
(3) The location, dimensions and height of proposed buildings and
structures and additions or alterations to existing buildings and
structures.
(4) The dimensions of yards and setbacks.
(5) Buffers, screening, fencing, landscaping and other features
required by this chapter.
(6) The means of access to the site and adjacent street and right-of-way
lines.
(7) The arrangement and dimensions of off-street parking spaces and
vehicular circulation.
(8) Existing and proposed use of land, buildings and structures, and
number of dwelling units, where applicable.
(9) The general nature and extent of existing vegetation on the site,
existing and proposed grades and drainage plans.
(10) Existing permanent signs to remain and proposed permanent
signs, including location, lettering, dimensions, lighting and means
of attachment or support.
(11) Any additional information deemed necessary by the Zoning
Administrator to determine compliance with specific requirements
of this chapter.
D. Waiver of certain plan requirements.
(1) Required plans described in Subsection C are intended in cases
where extensive plans and information are necessary to determine
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. With prior approval
by the Zoning Administrator, particular information may be omitted
from required plans when, due to the nature or limited scope of a
project, such information is not necessary for evaluation of the
zoning permit application or for purposes of maintaining a record
of zoning permit approval.
(2) Plans shall not be required where only the use of existing buildings
or structures is proposed to be changed and there is no new
construction and no changes are to be made to buildings or
structures or to the layout, arrangement or use of the site.
E. Zoning permits for signs.
(1) In the case of zoning permit applications for signs, only the plan
requirements of Subsection C(10) shall apply, provided that the
§ 171-19 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-19
157:293
§ 171-20. Certificate of zoning compliance.
§ 171-21. Building permit.
No building permit or permit to erect a sign shall be issued by the Building
Official until a zoning permit as required by § 171-19 of this Article has
been issued by the Zoning Administrator and the Building Official has been
provided with a copy thereof.
§ 171-22. Certificate of use and occupancy.
location of any freestanding sign shall be shown to scale on a site
drawing.
(2) In any case where a sign is approved in conjunction with a zoning
permit for construction, alteration or use of a building or the use of
land and no change to the sign is proposed, a separate zoning
permit for such sign shall not be required.
F. Expiration of zoning permit. A zoning permit shall be valid for a period
of one year from the date of issuance by the Zoning Administrator. A
zoning permit shall become null and void if, within such period, no
building permit or certificate of use and occupancy pursuant thereto
has been issued by the Building Official. In a case where no building
permit or certificate of use and occupancy is required by the Building
Code, a zoning permit shall become null and void if, within one year
from the date of its issuance, the use, activity or feature authorized by
such zoning permit has not been established.
G. An exception to this section is granted to those existing residential
properties that are now zoned business but have not changed use from
residential. No zoning permit will be required nor change in the zoning
if residential improvements are made. [Added 6-27-2016]
A. A certificate of zoning compliance shall be required after completion of
any construction, erection, enlargement, structural alteration, moving
or conversion of any building or structure for which a zoning permit is
required by § 171-19 of this Article and prior to occupancy or use of
such building or structure.
B. The Zoning Administrator shall issue the certificate of zoning
compliance within five working days after notification by the applicant
that the construction is completed if, after inspection of the building or
structure, the Zoning Administrator is satisfied that the construction is
in compliance with plans approved in conjunction with the zoning
permit. If construction is not in compliance with such plans, the
certificate of zoning compliance shall not be issued and the building or
structure shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter.
A. In any case where a building or other structure is constructed, erected,
enlarged, structurally altered, moved or converted, no certificate of use
§ 171-19 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-22
157:294
§ 171-23. Land disturbing permit.
No land disturbing permit required by the provisions of the Erosion and
Sediment Control Ordinance applicable within the town shall be issued until
the Zoning Administrator has reviewed the application for such permit and
certified that the proposed land disturbing activity and the intended use of
the property will not result in any violation of the provisions of this chapter.
and occupancy shall be issued by the Building Official until a certificate
of zoning compliance as required by § 171-20 of this Article has been
issued by the Zoning Administrator and the Building Official has been
provided with a copy thereof.
B. In any case where the use of a building or structure is changed, no
certificate of use and occupancy shall be issued by the Building Official
until a zoning permit as required by § 171-19 of this Article has been
issued by the Zoning Administrator and the Building Official has been
provided with a copy thereof.
§ 171-22 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-23
157:295

ARTICLE V
Enforcement and Remedies
§ 171-24. Complaints regarding violations.
Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs or is alleged to have occurred,
any person may file a written complaint. The complaint shall state fully
the causes and basis of such complaint and shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall properly record the
complaint, immediately investigate and take such action as provided for
in this chapter. The Town Attorney shall be immediately advised of all
violations of this chapter.
§ 171-25. Violations and penalties.
§ 171-26. Notice of violation; remedies.
A. Violations of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any
of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grants of variances or conditional uses)
following official notification shall be misdemeanors punishable by a
fine of not less than $10 nor more than $1,000. [Amended
11-11-1996]
B. The owner or tenant of any building, structure or premises and any
architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person who commits,
participates in, assists in or maintains such violation may be punished
as heretofore provided.
A. Upon finding that any provision of this chapter is being violated, the
Zoning Administrator shall notify, in writing, the person responsible for
such violation and order the remedy of conditions found to be in
violation, including the discontinuance of illegal uses of land and
buildings, the removal or bringing into compliance of illegal buildings,
structures, additions and alterations and the discontinuance of illegal
work being done.
B. Any written notice of a zoning violation or written order of the Zoning
Administrator shall include a statement informing the recipient that he
or she may have a right to appeal such notice or order to the Board of
Zoning Appeals within 30 days and that the decision of the Zoning
Administrator shall be final and unappealable if not appealed within 30
days. The appeal period shall not commence until such statement is
given.
C. Should such notice and order fail to result in compliance with this
chapter, the Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to bring
legal action to ensure compliance with the appropriate action or
proceeding. The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to
initiate criminal or civil proceedings as provided for by the laws of the
commonwealth. The Town shall have the right to contract the work to
§ 171-24 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-26
157:297
§ 171-27. Coordination of Town Attorney and Zoning Administrator.
The Zoning Administrator shall provide to the Town Attorney a copy of
every written notice and order involving a violation of this chapter. The
Town Attorney shall advise and assist the Zoning Administrator in his or her
efforts to obtain abatement of such violation.
§ 171-28. Remedy of violations procedure. [Amended 11-11-1996]
The following procedure shall be used to remedy violation of this chapter:
be completed to comply with the Town’s Code, the cost of which shall
be chargeable to and paid by the owner of said property. Every charge
authorized by this article with which the owner of any such property
shall have been assessed and which remains unpaid shall constitute a
lien against such property, and the Treasurer shall file with the Clerk of
the County Circuit Court a statement of the lien claim. Release of such
lien shall be executed by the Treasurer upon presentation of evidence
that the amount of the lien and cost involved have been paid to the
Town. [Amended 3-25-2013]
D. In case any building or other structure is proposed to be erected,
constructed, reconstructed, altered, extended or converted or any
building, other structure or land is or is proposed to be used in violation
of this chapter, the Zoning Administrator or other appropriate authority
of the town or neighboring property owner who would be especially
damaged by such violation may, in addition to other remedies, institute
an injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action or proceeding to
prevent, correct or abate such violation or to prevent the occupancy of
such building, structure or land.
A. The Zoning Administrator detects a violation and orders the remedying
of the violation, in writing.
B. If the violator fails to correct the violation, the Zoning Administrator
shall inform the Town Attorney to take appropriate action.
C. The Town Attorney initiates court action after notification from the
Zoning Administrator that the violation has not been corrected.
§ 171-26 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-28
157:298
ARTICLE VI
Official Zoning Maps
§ 171-29. Incorporation of maps.
The boundaries of districts established by this chapter shall be shown on the
Official Zoning Map which is hereby incorporated into the provisions of this
chapter.56 The Zoning Map in its entirety, including all amendments, shall
be as much a part of this chapter as if fully set forth and described herein.
§ 171-30. Identification of Official Zoning Map; changes.
A. Identification of map. The Official Zoning Map57 shall be identified by
the signature of the Mayor, together with the date of the map, and shall
bear the Town Seal under the following words: "This is to certify that
this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in the Zoning Ordinance of
the Town of Hillsville, Virginia." The Official Zoning Map shall be
located in the office of the Zoning Administrator and shall not be
removed from that office except for official purposes authorized by the
Zoning Administrator.
B. Recording amendments on map. Whenever amendment is made to the
zoning district boundaries or other matter depicted on the Official
Zoning Map58 by ordinance adopted by the Town Council, the Zoning
Administrator shall see that the amendment is properly recorded on the
Official Zoning Map, along with the effective date and nature of the
amendment. Each amendment shall be recorded as soon as practicable
after its adoption.
C. Effective date of amendments. The effective date of any amendment to
the zoning district boundaries shall be the effective date of the
ordinance providing for the amendment. Any delay in or failure to
record an amendment on the Official Zoning Map59 or any error in
recording or depicting the amendment shall not affect the validity of the
ordinance providing for the amendment.
D. Unauthorized changes to map. It shall be unlawful for any person to
make changes on the Official Zoning Map60 except by authorization of
the Zoning Administrator for official purposes and in accordance with
the provisions of this Article. Any unauthorized change shall be
56.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file and available for inspection in the office of the
Town Manager.
57.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file and available for inspection in the office of the
Town Manager.
58.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file and available for inspection in the office of the
Town Manager.
59.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file and available for inspection in the office of the
Town Manager.
60.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file and available for inspection in the office of the
Town Manager.
§ 171-29 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-30
157:299
§ 171-31. Interpretation of Official Zoning Map.
When uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts shown on the
Official Zoning Map,62 the following rules shall apply:
§ 171-32. Unclassified areas and additions to jurisdiction.
considered a violation of this chapter punishable as specified in
§ 171-25.
E. Copies of Official Zoning Map.61 The Zoning Administrator shall cause
copies of the Official Zoning Map to be made in such numbers, in such
form and for such purposes as deemed appropriate by the Zoning
Administrator with the consent of the Town Council. In the case of any
discrepancy between the Official Zoning Map and any copies thereof,
the Official Zoning Map shall be the final authority.
A. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center line of
streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such center
lines.
B. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall
be construed as following such lot lines.
C. Boundaries indicated as approximately following corporate limits shall
be construed as following such corporate limits.
D. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streams or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such
center lines.
E. Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map63 shall
be determined by the scale of map.
F. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at
variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map or in other
circumstances not covered by Subsections A through E above, the
Board of Zoning Appeals shall interpret the district boundaries. (See
Article XVIII.)
A. Any area for which no zoning classification is shown on the Official
Zoning Map64 shall be construed as being within the A-1 Agricultural/
Residential District unless otherwise designated by ordinance adopted
by the Town Council.
61.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file and available for inspection in the office of the
Town Manager.
62.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file and available for inspection in the office of the
Town Manager.
63.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file and available for inspection in the office of the
Town Manager.
64.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file and available for inspection in the office of the
Town Manager.
§ 171-30 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-32
157:300
B. Any territory hereafter annexed to the town shall be construed as being
within the A-1 Agricultural/Residential District until otherwise
designated by ordinance adopted by the Town Council.
§ 171-32 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-32
157:301

ARTICLE VII
Establishment and Purpose of Districts
§ 171-33. Districts established; purpose.
In order to implement all purposes and provisions of this chapter, the lands
within the corporate limits of the Town of Hillsville, Virginia, are divided
into the following districts, the purposes of which are as follows.
§ 171-34. A-1 Agricultural/Residential District.
The A-1 Agricultural/Residential District includes the sparsely developed
land of the town in which the principal use is currently used for lowdensity
agricultural and residential purposes. The regulations of this district
are designed to protect the agricultural sections of the community from
an influx of uses likely to render them undesirable for farms and future
development. The district is primarily a transitional agricultural area. This
zone is established for the specific purpose of:
§ 171-35. Residential districts.
A. Providing for the orderly expansion of urban development into
predominantly agricultural territory within the incorporated areas.
B. Confining such development to such locations as can feasibly be
supplied urban-type facilities.
C. Discouraging the random scattering of residential, commercial and
industrial uses into the area.
A. The residential districts established in this chapter are designed to
promote and protect the health, safety and general welfare by
encouraging the following goals for growth:
(1) Provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for residential
developments to adequately meet the housing needs of the present
and expected future population and provide a variety of choices in
site selections.
(2) Permit improved movement on the public ways and effectively
utilize existing public ways and, as far as possible, mitigate the
effects of heavy traffic and, more particularly, all through traffic in
residential areas.
(3) Protect residential areas against flood, fire, explosions and other
dangers and objectionable influences.
(4) Protect residential areas against undue congestion, as far as
possible, by regulating the density of population, the intensity of
activity and the bulk of buildings in relation to the surrounding land
and to one another, and by providing for off-street parking spaces
for automotive vehicles.
§ 171-33 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-35
157:303
(5) Provide for access of light and air to windows and for privacy, as far
as possible, by controls over the height of buildings and structures.
(6) Provide appropriate space for public and private educational,
religious, recreational and similar facilities and public utilities
which serve the needs of nearby residents and which do not create
objectionable influences; and coordinate the intensity of residential
land use with the appropriate community facilities.
(7) Provide the most desirable use of land in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan in order to protect the character of residential
neighborhoods, conserve the value of land and buildings and
protect the community's tax revenues.
B. Medium-Density Residential District. This district is designed to
provide suitable areas for medium-density residential development in
areas where necessary community services and facilities are provided
or where the extension of these facilities is physically and economically
feasible. This district will be characterized generally by single-family
dwellings with other type dwellings located where community services
and facilities are adequate to meet all demands. This district also
includes community facilities, public utilities and open spaces which
serve the residents of these districts. It is the express purpose of this
chapter to exclude in this district all buildings or other structures and
uses having commercial characteristics, whether operated for profit or
otherwise, except that conditional uses and home occupations
specifically provided for in these regulations shall be permitted if they
otherwise conform to the provisions of this chapter.
C. Multifamily Residential District. This district is designed to provide
suitable areas for high-density residential development where
necessary community services and facilities are available or where the
extension of these facilities is physically and economically feasible. It is
the intent of this district to allow multiple dwelling units in a building,
provided that there is sufficient lot area and open space in the lot
relative to the number of dwelling units. This district also includes
community facilities, public utilities and open spaces which serve the
residents of the district. It is the express purpose of this chapter to
exclude from the district all buildings or other structures and uses
having commercial characteristics, whether operated for profit or
otherwise, except that conditional uses and home occupations
specifically provided for in these regulations shall be permitted if they
otherwise conform to the provisions of this chapter.
D. MHP Mobile Home Park Residential District. This district is designed to
provide suitable areas for mobile home park residential development
where appropriate community services and facilities are provided or
where the extension of such facilities will be physically and
economically feasible. This district will be characterized by singlefamily
mobile home dwellings in mobile home parks, and accessory
structures. This district will also include community facilities, public
§ 171-35 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-35
157:304
§ 171-36. Commercial districts.
§ 171-37. Industrial District.
utilities and open spaces which serve the residents of the district.
Home occupations specifically provided for in these regulations shall be
permitted if they otherwise conform to the provisions of this chapter.
A. The commercial districts established by this chapter are designed to
promote and protect the health, safety and general welfare by
encouraging the following goals for growth:
(1) Provide sufficient space for the many and diverse types of
commercial activity needed to serve the people and industry of
Hillsville.
(2) Promote the improvement and orderly growth of the existing welllocated
commercial centers.
(3) Protect adjacent residential areas from offensive and detrimental
influences.
(4) Promote the most efficient and desirable land use.
B. NC Neighborhood Commercial District. This district is designed to
provide a limited variety of goods and services for the immediate
residential neighborhood. It is not intended that this district permit
uses which generate large volumes of traffic. Adequate buffers and
appropriate open spaces between commercial and residential areas are
required to protect the integrity of residential neighborhoods.
C. CC Core Commercial District. This district is designed to provide for a
wide range of retail, office, amusement and service uses normally found
in a central business district. High intensity of use is permitted in this
district, and increased building bulk is provided as a means of
encouraging such development. This district is intended to be designed
in a manner conducive to and safe for a high volume of pedestrian
traffic.
D. GC General Commercial District. This district is designed to provide
adequate space in appropriate locations for the establishment of a wide
variety of uses, including commercial trades and services,
entertainment facilities, offices and establishments engaged in
wholesale trade. Since these activities tend to generate relatively large
volumes of traffic and have other characteristics detrimental to
residential districts, their locations should be removed from the
proximity of residential districts as much as possible.
A. The industrial district established by this chapter is designed to
promote and protect the health, safety and general welfare by
encouraging the following goals for growth:
§ 171-35 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-37
157:305
§ 171-37.1. L Landfill District. [Added 5-10-2004]
The L Landfill District established by this chapter is designed to provide for
the controlled and orderly disposal of waste from residents of the Town of
Hillsville and surrounding areas by:
§ 171-38. Floodplain zoning. [Added 6-14-200465; amended
6-9-2008]
(1) Provide sufficient space in appropriate locations which are
adequately served by community facilities to meet the needs for
industrial expansion in Hillsville.
(2) Encourage industrial development which is free from hazards to
the public health and which is environmentally safe and
nonpolluting.
(3) Protect industrial activities against congestion, encroachment from
incompatible land uses and other adverse characteristics.
(4) Protect adjacent residential and commercial areas from
incompatible land uses and offensive influences.
(5) Promote the most efficient and desirable use of land.
B. In accordance with these goals, this district is designed to provide
space for a limited range of industrial uses which have high
performance standards and the least objectionable characteristics. In
this district all industrial operations shall be carried on within
completely enclosed neighboring properties. Residential uses are
excluded from this district. Only those community facility and
commercial uses which are essential to provide needed services for
industry are permitted in this district.
A. Providing sufficient space in appropriate locations to meet the waste
disposal needs of the residents of the Town and surrounding areas.
B. Protecting adjacent residential and commercial areas from
incompatible land uses, offensive influences and other adverse
characteristics.
C. Promoting the most efficient and desirable use of land.
A. General provisions.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of these provisions is to prevent the loss of
life and property, the creation of health and safety hazards, the
disruption of commerce and governmental services, the
extraordinary and unnecessary expenditure of public funds for
flood protection and relief, and the impairment of the tax base by:
65.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 171-38, F-1 Flood Hazard District
(overlay), as amended 11-11-1996.
§ 171-37 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-38
157:306
(a) Regulating uses, activities, and development which, alone or in
combination with other existing or future uses, activities, and
development, will cause unacceptable increases in flood
heights, velocities, and frequencies;
(b) Restricting or prohibiting certain uses, activities, and
development from locating within districts subject to flooding;
(c) Requiring all those uses, activities, and developments that do
occur in flood-prone districts to be protected and/or
floodproofed against flooding and flood damage; and
(d) Protecting individuals from buying land and structures which
are unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazards.
(2) Applicability. These provisions shall apply to all lands within the
jurisdiction of Hillsville and identified as being in the one-hundredyear
floodplain by the Federal Insurance Administration.
(3) Compliance and liability.
(a) No land shall hereafter be developed and no structure shall be
located, relocated, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, or
structurally altered except in full compliance with the terms
and provisions of this section and any other applicable
ordinances and regulations which apply to uses within the
jurisdiction of this section.
(b) The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this
section is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is
based on acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger
floods may occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be
increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and
bridge openings restricted by debris. This section does not
imply that districts outside the floodplain district, or that land
uses permitted within such district will be free from flooding or
flood damages.
(c) Records of actions associated with administering this section
shall be kept on file and maintained by the Town Manager.
(d) This section shall not create liability on the part of Hillsville or
any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this section or any administrative
decision lawfully made thereunder.
(4) Abrogation and greater restrictions. This section supersedes any
ordinance currently in effect in flood-prone districts. However, any
underlying ordinance shall remain in full force and effect to the
extent that its provisions are more restrictive than this section.
(5) Severability. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence,
clause, or phrase of this section shall be declared invalid for any
§ 171-38 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-38
157:307
reason whatever, such decision shall not affect the remaining
portions of this section. The remaining portions shall remain in full
force and effect; and for this purpose, the provisions of this section
are hereby declared to be severable.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION — The Federal Emergency Management
Agency designated one-hundred-year water surface elevation.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS — The board appointed to review
appeals made by individuals with regard to decisions of the Zoning
Administrator in the interpretation of this section.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations or storage of equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A non-basement building built to have the
lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid
foundation perimeter walls, pilings, or columns (posts and piers).
ENCROACHMENT — The advance or infringement of uses, plant
growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or
development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow
capacity of a floodplain.
FLOOD or FLOODING —
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source.
A general or temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from:
(a) The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.
(b)
(1)
The collapse or subsistence of land along the shore of a lake or
other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by
waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or
suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body
of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated
force of nature such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or
by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in
flooding as defined in Subsection (1)(a) of this definition.
(2)
§ 171-38 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-38
157:308
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than a designated height.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a
flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends
to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to
flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood
and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the
hydrological effect of urbanization in the watershed.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor;
provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure
in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of
Federal Code 44 CFR 60.3.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for
use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities. For floodplain management purposes, the term
"manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and
other similar vehicles placed one a site for greater than 180 consecutive
days.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
(a)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(b)
(4)
§ 171-38 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-38
157:309
NEW CONSTRUCTION — For the purposes of determining insurance
rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced on
or after the effective date of an initial Flood Insurance Rate Map
on or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain
management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which
start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a
floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
SHALLOW FLOODING AREA — A special flood hazard area with base
flood depths from one to three feet where a clearly defined channel
does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and
indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding
is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — The land in the floodplain subject
to a one-percent or greater chance of being flooded in any given year
as determined in Subsection C(2) of this section.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, substantial improvement or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond
the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation,
such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation
on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not
occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of the construction means the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before
(1) Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
(2)
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
(3)
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational camping, travel, or
seasonal use.
(4)
§ 171-38 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-38
157:310
damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of
the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
WATERCOURSE — A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial
flood damage may occur.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure.
(2)
C. Establishment of zoning districts.
(1) Description of districts.
(a) Basis of districts. The various floodplain districts shall include
special flood hazard areas. The basis for the delineation of
these districts shall be the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the
Flood Insurance Rate Maps for Carroll County and the Town of
Hillsville prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, Federal Insurance Administration, dated August 28,
2008, as amended.
[1] The Approximated Floodplain District shall be those areas
identified as an A or A99 Zone on the maps accompanying
the Flood Insurance Study. In these zones, no detailed
flood profiles or elevations are provided, but the onehundred-
year floodplain boundary has been approximated.
[2] The Shallow Flooding District shall be those areas
identified as Zone AO or AH on the maps accompanying
the Flood Insurance Study.
(b) Overlay concept.
[1] The Floodplain Districts described above shall be overlays
to the existing underlying districts as shown on the Official
Zoning Ordinance Map, and as such, the provisions for the
§ 171-38 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-38
157:311
Floodplain Districts shall serve as a supplement to the
underlying district provisions.
[2] If there is any conflict between the provisions or
requirements of the Floodplain Districts and those of any
underlying district, the more restrictive provisions and/or
those pertaining to the Floodplain Districts shall apply.
[3] In the event any provision concerning a Floodplain District
is declared inapplicable as a result of any legislative or
administrative actions or judicial decision, the basic
underlying provisions shall remain applicable.
(2) Official Zoning Map. The boundaries of the Special Flood Hazard
Area and Floodplain Districts are established as shown on the
Flood Boundary and Floodway Map and/or Flood Insurance Rate
Map which is declared to be a part of this section and which shall
be kept on file at the Town of Hillsville offices.
(3) District boundary changes. The delineation of any of the Floodplain
Districts may be revised by the Town of Hillsville where natural or
man-made changes have occurred and/or where more detailed
studies have been conducted or undertaken by the U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers or other qualified agency, or an individual documents
the need for such change. However, prior to any such change,
approval must be obtained from the Federal Insurance
Administration.
(4) Interpretation of district boundaries. Initial interpretations of the
boundaries of the Floodplain Districts shall be made by the Zoning
Officer. Should a dispute arise concerning the boundaries of any of
the Districts, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall make the necessary
determination. The person questioning or contesting the location of
the District boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
present his case to the Board and to submit his own technical
evidence if he so desires.
D. District provisions.
(1) Permit and application requirements.
(a) Permit requirement. All uses, activities, and development
occurring within any Floodplain District shall be undertaken
only upon the issuance of a zoning permit. Such development
shall be undertaken only in strict compliance with the
provisions of the section and with all other applicable codes
and ordinances, such as the VA USBC, as amended, and the
Town of Hillsville Subdivision Regulations.66 Prior to the
issuance of any such permit, the Zoning Officer shall require all
66.Editor's Note: See Ch. 140, Subdivision of Land.
§ 171-38 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-38
157:312
applications to include compliance with all applicable state and
federal laws.
(b) Site plans and permit applications. All applications for
development within any Floodplain District and all building
permits issued for the floodplain shall incorporate the
following information:
[1] For structures to be elevated, the elevation of the lowest
floor (including basement).
[2] For structures to be floodproofed (nonresidential only), the
elevation to which the structure will be floodproofed.
(2) General standards. In all special flood hazard areas, the following
provisions shall apply:
(a) New construction and substantial improvements shall be
according to the VA USBC, and shall be anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
(b) Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may
include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties
to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and
consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting
wind forces.
(c) New construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage.
(d) New construction or substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
(e) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities, including duct work,
shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from
entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding.
(f) New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
system.
(g) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood
waters.
§ 171-38 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-38
157:313
(h) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and
constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding.
(i) Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a
building that is in compliance with the provisions of this
section shall meet the requirements of new construction as
contained in this section.
(j) Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a
building that is not in compliance with the provisions of this
section shall be undertaken only if said nonconformity is not
furthered, extended, or replaced.
(k) In riverine situations, adjacent communities and the
Department of Conservation and Recreation (Department of
Floodplain Management) shall be notified prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and copies of such
notifications shall be submitted to FEMA.
(l) The flood-carrying capacity within an altered or relocated
portion of any watercourse shall be maintained.
(3) Specific standards. In all special flood hazard areas where base
flood elevations have been provided in the Flood Insurance Study
or generated according to Subsection D(4)(a), the following
provisions shall apply:
(a) Residential construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any residential structure (including
manufactured homes) shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated no lower than two feet above the base flood
elevation.
(b) Nonresidential construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial, or non-residential
building (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated to no lower than two feet above
the base flood elevation. Buildings located in all A1-30, AE, and
AH zones may be floodproofed in lieu of being elevated
provided that all areas of the building components below the
elevation corresponding to the BFE plus one foot are
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage
of water, and use structural components having the capability
of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect
of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect
shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied.
(c) Elevated buildings. Enclosed areas of new construction or
substantially improved structures which are below the
regulatory flood protection elevation shall:
§ 171-38 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-38
157:314
[1] Not be designed or used for human habitation, but shall
only be used for parking of vehicles, building access, or
limited storage of maintenance equipment used in
connection with the premises. Access to the enclosed area
shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of
vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance
equipment (standard exterior door), or entry to the living
area (stairway or elevator). The interior portion of such
enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into
separate rooms, except to enclose storage areas.
[2] Be constructed entirely of flood-resistant materials below
the regulatory flood protection elevation.
[3] Include, in Zones A, AO, AE, and A1-30, measures to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by
allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this
requirement, the openings must either be certified by a
professional engineer or architect or meet the following
minimum design criteria:
[a] Provide a minimum of two openings on different sides
of each enclosed area subject to flooding.
[b] The total net area of all openings must be at least one
square inch for each square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding.
[c] If a building has more than one enclosed area, each
area must have openings to allow floodwaters to
automatically enter and exit.
[d] The bottom of all required openings shall be no higher
than one foot above the adjacent grade.
[e] Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or
other opening coverings or devices, provided they
permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both
directions.
[f] Foundation enclosures made of flexible skirting are
not considered enclosures for regulatory purposes,
and, therefore, do not require openings. Masonry or
wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is
considered an enclosure and requires openings as
outlined above.
(d) Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
[1] All manufactured homes placed, or substantially improved,
on individual lots or parcels, in expansions to existing
manufactured home parks or subdivisions, in a new
§ 171-38 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-38
157:315
manufactured home park or subdivision or in an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision in which a
manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as
the result of a flood, must meet all the requirements for
new construction, including the elevation and anchoring
requirements in Subsection D(2)(a) and (b) and D(3)(a).
[2] Elevation and anchoring.
[a] All manufactured homes placed or substantially
improved in an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision in which a manufactured home has not
incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood
must be elevated so that either:
[b] The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated
no lower than two feet above the base flood elevation;
or
[c] The manufactured home chassis is supported by
reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at
least equivalent strength that are no less than 36
inches in height above grade.
[d] The manufactured home must be securely anchored to
the adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
[3] All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either:
[a] Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
[b] Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a
recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on
its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security
devices and has no permanently attached additions);
or
[c] Meet all the requirements for manufactured homes in
Subsection D(3)(d).
(4) Standards for approximated floodplain. The following provisions
shall apply within the approximate floodplain district:
(a) When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been
provided, the Zoning Administrator shall obtain, review, and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data
available from a federal, state, or any other source, in order to
administer the provisions of Subsection D. When such base
flood elevation data is utilized, the Zoning Administrator shall
obtain:
§ 171-38 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-38
157:316
[1] The elevation (in relation to the mean sea level) of the
lowest floor (including the basement) of all new and
substantially improved structures; and
[2] If the structure has been floodproofed in accordance with
the requirements of Subsection D(3)(b) of this section, the
elevation in relation to the mean sea level to which the
structure has been floodproofed.
(b) When the data is not available from any source as in
Subsection D(4)(a), the lowest floor of the structure shall be
elevated to no lower than two feet above the highest adjacent
grade.
(5) Standards for the floodway. The following provisions shall apply
within the floodway when it has been identified as in Subsection
D(4)(a):
(a) Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and other developments are prohibited unless
certification (with supporting technical data) by a registered
professional engineer is provided demonstrating that
encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels
during occurrence of the base flood discharge. Development
activities which increase the water surface elevation of the
base flood be allowed, provided that the developer or applicant
first applies – with Hillsville's endorsement – for a conditional
Flood Insurance Rate Map and floodway revision, and receives
the approval of the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(b) If Subsection D(5)(a) is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable
flood hazard reduction provisions of Subsection D.
(c) The placement of manufactured homes (mobile homes) is
prohibited, except in an existing manufactured homes (mobile
homes) park or subdivision. A replacement manufactured
home may be placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision, provided the anchoring, elevation, and
encroachment standards are met.
(6) Standards for subdivision proposals.
(a) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
(b) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems
located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
(c) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and
§ 171-38 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-38
157:317
(d) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development proposals
(including manufactured home parks and subdivisions) that
exceed 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser.
E. Variance factors to be considered.
(1) In passing upon applications for variances, the Board of Zoning
Appeals shall satisfy all relevant factors and procedures specified
in other sections of the Zoning Ordinance and consider the
following additional factors:
(a) The showing of good and sufficient cause.
(b) The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights
or velocities caused by encroachments. No variance shall be
granted for any proposed use, development, or activity within
any Floodway District that will cause any increase in the onehundred-
year flood elevation.
(c) The danger that materials maybe swept on to other lands or
downstream to the injury of others.
(d) The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the
ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and
unsanitary conditions.
(e) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owners.
(f) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community.
(g) The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location.
(h) The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding
for the proposed use.
(i) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing
development and development anticipated in the foreseeable
future.
(j) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program for the area.
(k) The safety of access by ordinary and emergency vehicles to the
property in time of flood.
(l) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site.
(m) The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will
§ 171-38 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-38
157:318
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
(n) Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this
section.
(2) The Board of Zoning Appeals may refer any application and
accompanying documentation pertaining to any request for a
variance to any engineer or other qualified person or agency for
technical assistance in evaluating the proposed project in relation
to flood heights and velocities and the adequacy of the plans for
flood protection and other related matters.
(3) Variances shall be issued only after the Board of Zoning Appeals
has determined that the granting of such will not result in
unacceptable or prohibited increases in flood heights; additional
threats to public safety; extraordinary public expense; and will not
create nuisances; cause fraud or victimization of the public; or
conflict with local laws or ordinances.
(4) Variances shall be issued only after the Board of Zoning Appeals
has determined that the variance will be the minimum required to
provide relief from exceptional hardship to the applicant.
(5) The Board of Zoning Appeals shall notify the applicant for a
variance, in writing, that the issuance of a variance to construct a
structure below the one-hundred-year flood elevation increases the
risks to life and property; and will result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(6) A record shall be maintained of the above notification as well as all
variance actions, including justification for the issuance of the
variances. Any variances that are issued shall be noted in the
annual or biennial report submitted to the Federal Insurance
Administrator.
F. Existing structures in floodplain areas. A structure or use of a structure
or premises which lawfully existed before the enactment of these
provisions, but which is not in conformity with these provisions, may be
continued subject to the following conditions:
(1) Existing structures in the Floodway Area shall not be expanded or
enlarged unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and
hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard
engineering practices that the proposed expansion would not result
in any increase in the base flood elevation.
(2) Any modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction, or
improvement of any kind to a structure and/or use located in any
flood plain areas to an extent or amount of less than 50% of its
market value shall conform to the VA USBC.
§ 171-38 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-38
157:319
(3) The modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction, or
improvement of any kind to a structure and/or use, regardless of its
location in a floodplain area, to an extent or amount of 50% or more
of its market value shall be undertaken only in full compliance with
this section and shall require the entire structure to conform to the
VA USBC.
§ 171-38 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-38
157:320
ARTICLE VIII
Use Regulations
§ 171-39. Permitted uses.
The uses, buildings and structures listed on the Table of Permitted Uses in
§ 171-41 of this Article are permitted in the districts indicated, subject to
all other applicable provisions of this chapter. All other uses, buildings and
structures are prohibited.
§ 171-40. Interpretation of table.
§ 171-41. Table of Permitted Uses. [Amended 5-10-2004; 6-14-2004;
2-11-2013]
The Table of Permitted Uses shall be as follows:
Districts (see Article VII)
Use A-1 R-1 R-2 MHP NC CC GC I L
Accessory uses and
structures
A A A A A A A A A
Agricultural uses P
Auto graveyard C
Automotive service P P P
Clinic P P P P
Community
education
P P P P
Construction
equipment sales,
service and rental
P
A. Key to table.
(1) The letter "P" indicates the listed use, building or structure is
permitted as a principal use, building or structure in the district.
(2) The letter "A" indicates the listed use, building or structure is
permitted as accessory to a permitted principal or conditional use
in the district, as defined in § 171-8 of this chapter.
(3) The letter "C" indicates the listed use, building or structure is
permitted as a conditional use in the district, subject to the
provisions of Article XVI of this chapter.
B. References. A reference in parenthesis following a listed use on the
Table of Permitted Uses indicates the section of this chapter defining
the term listed or other reference for purpose of clarification.
§ 171-39 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-41
157:321
Districts (see Article VII)
Use A-1 R-1 R-2 MHP NC CC GC I L
Construction sales
and service
P P
Contractor's
business and
storage yard
P
Dwelling,
incidental
[Amended
11-27-2000]
C A C
Dwelling,
multifamily
P
Dwelling, singlefamily
P P P P
Dwelling, twofamily
P P P P
Entertainment and
recreation, indoor
P
Financial
institution
P P P P
Home occupation A A A A A
Hospital P
Kennel or
veterinary facility
C P P
Laboratory or
research and
development
P P
Library C C C C
Manufactured
(mobile) home
P
Manufacturing,
light industrial
P P
Manufacturing,
heavy industrial
P
Mobile unit,
commercial or
office
C C C
Office P P P P
§ 171-41 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-41
157:322
Districts (see Article VII)
Use A-1 R-1 R-2 MHP NC CC GC I L
Off-street parking
and loading (see
Articles XII and
XIII)
A A A A A P,A A A
Place of worship P P P P P P
Private recreation
facility
A A A A A A A
Public use or
building
P P P
Public park or
playground
C C C C C P
Public landfill P
Restaurant P P P
Retail stores and
shops
P P P P
Semi-transient
residential
P P
Signs (see also
Article XIV)
A A A A A A A A
Transient lodgings P P P
Utility facilities P P P P P P P P
Buildings or
transmission lines
C C C C C C C C
Warehouse Type 1 P
Warehouse, Type 2 P P
Wholesale sales P P
§ 171-41 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-41
157:323

ARTICLE IX
Bulk Requirements
§ 171-42. Table of Bulk Requirements. [Amended 11-27-2000;
5-10-2004]
District
Maximum
Height
Minimum
Lot Area
Minimum
Lot Width
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
Front
Side
Rear

A-1 Agricultural/
Residential
35 40,000 50 50 50
R-1 35 10,000 35 30 10 30
R-2 Multifamily Residential 35 2,500 40 30 8 30
Dwellings (with
public water and
sewer)
10,000 (or
2,500 per
unit,
whichever
is greater)
80
MHP Mobile Home Park Residential
Mobile home park 5 acres
Individual mobile
home lot
4,500 15 15 15
Other uses in park 35 10,000 40 30 15 15
NC Neighborhood
Commercial
35 40 20 20 20
(20) (20) (20)
CC Core Commercial 35 (30)
§ 171-42 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-42
157:325
Minimum yards
District
Maximum
Height1
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)2
Minimum
Lot Width
(feet)
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
(percent)
Front3
(feet)
Side4
(feet)
Rear
(feet)
GC General
Commercial
35 50 20 20 20
(20) (20)
I Industrial 35 50 40 25
(50)
25
(50)
L Landfill 35 50 40 25
(50)
25
(50)
Footnotes to Table:
1 See § 171-43I for height exceptions.
2 Greater area may be required if necessary for private septic or well systems.
3 Dimensions in parentheses are required when parking is provided in the front yard.
4 Dimensions in parentheses are required when the lot abuts a residential district.
§ 171-43. Requirements applicable to all districts.
A. Visibility at intersections. On a corner lot in any district, except the CC
Core Commercial District, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or
allowed to be grown in such a manner as to impede vision between a
height of 2 1/2 and 10 feet above the center-line grades within 15 feet
of the intersecting streets.
B. Fences, walls and hedges. Fences, walls and hedges shall be permitted
in any required yard or along the edge of any required yard except as
prohibited in Subsection A, provided that fences and walls located in
required front yards shall not exceed four feet in height and fences and
walls located in required side and rear yards shall not exceed six (6)
feet in height. Fence posts and columns may exceed these height
limitations. Fences and walls provided for purposes of satisfying
screening requirements of this chapter may exceed these height
§ 171-42 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-43
157:326
limitations when greater height is necessary to accomplish the
screening objective of this chapter.
C. Use of required yard area. Required yards may be occupied by
driveways, parking, loading and sidewalks, provided that parking,
loading and access aisles thereto accessory to any use other than a
single-family or two-family dwelling shall not be located within a
required front yard within 10 feet of any street line. All required yards
not occupied by driveways, parking, loading, access aisles, sidewalks
shall be landscaped as landscaping is defined in § 171-8 of this chapter.
[Amended 11-11-1996]
D. Accessory buildings. No accessory building shall be located within five
feet of any other building or within 10 feet of any property line, nor
shall any accessory building be located within any required front yard.
An accessory building may be attached to a principal building, in which
case it shall be considered part of the principal building for purposes of
determining required yards.
E. Structures to have access. Every structure shall be on a lot having
access to a public street. All structures shall be located on lots so as to
provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection and
required off-street parking. For the purposes of this Article, all streets
recorded on the Official Zoning Map67 shall be considered public.
F. Parking, storage or use of major recreational equipment. No major
recreational equipment shall be permanently parked or stored in any
front yard of any lot in a residential district for more than 30 days in one
calendar year.
G. One principal building on any lot. More than one principal building as
defined in § 171-8 of this chapter may be located on a lot, except that in
an A-1 or R-1 District, only one principal building and its permitted
accessory buildings shall be located on any lot.
H. Yards on double frontage and corner lots. On double frontage and
corner lots, as defined in § 171-8 of this chapter, there shall be a front
yard as required by § 171-42, Table of Bulk Requirements, along each
lot frontage.
I. Height limitations. Building height shall be determined as specified in
§ 171-43I of this chapter. The height limitations set forth in § 171-42,
Table of Bulk Requirements, shall not apply to church spires, belfries,
cupolas, domes, monuments, water towers, windmills, chimneys,
smokestacks, flagpoles, radio towers, antennas or similar features or to
structures accessory to permitted agricultural uses.
J. Outdoor lighting. Outdoor lighting, when provided as accessory to any
use or to illuminate any sign or similar device, shall be located, directed
67.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file and available for inspection in the office of the
Town Manager.
§ 171-43 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-43
157:327
or shielded so as not to shine directly on or to create glare as viewed
from nearby properties or to create a potential traffic hazard on nearby
driveways or streets as a result of glare or similarity to or confusion
with traffic signals, warning lights or lighting on emergency vehicles.
K. All modular homes must contain decorative masonry skirting to be
located between ground level and underneath the side of the home.
Approved masonry skirting includes brick, stone, and decorative
masonry block. [Amended 6-14-2004]
L. Mobile modular containers, storage containers, office containers and
semi-trailers are prohibited except for a period of temporary use not to
exceed 30 days. [Added 11-20-2018]
M. No lot shall have more than three accessory buildings. [Added
11-20-2018]
§ 171-43 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-43
157:328
ARTICLE X
Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks
§ 171-44. Mobile homes.
Due to the unique characteristics of mobile homes, the following
restrictions are applied in order to eliminate the adverse effects of such
structures and, at the same time, permit such structures as an alternative
form of housing.
§ 171-45. Establishment of mobile home parks.
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate within the
corporate limits of the Town of Hillsville any mobile home or mobile home
park unless such person shall first obtain a zoning permit and occupancy
permit for the park.
A. All mobile homes shall be underpinned, and axles and wheels shall be
covered. The trailer hitch shall be removed if it is the removable type or
shielded if not removed. All mobile homes shall be installed and
anchored in accordance with state requirements.
B. Mobile homes shall be permitted only in those locations designated on
the Hillsville Zoning Map68 as MHP Mobile Home Park Residential
District.
C. All mobile homes must be served by the public sewer system if
available.
A. Additional site plan specifications. In addition to the site plan
requirements in § 171-48, site plans for mobile home parks shall
contain the following:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The location and legal description of the mobile park.
(3) A complete plan for the park showing compliance with Subsection
B of this chapter.
(4) Plans and specifications of all buildings and other improvements
constructed or to be constructed within the mobile home park. The
sketch shall show the number and arrangement of mobile home
lots, roadways, water supply, water outlets, the location and type of
sewage, liquid and garbage disposal and the location of other
facilities.
(5) Such further information as may be requested by the Zoning
Administrator to enable him to determine if the proposed park will
comply with legal requirements.
68.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file and available for inspection in the office of the
Town Manager.
§ 171-44 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-45
157:329
B. Specifications for mobile home park plan. All mobile home parks shall
conform to the following requirements:
(1) The park shall be located on a well-drained site, properly graded to
ensure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water.
The provisions of the Virginia Erosion Control and Sedimentation
Act shall prevail.69
(2) The bulk requirements pertaining to the Mobile Home Park District
in Article IX shall be the minimum specifications for a mobile home
park.
(3) Mobile home spaces shall be clearly defined and mobile homes
parked so that there will be at least 30 feet of clear space between
mobile homes or any attachment, such as a garage or porch, 15 feet
between mobile homes and any buildings or structure and at least
15 feet between any mobile home and any property line. No mobile
home shall be located closer than 30 feet to any public street or
highway.
(4) All mobile home spaces shall abut upon a driveway of not less than
30 feet in width which shall have unobstructed access to a public
street. All driveways shall be lighted at night with one-hundredwatt
lamps at intervals of 100 feet located approximately 15 feet
from the ground.
(5) An electric outlet supplying 100 and 220 volts shall be provided for
each mobile home space and shall be weatherproof and accessible
to the parked mobile home. All electrical installations shall be in
compliance with the National Electrical Code.
(6) An adequate supply for water under pressure from a source and of
a quality approved by the Virginia Department of Health shall be
provided; where possible, town water shall be used. Water shall be
piped to each mobile home lot.
(7) Liquefied petroleum gas for cooking purposes shall not be used at
individual mobile home spaces unless the containers are properly
connected by copper or other suitable metallic tubing. Liquefied
petroleum gas cylinders shall be securely fastened in place and
adequately protected from the weather. No cylinder containing
liquefied petroleum gas shall be located in a mobile home, nor
within five feet of a door thereof.
(8) Waste from laundries shall be discharged into a public sewer in
compliance with applicable ordinances or into a private sewer
disposal plant in such manner to conform to the specifications of
the Health Officer. All kitchen sinks, wash basins, bath or shower
tubs in any mobile home in any park shall empty into the sanitary
sewer drain located on the mobile home space. Mobile home parks
69.Editor's Note: See § 10.1-560 et seq. of the Code of Virginia.
§ 171-45 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-45
157:330
within 300 feet of the municipal sewer shall connect to it, with
approved and sized lines.
(9) Refuse storage, collection and disposal shall be in accordance with
other regulations and ordinances of the Town of Hillsville. A
dumpster system is recommended for MHP's of eight or more units.
(10) The mobile home park shall be subject to the rules and regulations
of the fire-prevention authorities having jurisdiction.
(11) All service buildings, mobile homes, mobile home spaces and the
grounds of the park shall be maintained in a clean, sightly condition
and kept free of any conditions that will menace the health of any
occupant or the public or constitute a nuisance.
C. Register of occupants.
(1) It shall be the duty of the applicant to keep a register containing a
record of all mobile home owners and occupants located within the
park. The register shall contain the following information:
(a) The name and address of each occupant.
(b) The make, model and year of all mobile homes.
(c) The title number and owner of each mobile home.
(d) The state issuing such title.
(e) The dates of arrival and departure of each mobile home.
(2) The park shall keep the register available for inspection at all times
by law enforcement officers, public health officials and other
officials whose duties necessitate knowledge of the information
contained in the register. The register records shall be current and
account for the three previous years.
§ 171-45 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-45
157:331

ARTICLE XI
Site Plan Review
§ 171-46. Applicability.
§ 171-47. Purpose.
The purpose of site plan review is to ensure compliance with regulations
and development standards contained in this chapter and to ensure that the
purpose and intent of this chapter are met.
§ 171-48. Site plan specifications.
A. Site plan review as described in this Article shall be required prior to
issuance of any zoning permit, building permit or land disturbing
permit for:
(1) Construction of a new principal building to be used for multifamily,
commercial or industrial purposes or construction of any public use
or building.
(2) Enlargement of an existing principal building to be used for
multifamily, commercial or industrial purposes or of any public use
or building, when such enlargement exceeds 10% of the floor area
of the existing building or 1,000 square feet, whichever is less.
(3) Construction of any parking area for five or more vehicles or any
addition to or alteration of the arrangement or means of access to
any existing parking area for five or more vehicles which is
accessible by way of a driveway connecting to a public street.
B. Any use or building for which a conditional use permit is required by
this chapter shall not require site plan review as described in this
Article, but shall be subject to the review and approval process
described in Article XVI of this chapter.
A. For all proposed development a site plan for the use and development of
the entire tract shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator. The site
plan shall conform to the following requirements:
(1) Be drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet.
(2) Include the following:
(a) All information required under § 171-19.
(b) All existing and proposed roads and drainage ways.
(c) Curb cuts, drives and parking and loading areas.
(d) Landscaping and planting screens.
(e) Building lines enclosing the portion of the tract within which
buildings are to be erected.
§ 171-46 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-48
157:333
§ 171-49. Procedure for site plan review.
(f) The proposed use of the land and buildings.
(g) The existing zoning.
(3) Include a vicinity map showing the relationship of the proposed
development to:
(a) The entire town.
(b) The street system.
(c) The surrounding use districts.
(d) Surrounding properties.
(4) Bear a certificate by a civil engineer, architect, surveyor or builder
certifying that the plan as shown is true and correct.
(5) Bear a form for certificate of approval by:
(a) The Town Council.
(b) The Planning Commission.
(6) Provide a form for certification by the owner and trustee of the
mortgage, if any, that they adopt the plan, and dedicate the streets
as shown on the plan and agree to make any required
improvements of adjacent streets as shown on the plan.
B. Additional submission requirements. The Zoning Administrator,
Planning Commission or Town Council may require such additional
plans and information as needed to determine compliance with
development standards and requirements of this chapter or to assess
the general compatibility of the proposed development with
surrounding uses and buildings. In the case of new buildings and
additions to existing buildings, elevation drawings may be required.
C. Waiver of site plan specifications. With prior approval by the Zoning
Administrator, particular information may be omitted from required site
plans when, due to the nature or limited scope of a project, such
information is not necessary for evaluation of the site plan or for
purposes of maintaining a record of site plan approval.
A. Submission to Zoning Administrator. Three copies of required plans and
information shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator, who shall
review such plans and information and forward them to the Planning
Commission within 30 days.
B. Planning Commission review and recommendation. The Planning
Commission shall review the site plan and related information and
submit a recommendation to the Town Council within 30 days after the
first meeting of the Commission at which the site plan is presented. The
§ 171-48 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-49
157:334
§ 171-50. Requirements for approval of site plan.
Commission may recommend to the Council that the site plan be
approved as submitted, be approved with specific modifications or be
disapproved.
C. Action by Town Council. The Town Council shall review the site plan
and take action to approve, to approve with specific modifications or to
disapprove the site plan within 30 days after the first meeting of the
Council at which the site plan is presented. In the case of approval with
modifications or disapproval of a site plan, the Council shall state the
specific modifications or its reasons for disapproval.
D. Issuance of zoning permits. Following approval of a site plan by the
Town Council, the Zoning Administrator shall be authorized to issue
necessary zoning permits consistent with such approval.
A. Commercial districts. Waste disposal facilities, exterior storage and
other accessory uses which by their nature must exist outside a building
shall be appropriately screened and maintained.
B. Industrial District.
(1) All uses shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings
except for parking and loading, exterior storage and other
accessory uses which by their nature must exist outside a building.
(2) Exterior storage may be permitted in the side and rear of the
principal building only, provided that the location, extent and
screening of storage is approved as a part of the site plan by the
Planning Commission, and further provided that exterior storage
shall be screened from public view by a suitable fence, wall or
hedge not exceeding 15 feet in height with the stored materials to
be kept at least two feet below the top of such screen.
(3) All storage areas shall be surfaced with concrete, asphalt, tar and
gravel or gravel that provides a dust-free surface. All areas shall be
graded and drained so as to dispose of all surface water in
compliance with applicable stormwater management regulations.
[Amended 3-25-2013]
§ 171-49 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-50
157:335

ARTICLE XII
Off-Street Loading Requirements
§ 171-51. General provisions.
The following provisions for accessory off-street loading berths are adopted
in order to provide needed space off public streets for loading and unloading
activities, to limit the use of streets for such purposes, to help relieve traffic
congestion in commercial areas and thus to promote and protect the public
health, safety and general welfare.
§ 171-52. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter on accessory off-street loading regulations
shall apply to community facility, commercial and industrial uses permitted
by right, by accessory use or by conditional use in all districts.
§ 171-53. Space requirements for off-street loading berths.
Off-street loading berths and the accessways to loading berths shall be
situated so that pedestrian and vehicular traffic is not adversely affected.
Activity
For Floor Area
(square feet) Required Berth
Less than 20,000 None
20,000 to 100,000 1
100,001 to 300,000 2
Each additional 300,000 2
Community assembly;
community education;
library, administrative;
utility facilities;
place of worship
Health care Less than 10,000 None
10,000 to 100,000 1
100,001 to 300,000 2
Each additional 300,000 1
Less than 10,000 None
10,000 to 25,000 1
25,001 to 40,000 2
40,001 to 60,000 3
Convenience sales
and service;
general retail sales
and service;
group assembly
60,001 to 100,000 4
Each additional 150,000 or
fraction of 1/2 or more
1
§ 171-51 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-53
157:337
Activity
For Floor Area
(square feet) Required Berth
Less than 20,000 None
20,000 to 100,000 1
General personal
service;
financial institution;
transient habitation
100,001 to 300,000 2
Each additional 300,000 or
fraction of 1/2 or more
1
Less than 10,000 None
10,000 to 25,000 1
25,001 to 40,000 2
40,001 to 60,000 3
60,001 to 100,000 4
Wholesale sales;
automotive
repair and
cleaning;
animal care; vehicular,
craft and related equipment,
sales, rental and
delivery; construction
sales and service
Each additional 80,000 or
fraction of one-half or more
1
Mortuary service Less than 2,500 None
2,500 to 5,000 1
Each additional 10,000 or
fraction of 1/2 or more
1
Construction sales and Less than 2,000 None
service 2,001 to 10,000 1
10,001 to 25,000 2
25,001 to 40,000 3
40,001 to 60,000 4
60,001 to 100,000 5
Each additional 80,000 or
fraction of 1/2 or more
1
Transportation and Less than 2,000 None
warehouses 2,001 to 10,000 1
10,001 to 25,000 2
25,001 to 40,000 3
40,001 to 60,000 4
60,001 to 100,000 5
§ 171-53 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-53
157:338
Activity
For Floor Area
(square feet) Required Berth
Each additional 80,000 or
fraction of 1/2 or more
1
Transportation and Less than 2,000 None
warehouses 2,001 to 10,000 1
10,001 to 25,000 2
25,001 to 40,000 3
40,001 to 60,000 4
60,001 to 100,000 5
Each additional 80,000 1
All other industrial Less than 5,000 1
activities 5,001 to 20,000 2
20,001 to 40,000 3
40,001 to 60,000 4
60,001 to 100,000 5
Each additional 80,00 1
Activities in the L
Landfill District
[Added 5-10-2004]
Same as activities in the I Industrial District
§ 171-54. Special provisions for a single lot with uses subject to
different loading requirements.
When any building or lot contains two or more uses having different
requirements for loading berths as set forth in § 171-53, and provided that
the floor area of each separate use is less than the minimum floor area for
which berths are required, then off-street loading berths shall be provided
as if the total floor area were used for that use for which the most berths
are required.
§ 171-55. Size of required berths.
Off-street loading berths, opened or enclosed, shall have minimum
dimensions of length: 55 feet; width: 12 feet; and vertical clearance: 15 feet.
These dimensions shall not include driveways or entrances to or exits from
such off-street berths.
§ 171-56. Location of access to the street.
The entrances and exits to all required accessory off-street loading berths
shall be located at least 50 feet from the intersection of any two streets.
§ 171-53 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-57
157:339
§ 171-57. Surfacing. [Amended 3-25-2013]
After the effective date of this amended chapter, § 171-57, all permitted or
required open off-street loading berths and parking shall be surfaced with
asphalt or concrete and constructed to provide adequate drainage. Design
and construction must comply with applicable stormwater management
regulations.
§ 171-58. Screening.
§ 171-59. Location.
All off-street loading facilities shall be located in the rear of the principal
building.
A. All permitted or required open off-street loading berths located
adjacent to residences or a residential district shall be screened from
the adjoining residential district by either:
(1) A strip at least four feet wide, densely planted with shrubs or trees
which are at least four feet high at the time of planting and which
are of a type which may be expected to form a year-round dense
screen at least six feet high within three years; or
(2) A wall or barrier of uniformly painted fence of fire-resistant
material, at least six feet high but not more than eight feet high, as
measured from the finished grade. Such wall, barrier or fence may
be opaque or perforated, provided that not more than 50% of the
fence is open.
B. In addition, such screening:
(1) Shall be maintained in good condition at all times;
(2) Shall not be located within 15 feet of normal vehicular entrances
and exits; and
(3) Shall have no signs hung or attached thereto other than those
permitted signs for loading berths as specified in this chapter.
§ 171-57 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-59
157:340
ARTICLE XIII
Off-Street Parking Requirements
§ 171-60. Off-street requirements.
In all districts, accessory off-street parking shall be provided in accordance
with the following provisions as a condition precedent to the use. After
the effective date of this chapter, all enlargements or modifications which
increase the floor area, number of employees, seating capacity or other
applicable unit of measure shall be subject to these provisions.
§ 171-61. Space requirements for off-street parking.
In the case of fractions, the number of off-street parking shall be rounded
off to the next whole number.
A. Residential dwelling: two spaces per dwelling unit.
B. Place of worship: one space for each three seats in the church
sanctuary.
C. Community education:
(1) Elementary and junior high schools: three spaces per classroom.
(2) High schools (grades 10 through 12, inclusive): four spaces per
classroom or one space for each six seats in an auditorium, arena or
stadium, whichever requires the greatest number of space, but in
no case shall more than 300 spaces be required, except as may be
recommended by the Planning Commission.
D. Community and group assembly: for clubs, lodges, meeting halls and
recreation centers, one space for each four seats in an assembly area
within the facility or one space for each 75 square feet of gross floor
area, whichever is greater.
E. Library: one space for each four seats in the building.
F. Public park, playground or utility facility: the number of spaces to be
prescribed by the Zoning Administrator.
G. Commercial use. One off-street parking space shall be provided for each
unit of the specified number of square feet of gross floor area for the
following activities in neighborhood commercial and general
commercial only:
Activity
Gross Floor Area
(square feet)
Convenience sales and service 150
Professional office 150
Animal care 200
§ 171-60 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-61
157:341
§ 171-62. Additional regulations for accessory off-street parking.
Activity
Gross Floor Area
(square feet)
General personal service 300
Financial institution 400
Retail sales and service 150
Automotive repair and cleaning 500
Vehicular, craft and related equipment sales,
rental and service
500
Construction sales and service 1,000
Wholesale sales 1,000
Transportation 5,000
Warehousing 10,000
H. Mortuary service: one space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area or
when a chapel is provided, one space for each four permanent seats
plus one space for every 25 square feet of floor area where temporary
seats are used, whichever requires the greater number of spaces.
I. Transient habitation: one space for each unit in a building serving
transient guests.
J. Industrial use: one accessory off-street parking space for each 1,500
square feet of gross floor area or one space for each three employees
during a single or two successive shifts, whichever requires the greater
number of spaces.
K. The same space requirements for off-street parking applicable in the I
Industrial District also shall be applicable in the L Landfill District.
[Added 5-10-2004]
A. Building containing two or more uses. When a building or lot contains
two or more uses having different parking requirements, the parking
requirements for each type of use shall apply to the extent of that use.
B. Operation of off-street parking spaces. Off-street spaces shall be
designed and operated exclusively for the storage of motor vehicles
used by the visitors, occupants, employees, patrons or customers of the
use associated with the parking facilities.
C. Area of off-street parking spaces. Each off-street parking space, open or
enclosed, shall be a minimum of nine feet wide and 20 feet long,
exclusive of drives, ramps and aisles.
D. Off-site parking requirements. Off-street parking must be on the same
lot as the principal use except where there is no way to arrange the
spaces on the same lot as the principal use, provided that:
§ 171-61 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-62
157:342
§ 171-63. Design of off-street parking spaces.
(1) The spaces are located to draw a minimum of vehicular traffic to
and through streets having predominantly residential frontage;
(2) The spaces are located no further than 200 feet from the nearest
boundary of the lot occupied by facility to which the spaces are
accessory;
(3) The spaces are in the same fee simple ownership as the use to
which the spaces are accessory; and
(4) The spaces conform to all applicable district regulations of both the
district in which the principal use is located and in the district in
which the spaces are located. In the event of conflict between the
applicable district regulations, the most restrictive shall prevail.
A. Location of access to the street. The entrances and exits of all required
or permitted accessory off-street parking facilities with five or more
spaces shall be located at least 50 feet from the intersection of any two
streets.
B. Surfacing. All off-street parking areas shall be surfaced with asphalt or
concrete and constructed to provide adequate drainage. [Amended
3-25-2013]
C. Screening.
(1) Open off-street parking areas with five or more parking spaces
which are located on a lot adjacent to the boundary of a residential
district shall be screened from the residential district by either:
(a) A strip at least four feet wide, densely planted with shrubs or
trees at least four feet high at the time of planting, and which
are of a type which may be expected to form a year-round
dense screen at least six feet high within three years; or
(b) A wall or barrier or uniformly painted fence of fire-resistant
material at least six feet in height. Such wall, barrier or fence
may be opaque or perforated, provided that not more than 50%
of the fence is open.
(2) In addition, such screening:
(a) Shall be maintained in good condition at all times;
(b) Shall not be placed within 15 feet of the normal vehicular
entrances and exits;
(c) Shall have no signs hung or attached thereto other than those
permitted signs for parking areas specified in this chapter; and
(d) Shall not obstruct visibility of motorists at street intersections.
§ 171-62 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-63
157:343

ARTICLE XIV
Sign Regulations
[Amended 5-10-2004; 6-9-2014]
§ 171-64. Applicability; exemptions; purpose; compliance;
interpretation.
A. Regulations. The regulations set forth in this article or set forth
elsewhere in this chapter and referred to in this article shall apply to all
new signs, replacement signs and their modification(s) established
after the effective date of the chapter.
B. Exemption for certain existing signs. Notwithstanding any contrary
provision in this chapter, no nonconforming sign is required to be
removed solely by the passage of time if to so require is otherwise
prohibited by state or federal law.
C. Purpose and intent.
(1) The sign regulations are intended to define, permit, and control the
use of signs which are legible from the public right-of-way. Town
Council has adopted these regulations in order to achieve all of the
following community goals and objectives:
(a) Protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public.
(b) Equitably distribute the privilege of using the public environs
to communicate private information.
(c) Safeguard the public use and nature of the streets and
sidewalks.
(d) Protect and enhance the visual environment of the Town.
(e) Discourage the diminishing of property values within the Town.
(f) Minimize visual distractions to motorists using the public
streets.
(g) Promote an aesthetically pleasing environment for the citizens
of this Town.
(h) Promote the economic growth of the Town by creating a
community image that is conducive to attracting new business
and industrial development.
(i) Permit reasonable legibility and effectiveness of signs and
prevent their over-concentration, improper placement and
excessive height, bulk, density, and area.
(j) Promote the safety of persons and property by requiring that
signs not create a hazard due to collapse, fire, decay, or
abandonment.
§ 171-64 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-64
157:345
§ 171-65. Definitions.
The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this chapter and as
used elsewhere in this Code, have the meanings shown herein.
ABANDONED SIGN — A sign structure that has ceased to be used, and the
owner intends no longer to have used, for the display of sign copy, or as
otherwise defined by state law.
ANIMATED SIGN — A sign employing actual motion or the illusion of
motion. Animated signs, which are differentiated from changeable signs as
defined and regulated by this Code, include the following types:
(k) Ensure that signs do not obstruct firefighting efforts, and do
not create traffic hazards by confusing or distracting motorists
or by impairing drivers' ability to see pedestrians, obstacles, or
other vehicles or to read traffic signs.
(l) Provide for reasonable advertising of business and civic
products and services, with recognition of the effects of
signage on the character of the community.
(m) Control visual clutter, and encourage high professional
standards in sign design and display.
(n) Ensure compliance with Virginia Department of Highway and
Transportation (VDOT) regulations.
(2) The Town Council finds that the regulations in this article advance
the significant government interests identified herein and are the
minimum amount of regulation necessary to achieve those
interests.
D. Standards.
(1) Any sign displayed in the Town of Hillsville, shall comply with:
(a) All provisions of this article;
(b) All applicable provisions of the Uniform Statewide Building
Code and all amendments thereto; and
(c) All state and federal regulations pertaining to the display of
signage.
(2) If any two or more sections of the above-referenced regulations are
in conflict, the provision that provides the most restrictive standard
shall apply.
E. Interpretation; conflicting laws or regulations. Where this article differs
in any manner from the provisions of the Virginia Uniform Statewide
Building Code, the Town Code or any other ordinance or regulation of
the Town, the ordinance, Code or regulation imposing the greatest
restriction upon the use of any sign shall control.
§ 171-64 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-65
157:346
ARCHITECTURAL PROJECTION — Any projection that is not intended for
occupancy and that extends beyond the face of an exterior wall of a
building, but that does not include signs as defined herein. See also
"awning"; "backlit awning"; and "canopy, attached" and "canopy,
freestanding."
AWNING — An architectural projection or shelter projecting from and
supported by the exterior wall of a building and composed of a covering
of rigid or nonrigid materials and/or fabric on a supporting framework that
may be either permanent or retractable, including such structures that are
internally illuminated by fluorescent or other light sources.
AWNING SIGN — A sign displayed on or attached flat against the surface or
surfaces of an awning. See also "wall or fascia sign."
BACKLIT AWNING — An awning with a translucent covering material and a
source of illumination contained within its framework.
BANNER — A flexible substrate on which copy or graphics may be
displayed.
BANNER SIGN — A sign utilizing a banner as its display surface.
ELECTRICALLY ACTIVATED — Animated signs producing the illusion
of movement by means of electronic, electrical or electro-mechanical
input and/or illumination capable of simulating movement through
employment of the characteristics of one or both of the classifications
noted below:
Flashing: Animated signs or animated portions of signs whose
illumination is characterized by a repetitive cycle in which the
period of illumination is either the same as or less than the period
of nonillumination. For the purposes of this chapter, flashing will
not be defined as occurring if the cyclical period between on-off
phases of illumination exceeds four seconds.
(1)
Patterned illusionary movement: Animated signs or animated
portions of signs whose illumination is characterized by simulated
movement through alternate or sequential activation of various
illuminated elements for the purpose of producing repetitive light
patterns designed to appear in some form of constant motion.
(2)
A.
ENVIRONMENTALLY ACTIVATED — Animated signs or devices
motivated by wind, thermal changes or other natural environmental
input; includes spinners, pinwheels, pennant strings, and/or other
devices or displays that respond to naturally occurring external
motivation.
B.
MECHANICALLY ACTIVATED — Animated signs characterized by
repetitive motion and/or rotation activated by a mechanical system
powered by electric motors or other mechanically induced means.
C.
§ 171-65 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-65
157:347
BILLBOARD — An off-premises sign or sign structure with display space
available for lease and designed so that the copy or poster on the sign can
be changed frequently.
BUILDING ELEVATION — The entire side of a building, from ground level
to the roofline, as viewed perpendicular to the walls on that side of the
building.
CANOPY (ATTACHED) — A multisided overhead structure or architectural
projection supported by attachments to a building on one or more sides
and either cantilevered from such building or also supported by columns
at additional points. The surface(s) and/or soffit of an attached canopy may
be illuminated by means of internal or external sources of light. See also
"marquee."
CANOPY (FREESTANDING) — A multisided overhead structure supported
by columns, but not enclosed by walls. The surface(s) and/or soffit of a
freestanding canopy may be illuminated by means of internal or external
sources of light.
CANOPY SIGN — A sign affixed to the visible surface(s) of an attached or
freestanding canopy.
CHANGEABLE SIGN — A sign with the capability of content change by
means of manual or remote input, including signs which are:
COMBINATION SIGN — A sign that is supported partly by a pole and partly
by a building structure.
COPY — Those letters, numerals, figures, symbols, logos and graphic
elements comprising the content or message of a sign, excluding numerals
identifying a street address only.
DEVELOPMENT COMPLEX SIGN — A freestanding sign identifying a
multiple-occupancy development, such as a shopping center or planned
industrial park, which is controlled by a single owner or landlord.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — Any sign that is designed and erected for the
purpose of providing direction and/or orientation for pedestrian or vehicular
traffic.
DOUBLE-FACED SIGN — A sign with two faces, back to back.
Electrically activated: changeable sign whose message copy or content
can be changed by means of remote electrically energized on-off
switching combinations of alphabetic or pictographic components
arranged on a display surface. Illumination may be integral to the
components, such as characterized by lamps or other light-emitting
devices; or it may be from an external light source designed to reflect
off the changeable component display. See also "electronic message
sign or center."
A.
Manually activated. Changeable sign whose message copy or content
can be changed manually.
B.
§ 171-65 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-65
157:348
ELECTRIC SIGN — Any sign activated or illuminated by means of electrical
energy.
EXTERIOR SIGN — Any sign placed outside a building.
FASCIA SIGN — See "wall or fascia sign."
FLASHING SIGN — See "animated sign, electrically activated."
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign principally supported by a structure affixed
to the ground, and not supported by a building, including signs supported
by one or more columns, poles or braces placed in or upon the ground; for
visual reference.
FRONTAGE (BUILDING) — The length of an exterior building wall or
structure of a single premises orientated to the public way or other
properties that it faces.
FRONTAGE (PROPERTY) — The length of the property line(s) of any single
premises along either a public way or other properties on which it borders.
GROUND SIGN — See "freestanding sign."
ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign characterized by the use of artificial light,
either projecting through its surface(s) (internally illuminated) or reflecting
off its surface(s) (externally illuminated).
INTERIOR SIGN — Any sign placed within a building, but not including
window signs as defined by this chapter. Interior signs, with the exception
of window signs as defined, are not regulated by this chapter.
MANSARD — An inclined decorative roof-like projection that is attached to
an exterior building facade.
MARQUEE — See "canopy (attached)."
MARQUEE SIGN — See "canopy sign."
MENU BOARD — A freestanding sign orientated to the drive-through lane
for a restaurant that advertises the menu items available from the drivethrough
window, and which has no more than 20% of the total area for such
a sign utilized for business identification.
MULTIPLE-FACED SIGN — A sign containing three or more faces.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — See "outdoor advertising sign."
ON-PREMISES SIGN — A sign erected, maintained or used in the outdoor
environment for the purpose of the display of messages appurtenant to the
use of, products sold on, or the sale or lease of, the property on which it is
displayed.
OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN — A permanent sign erected, maintained
or used in the outdoor environment for the purpose of the display of
commercial or noncommercial messages not appurtenant to the use of,
products sold on, or the sale or lease of, the property on which it is
displayed.
§ 171-65 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-65
157:349
PARAPET — The extension of a building facade above the line of the
structural roof.
POLE SIGN — See "freestanding sign."
POLITICAL SIGN — A temporary sign intended to advance a political
statement, cause or candidate for office. A legally permitted outdoor
advertising sign shall not be considered to be a political sign.
PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or to
a building or building surface.
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign other than a wall sign that is attached to or
projects more than 15 inches (457 mm) from a building face or wall or from
a structure whose primary purpose is other than the support of a sign.
REAL ESTATE SIGN — A temporary sign advertising the sale, lease or rental
of the property or premises upon which it is located.
REVOLVING SIGN — A sign that revolves 360° about an axis. See also
"animated sign, mechanically activated."
ROOFLINE — The top edge of a peaked roof or, in the case of an extended
facade or parapet, the uppermost point of said facade or parapet.
ROOF SIGN — A sign mounted on and supported by the main roof portion of
a building, or above the uppermost edge of a parapet wall of a building and
which is wholly or partially supported by such a building. Signs mounted
on mansard facades, pent eaves and architectural projections, such as
canopies or marquees, shall not be considered to be roof signs; for a visual
reference, and a comparison of differences between roof and fascia signs.
SIGN — Any device visible from a public place that displays either
commercial or noncommercial messages by means of graphic presentation
of alphabetic or pictorial symbols or representations. Noncommercial flags
or any flags displayed from flagpoles or staffs will not be considered to be
signs.
SIGN AREA — The area of the smallest geometric figure, or the sum of
the combination of regular geometric figures, which comprise the sign face.
The area of any double-sided or shaped sign shall be the area of the largest
single face only. The area of a sphere shall be computed as the area of a
circle. The area of all other multiple-sided signs shall be computed as 50%
of the sum of the area of all faces of the sign.
SIGN COPY — Those letters, numerals, figures, symbols, logos and graphic
elements comprising the content or message of a sign, exclusive of
numerals identifying a street address only.
SIGN FACE — The surface upon, against or through which the sign copy
is displayed or illustrated, not including structural supports, architectural
features of a building or sign structure, nonstructural or decorative trim, or
any areas that are separated from the background surface upon which the
sign copy is displayed by a distinct delineation, such as a reveal or border.
§ 171-65 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-65
157:350
SIGN STRUCTURE — Any structure supporting a sign.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign intended to display either commercial or
noncommercial messages of a transitory or temporary nature. Portable
signs or any sign not permanently embedded in the ground, or not
permanently affixed to a building or sign structure that is permanently
embedded in the ground, are considered temporary signs.
UNDER CANOPY SIGN or UNDER MARQUEE SIGN — A sign attached to
the underside of a canopy or marquee.
V SIGN — Signs containing two faces of approximately equal size, erected
upon common or separate structures, positioned in a V-shape with an
interior angle between faces of not more than 90° with the distance
between the sign faces not exceeding five feet (1,524 mm) at their closest
point.
WALL OR FASCIA SIGN — A sign that is in any manner affixed to any
exterior wall of a building or structure and that projects not more than 15
inches (457 mm) from the building or structure wall, including signs affixed
to architectural projections from a building, provided that the copy area of
such signs remains on a parallel plane to the face of the building facade or
to the face or faces of the architectural projection to which it is affixed; for
a visual reference and a comparison of differences between wall or fascia
signs and roof signs.
WINDOW SIGN — A sign affixed to the surface of a window with its message
intended to be visible to and readable from the public way or from adjacent
property.
§ 171-66. General rules for placement and design.
In the case of panel or cabinet-type signs, the sign face shall include
the entire area of the sign panel, cabinet or face substrate upon which
the sign copy is displayed or illustrated, but not open space between
separate panels or cabinets.
A.
In the case of sign structures with routed areas of sign copy, the sign
face shall include the entire area of the surface that is routed, except
where interrupted by a reveal, border, or a contrasting surface or color.
B.
In the case of signs painted on a building, or individual letters or
graphic elements affixed to a building or structure, the sign face shall
comprise the sum of the geometric figures or combination of regular
geometric figures drawn closest to the edge of the letters or separate
graphic elements comprising the sign copy, but not the open space
between separate groupings of sign copy on the same building or
structure.
C.
In the case of sign copy enclosed within a painted or illuminated border,
or displayed on a background contrasting in color with the color of the
building or structure, the sign face shall comprise the area within the
contrasting background, or within the painted or illuminated border.
D.
§ 171-65 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-66
157:351
A. General. Sign types and the computation of sign area shall be as
depicted in the International Zoning Code, as amended.
B. Conformance to codes. Any sign hereafter erected shall conform to the
provisions of this chapter and the provisions of the International
Building Code and of any other ordinance or regulation within this
jurisdiction.
C. Signs in rights-of-way. No sign other than an official traffic sign or
similar sign shall be erected within five feet of the lines of any street, or
within any public way, unless specifically authorized by other
ordinances or regulations of this jurisdiction or by specific
authorization of the Zoning Administrator.
D. Projections over public ways. Signs projecting over public walkways
shall be permitted to do so only subject to the projection and clearance
limits either defined herein or, if not so defined, at a minimum height of
eight feet (2,438 mm) from grade level to the bottom of the sign. Signs,
architectural projections or sign structures projecting over vehicular
access areas must conform to the minimum height clearance limitations
imposed by the jurisdiction for such structures.
E. Traffic visibility. No sign or sign structure shall be erected at the
intersection of any street in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear
vision, nor at any location where by its position, shape or color it may
interfere with or obstruct the view of or be confused with any
authorized traffic sign, signal or device.
F. Animation signs. Animated signs are only permitted in Neighborhood
Commercial, General Commercial, and Industrial Zones.
G. Maintenance, repair and removal. Every sign permitted by this chapter
shall be kept in good condition and repair and be legible. When any sign
becomes unsecure, in danger of falling or is otherwise deemed unsafe
by the Zoning Administrator, or if any sign shall be unlawfully installed,
erected or maintained in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter, the owner thereof or the person or firm using same shall, upon
written notice by the Zoning Administrator forthwith in the case of
immediate danger, and in any case within not more than 10 days, make
such sign conform to the provisions of this chapter, or shall remove it. If
within 10 days the order is not complied with, the Zoning Administrator
shall be permitted to remove or cause such sign to be removed at the
expense of the owner and/or the user of the sign.
H. Obsolete sign copy. Any sign copy that no longer advertises or identifies
a use conducted on the property on which said sign is erected must
have the sign copy covered or removed within 30 days. After written
notification from the Zoning Administrator, and upon failure to comply
with such notice within 15 days, the Town is hereby authorized to cause
removal of such sign copy, and any expense incident thereto shall be
paid by the owner of the building, structure or ground on which the sign
is located.
§ 171-66 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-66
157:352
I. Nonconforming signs. Any sign legally existing at the time of the
passage of this chapter that does not conform in use, location, height or
size with the regulations of the zone in which such sign is located, shall
be considered a legal nonconforming use or structure and shall be
permitted to continue in such status until such time as it is either
abandoned or removed by its owner, subject to the following limitations:
(1) Structural alterations, enlargement or re-erection are permissible
only where such alterations will not increase the degree of
nonconformity of the signs.
(2) Any legal nonconforming sign shall be removed or rebuilt without
increasing the existing height or area if it is damaged, or removed
if allowed to deteriorate to the extent that the cost of repair or
restoration exceeds 50% of the replacement cost of the sign as
determined by the Zoning Administrator.
(3) Signs that comply with either Subsection I(1) or (2) above need not
be permitted.
J. Maximum number of signs allowed. Except where district regulations
are more restrictive, any establishment may have no more than two
signs per major street frontage and one additional sign for each
additional street frontage unless stated otherwise. For purposes of
calculation of the number of signs permitted per establishment, only
one street frontage per establishment shall be designated as major
street frontage. Signs which are less than one square foot in area or for
which a permit is not required shall not be counted in calculating the
number of allowed signs.
K. Height, nature of freestanding and projecting signs.
(1) No part of any freestanding or projecting sign shall be higher than
15 feet from grade with the exception of signs within a two-mile
radius of Interstate Route 77, which signs shall be allowed up to 25
feet in height.
(2) Only one sign per parcel as designated on the Town real property
tax maps may be freestanding or projecting except as provided in
Subsection J of this section.
(3) Shopping centers shall be permitted one freestanding sign per
street frontage. A freestanding shopping center sign may display
the shopping center name and a list of tenants. Individual shops
and businesses in shopping centers may have wall signs only as
provided for elsewhere in this article.
L. Replacement or consolidation of existing signs. When existing signs are
replaced or consolidated, the maximum total sign surface area of the
replacement or consolidated sign shall be:
§ 171-66 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-66
157:353
§ 171-67. Standards for marquees.
(1) Thirty percent less than the total sign surface area of the signs
being replaced or consolidated; or
(2) The area permitted by Subsection M of this section, whichever is
greater.
M. Sign area calculations. The following method shall be utilized in the
calculation of sign area:
(1) All sign surfaces and faces visible from a public right-of-way or
place and used for display shall be included in the calculation of
sign area.
(2) Wall or roof signs:
(a) The area of a wall or roof sign where the sign is painted or
affixed by letters and numerals or symbols shall be the sum
total of the area of the smallest connected rectilinear
geometric shape enclosing such painted or affixed letters,
numbers or symbols.
(b) The area of wall or roof signs where the sign surface is hung or
affixed to the structure shall be the total area of the affixed or
hung surfaces.
(3) Freestanding, projecting or ground signs. The area of a
freestanding, projecting or ground sign shall be the sum total of the
areas of all surfaces visible from the public right-of-way or other
area from which the sign is intended to be viewed.
N. Obstructing doors, windows or fire escapes.
(1) No sign shall be erected, replaced or relocated so as to:
(a) Prevent free ingress or egress from a required door, window or
fire escape; or
(b) Obstruct the light or ventilation required by the provisions of
this chapter or other Town ordinances from any window.
(2) No advertising or business sign of any kind shall be attached to a
standpipe or fire escape.
A. Construction of all marquees shall follow requirements set forth in the
Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code, as amended.
B. Signs on marquees for establishments other than theaters shall not
exceed 20 square feet on any side or front section of the marquee. Such
signs may extend above the top of the marquee, provided that the
vertical dimension of the structure, including both marquee and sign,
shall not exceed three feet. If such signs are illuminated, exposed light
sources shall not be used.
§ 171-66 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-67
157:354
§ 171-68. Exempt signs.
The following signs shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. No
sign shall be exempt from § 171-66E.
C. Signs may be located under marquees subject to the following
restrictions:
(1) There shall be only one sign for each store entrance.
(2) Such signs shall not exceed 12 inches in depth with not more than
an additional three inches in depth to include the supports and
hangers attaching the sign to the marquee.
(3) If such signs are illuminated, the illumination shall be by interior
lighting only, subject to the interior lighting restrictions as set forth
in this section.
D. Theater marquees shall not exceed five feet in the vertical dimension.
The restriction on square footage as set forth in this article shall not
apply to theater marquees. Such signs may extend above the top of the
marquee, provided that the vertical dimension of the structure,
including both marquee and sign, shall not exceed five feet. A sign or
signs may also be suspended below the marquee, provided that a
clearance of 10 feet is maintained between the bottom of the sign and
the sidewalk or floor.
A. Official notices authorized by a court, public body or public safety
official.
B. Directional, warning or information signs authorized by federal, state
or municipal governments.
C. Memorial plaques, building identification signs and building
cornerstones when cut or carved into a masonry surface or when made
of noncombustible material and made an integral part of the building or
structure.
D. The flag of a government or noncommercial institution, and any other
flag of a state or nation flown for noncommercial purposes; or flags
displaying purely ornamental and noncommercial information, such as
graphic depictions such as flowers and the like.
E. Signs attached to athletic field fences.
F. Religious symbols and seasonal decorations, both residential and
commercial, within the appropriate public holiday season.
G. Street address signs and combination nameplate and street address
signs that contain no advertising copy and which do not exceed six
square feet (0.56 square meters) in area.
H. Any sign with an area of one square foot or less.
§ 171-67 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-68
157:355
§ 171-69. District regulations.
The following regulations shall apply in the designated district, as
appropriate, to permitted uses by right and special uses as may be
permitted:
I. Signs on the inside of store windows, except those signs specified as
prohibited signs in this article.
J. Signs displayed for the direction or convenience of the public, including
signs which identify restrooms, location of public telephones, public
entrances, freight entrances or the like, provided that such signs do not
exceed a total surface area of three square feet per sign on any lot or
parcel.
K. Gasoline price signs, provided that the total area of all such signs is 12
square feet or less.
L. Signs displayed during the months of November and December for the
purpose of selling holiday vegetation and accessory items.
M. Signs displayed on a truck, bus, or other vehicle while in use in the
normal conduct of business. This section shall not be interpreted to
permit the parking for display purposes a vehicle to which a sign is
attached or the use of such a vehicle as a portable sign.
N. Menu/daily special signs, not exceeding four square feet in size,
provided that the sign is attached to a building facade.
O. Signage for Town-sponsored events as approved by the Town Manager.
P. Sandwich board signs, provided that they in no way obstruct vehicular
travel, public parking and/or pedestrian movement along sidewalks.
Q. Political campaign signs or signs demonstrating the freedom of speech,
provided that such signs do not advertise a product or business.
A. Agricultural (A-1), Residential (R-1), Residential (R-2), Mobile Home
Park (MHP) Residential Districts:
(1) Public and semipublic identification signs of not more than 12
square feet located on the premises. No more than one sign per
use.
(2) Residential signs and realty signs of not more than six square feet
located on the premises and civic signs not to exceed nine square
feet.
(3) Directional signs.
(4) Churches, schools, hospitals and assisted living facilities zoned R-1
or R-2 will use Neighborhood Commercial District (NC) standards
for sign restrictions and determination of conforming application of
that standard.
§ 171-68 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-69
157:356
§ 171-70. Comprehensive signage plan.
B. Neighborhood Commercial District (NC), Core Commercial District
(CC), General Commercial District (GC), Industrial District (I), Landfill
District (L):
(1) One overhanging sign referring to a business operated on the
premises is permitted, provided that any such sign shall not be
allowed to protrude more than five feet from the building front and
shall not exceed one square foot for 20 square feet of that business
storefront up to a maximum of 10 square feet.
(2) The total area of all freestanding and projecting signs permitted for
any business establishment shall not be greater than 64 square feet
and shall be located on the premises.
(a) Electronically and manually activated message signs are
allowed in NC, CC, GC and Industrial Zones.
(b) Animated signs are prohibited except in GC, NC and I Zones.
(3) Off-premises signs. Freestanding signs referring to a business or
other permitted use and located off the premises of such business
or use shall be permitted in GC and Industrial Districts subject to
the following restrictions:
(a) No such sign shall exceed 32 square feet in area nor shall such
sign exceed eight feet in height.
(b) No such sign shall be located within 10 feet of any street line,
other property line or driveway.
(c) Such sign shall not be illuminated.
(d) No such sign shall be located within 300 feet of another such
sign situated along the same side of a street, provided that two
such signs may be attached back-to-back on the same
supporting structure.
(e) Not more than one such sign pertaining to the same use and
facing the same direction of travel shall be located along a
single route.
(4) Other provisions of this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding,
planned commercial developments other than shopping centers
which require a site plan within the GC and I Zoning Districts and
located within a two-mile radius of the midpoint between two
bridges at Exit 14 of Interstate Route 77 may be allowed up to 200
square feet of aggregate sign area; the sizes and locations of such
signs to be specified within the site plan of such development and
approved by the Zoning Administrator prior to finalization of such
site plan.
§ 171-69 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-70
157:357
A. For a proposed development subject to site plan review, and for any
development that is subject to architectural review, the Zoning
Administrator or public body may waive or modify requirements of this
article by approving a comprehensive signage plan for such
development or project. Where a particular development is subject to
site plan review and architectural review, the official or public body
conducting the architectural review shall be the decisionmaker upon a
proposed comprehensive signage plan.
B. For the purposes of this section, the term "comprehensive signage plan"
refers to a written plan detailing the type, quantity, size, shape, color,
and location of all signs within the development that is the subject of
the plan, where the number, characteristics and/or locations of one or
more signs referenced within the plan do not comply with the
requirements of this article.
C. The official or public body may approve a comprehensive signage plan
upon a determination that:
(1) There is good cause for deviating from a strict application of the
requirements of this article; and
(2) The comprehensive signage plan, as proposed, will serve the public
purposes and objectives of this article at least as well, or better,
than the signage that would otherwise be permitted for the subject
development.
D. Applications for approval of a comprehensive signage plan shall be
submitted in writing to the Zoning Administrator and shall be
accompanied by the required application fee as set forth within the
most recent zoning fee schedule approved by Town Council.
E. Each application for approval of a comprehensive signage plan shall
include the following information:
(1) A written narrative description of the overall plan, including,
without limitation; a tally of the total number of signs included
within the coverage of the plan, and a summary of how the
applicant believes the comprehensive signage plan will serve the
objectives set forth within § 171-64C of this article.
(2) A color illustration or photograph of each sign included within the
plan. For signs with multiple faces, an illustration or photograph
shall be provided for each face. For monument and pole signs, an
illustration or photograph of proposed landscaping shall be
provided.
(3) A written description of the type, size (dimensions), materials, and
proposed location of each sign.
(4) A map or other written identification and description of all existing
signs on the property comprising the proposed development.
§ 171-70 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-70
157:358
§ 171-71. Prohibited signs.
The following signs are prohibited within the Town unless otherwise stated
in this article:
(5) Color illustrations or photographs of signage existing on adjacent
properties.
(6) A written description (and illustration or photograph) of proposed
lighting (for illuminated signs).
F. Appeals from decisions of a Town official or public body reviewing a
proposed comprehensive signage plan shall be taken in the same
manner as provided within this chapter with respect to other
decision(s) of that official or public body.
A. Any sign affixed to, hung, placed or painted on any other sign, fence,
cliff, tree, public utility pole, radio or television or similar tower,
provided that this prohibition shall not affect official traffic, parking or
informational signs placed on utility poles by the Town government.
B. Any sign or banner within or across a public right-of-way, unless
specifically approved by the Town Manager, or his/her designee.
C. Any sign attached to, rather than painted on, an awning which is not a
marquee.
D. Any flashing or moving sign, except those officially erected for safety
purposes.
E. Any sign which advertises any business, product or service which is not
conducted, produced or sold as a primary product under license on the
premises where the sign is located. Signs relating to the activities of the
previous occupant may remain in place for not more than 60 days from
the date of vacancy. When a business is vacated, the sign for such
terminated business shall be removed within 60 days.
F. Any sign which the Town Manager determines to imitate an official
traffic sign or signal or conflict with traffic safety needs due to its
location, coloring, movement, shape or illumination.
G. Portable signs.
H. Any sign, except an official public notice, which is nailed, tacked,
posted, or in any other manner attached to any utility pole, or structuresupporting
wire, cable, or pipe, or to public property of any description.
I. Signs advertising activities or products that are illegal under federal,
state, Town, or county law.
J. Any electrical sign that does not display the UL, ETL, CSA, or ULC
label.
§ 171-70 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-71
157:359
§ 171-71.1. Temporary signs.
K. Any sign that due to its size, illumination, location or height obstructs
the vision of motorists or pedestrians at any intersection, or similarly
obstructs the vision of motorists entering a public right-of-way from
private property.
L. A sign which obstructs any window or door opening used as a means of
egress, or which prevents free passage from one part of a roof to any
other part thereof, and a sign which interferes with an opening required
for ventilation.
M. A sign in a public right-of-way except as provided in § 171-71.3 of this
article. Any sign existing or having been allowed in a public right-of-way
may be ordered removed by the Zoning Administrator upon 30 days'
notice if the use of that right-of-way is changed to require the signs'
removal, or if the public right-of-way is to be used for any public
purposes inconsistent with the existence of the sign.
N. A sign that violates any provision of any federal or state law relative to
outdoor advertising.
O. Signs with moving components.
P. Pennants, streamers, except as provided in § 171-71.1 of this article.
Q. Large floating or stationary balloons.
R. Signs attached, painted, or mounted to unlicensed and inoperative or
generally stationary vehicles.
S. Any sign representing or depicting specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas or sexually oriented goods. Any sign
containing obscene text or pictures as defined by the Virginia Code.
T. Off-premises signs. No off-premises signs are permitted in the Town of
Hillsville, except location signs which may be located off-premises.
U. Billboards, except those existing at the adoption of this chapter. Repair
of existing billboards is allowed, however, replacement is not.
V. Signs placed in the right-of-way of any street.
A. Temporary signs are permitted, provided that they meet the standards
of this section. The area of any temporary sign maintained per this
section shall not count for the allowable permanent sign area for any lot
or structure.
B. A "temporary sign" is a sign that is not permanently mounted to a
building or into the ground. Signs attached by rope, string, chain, tape,
paste, and similar mechanisms; signs not rigidly attached to a
supporting structure; signs made of paper, cardboard, cloth, and similar
materials; and signs that are pushed, hammered or similarly put into
§ 171-71 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-71.1
157:360
§ 171-71.2. Signs for which permit not required.
No permit shall be required for the following signs, if they are installed in
compliance with the provisions of this article. Signs approved in accordance
with a site plan review shall be in compliance with the site plan as approved
by the Planning Commission. All of the following signs may be erected in
any of the Town zoning districts:
the ground are considered temporary signs. Examples of temporary
signs include, but are not limited to, garage or yard sale signs, political
campaign signs, real estate signs, construction signs, menu/daily
special signs.
C. Each temporary sign shall be maintained in good, safe condition,
securely affixed to a building or the ground.
D. Temporary sign area per lot shall not exceed 32 square feet.
E. Any temporary sign pertaining to an event must be removed within 10
days after the event. For example, garage or yard sale signs, political
campaign signs, and real estate signs are subject to this provision. For
all other temporary signs, a maximum posting period of 14 consecutive
calendar days is permitted, up to five times per calendar year. Such
signs shall not be attached in any way to utility poles, meter posts, or
trees within any public street right-of-way. No person shall put up any
notice upon any building, wall, fence or other property of another
person without having first obtained written consent of the owner of
such property.
F. A temporary sign shall not be illuminated.
G. Pennants and streamers, without advertising, may be displayed
simultaneously with temporary grand opening signs, but at no other
time.
(1) Each sign is 32 square feet or less in area;
(2) Each sign is on-premises and attached to the structure or a
permanent sign;
(3) Such signs are displayed no more than 14 consecutive days.
A. Real estate signs not exceeding six square feet in area which advertise
for sale or rental the land or building upon which such signs are
located. Such signs shall not be illuminated and shall not be more than
four feet in height. Such signs may be erected up to the property line.
B. Professional nameplates not exceeding one square foot in area when
placed upon the wall of the building.
C. Monumental inscriptions, memorial signs or tablets containing names
of persons or buildings or dates of erection, and similar information,
§ 171-71.1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-71.2
157:361
when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or
other noncombustible material.
D. Signs denoting the architect, engineer or contractor when placed at the
construction site. Such signs shall not be illuminated, and no such signs
shall exceed an area of 32 square feet, nor shall they remain standing
after construction has been completed.
E. Traffic, municipal, legal notice, directional or informational sign;
railroad crossing signs, danger, safety, temporary or emergency signs
and holiday decorations across a public right-of-way when authorized
by the Town Manager, or his/her designee.
F. Temporary directional, political or informational signs not over six
square feet in area, provided that the activity which the sign promotes
is one permitted under the use regulations applicable to the district
where the sign is located. Signs for temporary events, sales or special
promotions may be erected not more than one month before the event
or activity and shall be removed within one week of its conclusion. In no
case shall any such temporary sign be displayed for a period longer
than two months in any calendar year. There shall be no more than two
such temporary signs per establishment at any time.
G. Signs designating entrances, exits or conditions of use for parking lots.
Such signs shall not exceed six square feet in area.
H. Subdivision or housing development signs. Such signs shall not exceed
six feet in height, 25 square feet in area, and shall include only the
name of the subdivision, housing development, multiple-family dwelling
complex or townhouse development.
I. Signs showing the name and address of the resident, but not to include
any commercial advertising and not more than one square foot in area.
J. Signs regulating on-premises traffic, parking or indicating other
functional information such as lavatory facilities or telephone and signs
denoting functions of other sections of a building such as "fabrication,"
or "office," when less than six square feet in area and bearing no
commercial advertising.
K. Signs identifying the home occupation or office of the resident, of not
more than one square foot in area, and attached to the wall of the
building or other existing permanent structure.
L. "No Trespassing" signs of not more than one square foot in area.
M. Historic markers of an area less than 15 square feet when approved by
the Board of Architectural Review.
N. Signs on the inside of store windows.
§ 171-71.2 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-71.2
157:362
§ 171-71.3. Signs placed by public authority.
The Town Manager or his/her designee may place or cause to be placed
signs in the public right-of-way and in or upon any public property.
§ 171-71.4. Public liability insurance.
O. Signs not over 25 feet in area identifying municipal or governmental
buildings and offices or buildings used for religious purposes, when
erected upon the building or land upon which such building is located.
P. Flags flying from a flagpole, where no more than three flags are
displayed at any one time, no individual flag exceeding 50 square feet in
area.
Q. Signs indicating the hours of operation for a business (other than a
home occupation), where located in the window of a business and not in
excess of two square feet.
R. Signs containing the words "private drive," not exceeding two square
feet, limited to one sign per entrance drive.
S. Official notices or advertisements posted according to statutory notice
or other advertising requirements imposed by law by any public, local
or state official, or court officer or any trustees under deeds of trust or
other similar instruments.
T. No more than two "entrance" or "exit" signs at each vehicular entrance
to and exit from a parking lot, not to exceed two square feet each. Signs
specifying parking restrictions, not to exceed three square feet each,
may be affixed to a wall and located no less than 25 feet apart. The
signs may be freestanding if no larger than two square feet, located on
the perimeter of a parking lot no less than 25 feet apart, and at a height
no greater than four feet.
A. A person shall not erect, install, alter, modify, reface, rehang or replace
over public property any sign for which a permit is required under the
provisions of this article until the sign owner presents satisfactory
evidence that a public liability insurance policy with a minimum of
$300,000 single limit coverage is in force during the term of this
permit.
B. Such insurance policy shall protect and save the jurisdiction members
from any and all claims or demands for damages by reason of any
negligence of the sign hanger, contractor or agents, or by any reason of
defects in the construction or damages resulting from the collapse,
failure or combustion of the parts thereof.
C. The obligation herein specified shall remain in force and effect during
the life of every sign and shall not be cancelled by the principal or
surety until after a thirty-day notice to the Zoning Administrator, after
which time the sign must be immediately removed.
§ 171-71.2 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-71.5
157:363
§ 171-71.5. Building code compliance required.
The structural components of a sign (including, without limitation, lighting
fixtures) shall be constructed, installed and maintained in accordance with
the requirements of the Virginia Uniform Statewide Building Code.
§ 171-71.6. Illumination.
All applicants for a sign permit or entrance corridor overlay certificate of
appropriateness must present a lighting plan for the proposed signage.
§ 171-71.7. Uniform sign regulations for all zoning districts.
A. Signs may be illuminated either through the use of backlighting or
direct lighting, provided that the following standards are met:
(1) Information on any illumination proposed as part of a sign must be
provided by the applicant on the sign permit application.
B. Any sign containing electrical components shall conform to current UL,
ETL, CSA, or ULC standards and display a label from one of these
recognized testing labs.
C. Animated/electronic signs of red/opaque/amber or intermittent color
shall be allowed, one, double-sided, per establishment, upon proper
permitting, as long as the animation does not flash, scroll or any other
movement which is deemed dangerous to traffic.
D. Such animated signs are only allowed in GC, NC, and I Districts, as
defined by this chapter.
E. The Town Manager, upon finding that an animated or electronic sign is
negatively affecting the health, safety and welfare of the public, may
cause the removal of such sign, or prevent the installation thereof.
A. Historic site signs, up to a maximum of one for each site, structure, or
landmark registered with the Virginia Landmarks Register or the
National Historic Register, are permitted in all zoning districts. The
maximum size sign permitted is 12 square feet, with a maximum height
of nine feet.
B. Historic district signs containing information relating to the historic,
architectural, cultural, or archeological significance of the district. The
maximum size sign permitted is 12 square feet, with a maximum height
of nine feet. The sign plan for historic district signs must be submitted
with the rezoning application for the historic district.
C. Location sign. Such signs may be freestanding and may be located
within the public right-of-way, provided that written permission is
obtained from the Administrator. Only one location sign per
establishment is permitted.
§ 171-71.5 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-71.8
157:364
§ 171-71.8. Permitted special uses.
A signage plan shall be submitted as part of any application for a special
use permit as authorized elsewhere in this chapter. The signage plan shall
be of sufficient detail to allow the Zoning Administrator, Town Manager
and Town Council to judge the compatibility of the proposed signage with
the character of the special use and the surrounding neighborhood. At a
minimum, all signage plans shall provide information on the general size,
location, style, color, and materials of all signs proposed. In evaluating the
special use permit application, the Commission and Council shall consider
the appropriateness of the proposed signage plan in relation to the
character of the proposed development and the surrounding area.
§ 171-71.9. Banners over the public right-of-way.
A. Banners may be displayed over a right-of-way or within the median of a
right-of-way for two consecutive weeks, provided that approval is
granted by the Town Manager. The Town may attach conditions in the
display of these banners.
(1) In determining whether to grant or deny the request to display a
banner, the Town shall be guided by the following standard: the
event or cause for which the banner is to be displayed shall be of a
Town-wide, public nature. In this regard, the Council finds that the
Town does not, and has not, designated the air space over the
public streets or the medians of public rights-of-way as a public
forum or a limited public forum, and it is reasonable to restrict
messages there to those of a Town-wide, public nature.
Authorization may be subject to VDOT approval.
B. Banners shall meet the following criteria:
(1) Banners over a right-of-way shall not exceed 120 square feet in
area and shall have a minimum street clearance of 17 feet over
grade.
(2) The person granted permission to display a banner over the public
right-of-way or in a public median shall reimburse the Town for the
reasonable and customary cost for the erection and removal of the
banner and shall deposit with the Town an amount equal to that
cost prior to the erection of the banner. The Town Manager shall
determine the cost to erect and remove the banner, using the cost
of labor, materials, and equipment. Only Town forces shall erect
and remove banners.
(3) Banners shall have reinforced eyelets in each corner and a
continuous reinforced border around the perimeter of the banner.
(4) Air vents shall be provided in each banner to allow air to pass
through the banner.
§ 171-71.8 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-71.10
157:365
§ 171-71.10. Identification signs at entrances to Town.
Freestanding group identification signs announcing the names of churches,
social organizations, and the time and place of meetings of civic clubs shall
be permitted at the major entrances to Hillsville. Additionally, freestanding
identification signs announcing the name of the Town of Hillsville, or
governmental purpose, may also be permitted at the major entrances to
the Town. Such freestanding monument signs shall not exceed 20 feet in
height or 50 square feet in area. Any such sign shall require a sign permit.
Groupings of signs along the major entrance routes to the Town shall be
designed as an integrated unit, where possible, and shall be landscaped.
These signs may be located within a public right-of-way, provided that
approval is granted by the Zoning Administrator and/or VDOT.
§ 171-71.11. Permit procedures; permit fee; maintenance; removal.
A. Application and permit.
(1) No person shall erect, install, alter, modify, reface, rehang or
replace any sign within the Town, without obtaining a permit
pursuant to this article, a business license from the Town and
provided that a permit shall not be required for the performance of
regular maintenance.
(2) An application for such a permit shall specify the type of sign to be
constructed and the zoning district in which this sign is to be
located and shall be accompanied by plans including a sketch of the
property indicating the lot frontage. The application shall also
indicate the square footage and location of all existing signs on the
property, and the area, size, structure, design, location, lighting,
and materials for the sign. Also, the application shall contain
photographs and sizes of all existing signs on the building or parcel
and the written consent of the owner or lessee of the land or
building upon which the sign is to be erected.
(3) Applications for sign permits shall be submitted to the
Administrator and shall be accompanied by the required
application fee, as set forth within the most recent zoning fee
schedule approved by Town Council.
(a) For new construction within any of the Town's old and historic
districts and entrance corridors, such permit shall take the
form of a certificate of appropriateness issued by the Board of
Architectural Review or the Zoning Administrator.
(b) Within all other districts, the required permit shall be issued by
the Zoning Administrator. No permit shall be issued by the
Zoning Administrator except upon a determination that a
proposed sign is in conformity with the requirements of this
article and, where applicable, in conformity with the
requirements of an approved site plan for the property upon
§ 171-71.10 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-71.11
157:366
which the sign is to be placed. Appeals from decisions of the
Zoning Administrator shall be taken to the Town's Board of
Zoning Appeals.
(4) A nonrefundable sign permit fee is due and payable with the filing
of a sign permit application. More than one sign on one building or
group of buildings located on the same parcel of land may be
included on one application, provided that all such signs be applied
for at one time.
(5) After the issuance of an approved sign permit, the applicant may
install and display any such sign or signs approved. Once installed,
the Administrator may inspect the sign(s) for conformance with the
approved sign permit and this chapter.
(6) Any sign permit issued shall be null and void if any sign for which
the permit was issued is not installed in accordance with the permit
within six months of the date the permit was approved.
(7) A sign permit shall become null and void if the use to which it
pertains is not commenced within six months after the date the sign
permit is issued. Upon written request and for good cause shown,
the Zoning Administrator may grant one six-month extension.
(8) The Zoning Administrator shall revoke a sign permit if the sign
does not comply with applicable regulations of this article.
B. Fee. A fee of $1 per square foot of sign area with a minimum of $15 shall
accompany each application for a sign permit and shall be payable to
the Town of Hillsville.
C. Maintenance. The owner of any sign shall be required to keep such sign
properly maintained at all times in accordance with the following
standards:
(1) All materials used in the sign shall be kept in good condition, free of
holes, rotting, peeling paint and other forms of decay.
(2) If the sign is illuminated, all lighting shall be maintained in working
order and meet the standards set forth in the Virginia Uniform
Statewide Building Code, as amended.
D. Removal of signs. Any sign that is hereafter unlawfully installed or
maintained, presents a hazard to the public and any nonconforming
sign (other than billboards) associated with premises that have been
vacant for two years or more shall be taken down and removed by the
owner, owner's agent or other person having the beneficial use of the
premises upon which such sign is found, within 30 days after written
notification to do so from the Zoning Administrator. Upon failure to
comply with such notice within the time specified, the Zoning
Administrator may cause the removal of such sign; thereafter, any
expenses incident to such removal shall be paid by the owner, owner's
§ 171-71.11 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-71.11
157:367
agent or other person having the beneficial use of the premises from
which the sign was removed.
(1) The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to order the
removal, without compensation, of any sign or sign structure that,
due to neglect or damage, poses a clear danger to the health, safety
and welfare of the public.
(2) In lieu of removal, the Zoning Administrator may require the
immediate repair of any sign or sign structure which has been
damaged or which has deteriorated so as to become a public
hazard.
§ 171-71.11 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-71.11
157:368
ARTICLE XV
Nonconforming Uses and Features
§ 171-72. Nonconforming uses and features may continue.
Subject to the limitations set forth in this Article, nonconforming uses,
nonconforming features and nonconforming buildings may continue. The
terms "nonconforming use," "nonconforming feature" and "nonconforming
building" shall have such meanings as specified in § 171-8 of this chapter.
§ 171-73. Extension of nonconforming use.
No nonconforming use shall be extended, enlarged or moved so as to occupy
a different or greater area of land or buildings than was occupied by and
actively devoted to such use at the time it became nonconforming, provided
that a nonconforming use may be extended throughout such portion of land
or such part of a building which was lawfully arranged, designed, equipped
and intended for such use at the time it became nonconforming.
§ 171-74. Alterations to buildings devoted to nonconforming uses.
No building or portion of a building devoted to a nonconforming use shall
be enlarged, extended, structurally altered, reconstructed or moved, unless
such building or portion of a building is thereafter devoted to a use which
conforms with the use regulations of this chapter. Nothing in this Article
shall be construed to prohibit normal repair, maintenance or incidental
alteration of a building or the alteration, strengthening or restoring of a
building to safe condition as may be required by law.
§ 171-75. Change of nonconforming use.
§ 171-76. Discontinuance of nonconforming uses.
A. A nonconforming use of land or a nonconforming use of a building may
be changed to a use which conforms with the use regulations of this
chapter or to a use, other than multifamily, which is first permitted by
right in a more restricted zoning district as indicated by § 171-41, Table
of Permitted Uses. Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to
a conforming use or to a more restricted use, such use shall not
thereafter be changed back to the original nonconforming use or to any
less restricted use.
B. For purposes of this Article, the term "use" shall mean a type of activity
listed on the Table of Permitted Uses, and a change in occupancy,
ownership or management shall not in itself constitute a change in use.
A. Whenever a nonconforming use of land or a nonconforming use of a
building is discontinued for a period of more than 24 consecutive
months, whether or not equipment or fixtures intended for such use are
removed, any subsequent use shall conform with the use regulations of
the district in which the property is located.
§ 171-72 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-76
157:369
§ 171-77. Use and alteration of buildings with nonconforming
features.
§ 171-78. Damage to buildings having nonconforming features or
buildings devoted to nonconforming uses.
B. In case of determination by the Zoning Administrator that a
nonconforming use has been changed to an illegal use, such illegal use
shall cease and any subsequent use on the premises shall be in
conformity with the use regulations of this chapter or the illegal use
may be changed to the last lawful nonconforming use to occupy the
premises.
A. A building which is nonconforming with respect to the bulk regulations
or other feature required by this chapter may nonetheless be occupied
by a use permitted in the district in which such building is located,
provided that off-street parking and loading requirements for the use
are satisfied.
B. A building which is devoted to a conforming use and is nonconforming
with respect to the bulk regulations or other feature required by this
chapter may be enlarged, extended or structurally altered, provided
that the degree or extent of any nonconforming feature is not
increased.
C. An increase in the height of a building or portion of a building which is
nonconforming with respect to a yard requirement shall be deemed to
be an increase in the extent of the nonconforming feature of the
building.
A. Damage not exceeding 50% of value. Any building having a
nonconforming feature or building devoted to a nonconforming use
which is damaged by fire, explosion, act of God or the public enemy to
an extent not exceeding 50% of its most recent assessed taxable value
may be restored, repaired, reconstructed and used as before the
damage, provided that the degree or extent of any nonconforming
feature that existed prior to the damage shall not be increased and the
area devoted to any nonconforming use prior to the damage shall not be
increased. Such restoration, repair, reconstruction or reuse shall be
completed within 24 months of the date of damage.
B. Damage exceeding 50% of value. Whenever a building having a
nonconforming feature or a building devoted to a nonconforming use is
damaged by any cause whatsoever to an extent greater than 50% of its
most recent assessed taxable value, such building shall not be restored,
repaired, reconstructed or used except in conformance with all of the
applicable provisions of this chapter, except as may be authorized by
the Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant to Subsection C.
C. Special exception. Subject to the conditions of this section, the Board of
Zoning Appeals shall have the authority to grant a special exception as
§ 171-76 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-78
157:370
§ 171-79. Intermittent, temporary or illegal use.
Intermittent, temporary or illegal use of land or buildings shall not be
construed to establish the existence of a nonconforming use for the
purposes of this Article.
§ 171-79.1. Replacement of nonconforming manufactured homes.
[Added 12-9-1996; amended 3-25-2013]
Removal and replacement of a manufactured home which constitutes a
nonconforming use on an individual lot or within a manufactured home
park or removal of any manufactured or mobile home unit which does
not conform to current Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and
Safety Standards and not Housing and Urban Development (HUD) approved
and manufactured in 1980 and prior and replacement of such unit with a
manufactured home which conforms to said standards shall be permitted,
provided the replacement takes place within 60 days of removal.
provided in Article XVIII of this chapter for restoration, repair,
reconstruction or reuse of a building damaged by fire, explosion, act
of God or the public enemy to an extent greater than 50% of its most
recent assessed taxable value.
(1) Before granting any special exception, the Board shall be satisfied
from the evidence presented that the proposed restoration, repair,
reconstruction or reuse would result in the minimum deviation
from the provisions of this chapter necessary to enable reasonable
use of the property with consideration for its use prior to the
damage. Whenever possible, the Board shall require reduction in
the degree or extent of nonconforming features and uses. In no
case shall the Board authorize restoration, repair, reconstruction or
reuse to any extent that constitutes a greater deviation from the
provisions of this chapter than existed prior to the damage.
(2) Before granting any special exception, the Board shall receive
testimony and make a finding that restoration, repair or
reconstruction of the building will not unreasonably impair light
and air to adjoining property, will not impair established property
values in the immediate area and will not otherwise be detrimental
to the health, safety and general welfare of the public. Before
granting any special exception to reestablish a nonconforming use,
the Board shall also receive testimony and find that the continued
operation of the nonconforming use is in the public interest and
contributes to public convenience.
§ 171-78 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-79.1
157:371

ARTICLE XVI
Conditional Use Provisions
§ 171-80. Applicability.
§ 171-81. Application for conditional use permit.
A. Intent of conditional use provisions. Conditional use provisions are
intended as a means for the Town Council, after review and
recommendation by the Planning Commission, to authorize certain uses
which, although generally appropriate in the district in which they are
permitted, have potentially greater impacts on neighboring properties
than uses which are permitted by right. The conditional use permit
procedure provides the opportunity for the Town Council to review each
proposed conditional use and impose such conditions as reasonably
necessary to ensure the use will be compatible with the surrounding
area and consistent with the purposes of this chapter.
B. Conditional use permit required. A use indicated as permitted as a
conditional use in § 171-41 of this chapter shall be authorized only upon
approval of a conditional use permit by the Town Council. No zoning
permit for a conditional use or for a building devoted to a conditional
use shall be issued unless a conditional use permit has been approved
in accordance with this Article.
C. Existing uses. Any use specified as a conditional use in the district in
which it is located and for which no conditional use permit has been
approved shall be considered a nonconforming use, provided that such
use was legally established prior to the effective date of this chapter.
A. Submission of applications. Applications for conditional use permits
shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator and may be filed by the
owner of the property or, with the written consent of the owner, the
contract purchaser of the property or an agent of the owner.
B. Content of applications and plans.
(1) Applications for conditional use permits shall include:
(a) A zoning permit application and plans as described in § 171-19
of this chapter;
(b) Three copies of elevation drawings and general floor plans for
proposed buildings and additions to existing buildings;
drawings of proposed fences and walls; and landscaping plans;
(c) A report from the applicant explaining the manner in which the
proposed conditional use complies with the requirements and
standards of this Article; and
(d) The required application fee, which may be waived in the case
of an application by a governmental agency.
§ 171-80 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-81
157:373
§ 171-82. Issuance of conditional use permits.
(2) The Zoning Administrator may waive plan elements that are
unnecessary to determine compliance with this chapter and may
require such additional information as may be necessary to
determine compliance with this chapter and to evaluate potential
impacts of a proposed conditional use.
A. Review by Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall review
each conditional use permit application and forward the application to
the Planning Commission. At such time as requested by the
Commission, the Zoning Administrator shall submit to it a report
indicating the manner in which the proposed conditional use complies
or does not comply with the provisions of this chapter and any
recommendations the Zoning Administrator may have regarding
approval, disapproval or conditions to be attached to the proposed use
or plans.
B. Action by Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall review
each conditional use permit application for compliance with provisions
of this chapter and shall provide a recommendation to the Town Council
in accordance with the following:
(1) The Commission shall give public notice and hold a public hearing
as required by § 15.1-431, Code of Virginia 1950, as amended. The
hearing shall be held not more than 60 days after filing of a
complete application and all necessary plans. A joint public hearing
may be held with the Town Council.
(2) After holding a public hearing, the Commission may recommend
approval or disapproval of the conditional use permit or that
conditions be imposed to ensure compliance with the
requirements, standards and factors set forth in this Article.
(3) All actions by the Commission shall be in the form of a motion,
giving the reasons for the action and the vote of each member. All
actions shall be recorded in the Commission's records. Each
recommendation to the Council shall include a statement of the
relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan of the
town.
(4) In any case where the Commission is unable to adopt a motion to
recommend approval or disapproval, it shall forward a written
report to the Council stating such fact and summarizing its
discussions on the matter.
C. Action by Town Council.
(1) The Town Council shall take action on each conditional use permit
application in accordance with the following:
§ 171-81 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-82
157:374
§ 171-83. General requirements.
A conditional use permit shall be granted only if the Town Council finds that
the proposed conditional use:
§ 171-84. Standards and factors to be considered.
(a) After receiving the recommendation of the Planning
Commission, the Town Council shall give public notice as
required by § 15.1-431, Code of Virginia 1950, as amended,
and shall hold a public hearing. A joint public hearing may be
held with the Planning Commission.
(b) The Town Council may approve or disapprove the conditional
use permit application and may impose conditions that the
Council deems reasonable and necessary to ensure the
conditional use will comply with the requirements, standards
and factors set forth in this Article.
(2) The Town Council may require a guarantee or bond to ensure that
conditions imposed will be satisfied and may specify a date for
expiration of a conditional use permit as a condition of approval.
(3) Action of the Town Council shall be by resolution, which shall
include the reasons for its action.
D. Following approval of a conditional use permit by the Town Council, the
Zoning Administrator shall issue the necessary zoning permit.
A. Will not be in conflict with the objectives of the comprehensive plan for
the town;
B. Will not be contrary to the purposes of this chapter stated in § 171-6;
and
C. Conforms with all applicable provisions of § 171-84 of this Article and
all other applicable requirements of the district in which such use is
located.
A. In addition to the general requirements in § 171-83 of this Article, the
Planning Commission and the Town Council shall consider the following
factors in evaluating and acting on all conditional use permit
applications: adequacy of utilities, access and public facilities and
services; off-street parking and vehicular circulation; arrangement of
vegetation and topographical features are to be retained; and the
adequacy of landscaping, buffers, yards and other features to protect
adjacent properties from potential adverse effects of the conditional
use.
B. The following additional standards shall apply to particular conditional
uses.
(1) Specific conditions for community facilities.
§ 171-82 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-84
157:375
(a) The location, site and design of such facilities shall be such
that the proposed development shall be compatible with the
development within the surrounding area, thus reducing the
impact on the surrounding area.
(b) The traffic generated by such facility shall be safely
accommodated along major streets without traversing local
minor streets.
(c) Fencing, screening and landscaping shall be provided as
appropriate to protect the surrounding area.
(d) All public utilities and sewage disposal shall be available to the
site.
(e) All bulk regulations of the zoning district shall apply.
(2) Specific conditions for utility facilities.
(a) All of the bulk regulations of the zoning district shall apply.
(b) The location of the facility shall not materially increase traffic
on surrounding streets.
(c) The location of the facility shall not have an adverse effect on
surrounding properties.
(d) There shall be provided along the entire site boundaries
fencing, screening and landscaping, as appropriate to protect
the surrounding area.
(3) Specific conditions for dwelling unit in CC District and GC District.
(a) The location of the facility shall not have an adverse effect on
surrounding properties.
(b) There shall be provided along the entire site boundaries
fencing, screening and landscaping, as appropriate, to protect
the surrounding area.
(4) Specific conditions for commercial or office mobile units in NC and
GC Districts and mobile or modular units in the MHP District.
(a) The location of the unit shall not have an adverse effect on
surrounding properties.
(b) There shall be provided along the site boundaries fencing,
screening and landscaping, as appropriate, to protect the
surrounding area.
(c) All bulk regulations for NC, GC and MHP Districts in Article IX
shall apply.
(d) All mobile units shall be underpinned, and axles and wheels
shall be covered. The trailer hitch shall be removed if it is the
§ 171-84 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-84
157:376
§ 171-85. Amendments and modifications to conditional use
permits.
§ 171-86. Expiration of conditional use permits.
An approved conditional use permit shall become null and void if no
application for a building permit to construct the authorized improvements
has been submitted within one year of the date of approval by the Town
Council. A conditional use permit for which no building permit is required
shall become null and void if the use is not established within one year of
the date of approval by the Town Council. The Town Council may specify a
longer period in its approval of a conditional use permit.
§ 171-87. Compliance with approved plans.
removable type or shielded if not removed. All mobile units
shall be installed and anchored in accordance with state
standards.
(e) The use of the mobile unit shall be limited to only those
commercial or office uses permitted by right or permitted by
conditional use permit in the NC and GC Districts in Article
VIII, and in the MHP District, the units shall be limited to
commercial or office activity that is for the mobile home park
residents only and is incidental and subordinate to the
residential use of the district.
(f) Mobile units are to be considered as temporary uses, and a
time limit of no more than five years will be placed on the
conditional use permit.
(g) Application for renewal of the conditional use permit shall be
made 90 days prior to the termination of the conditional use
permit. The Zoning Administrator shall forward the
applications for renewal to the Planning Commission. All
provisions of Article XX shall be followed in the review of the
application.
A. Any change of substance to an approved conditional use permit shall
require amendment subject to the same procedures and standards as
for a new application.
B. Minor modifications to approved site plans or building details may be
authorized by the Zoning Administrator when such modifications do not
significantly alter the boundaries of the property; conflict with specific
requirements of this chapter or conditions of the approved conditional
use permit; significantly decrease the width or depth of any yard,
setback or buffer area; or significantly alter points of access to the
property or the internal arrangement of site plan elements.
§ 171-84 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-87
157:377
§ 171-88. Appeals.
Appeals from any decision of the Town Council regarding a conditional
use permit may be taken to the circuit court by any aggrieved party in
accordance with the provisions of § 15.1-493, Code of Virginia 1950, as
amended.
A. Failure to comply with approved plans or conditions of a conditional use
permit shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
B. Upon determination by the Zoning Administrator of any violation of a
conditional use permit, such permit may be subject to revocation if the
violation is not corrected within 90 days of written notice to the owner
of the property by the Zoning Administrator. If the violation is not
corrected within the specified period and the Zoning Administrator is
not satisfied that appropriate means are being taken to correct the
violation, the Town Council shall have the authority to revoke the
conditional use permit after notice and hearing as provided by
§ 15.1-431, Code of Virginia 1950, as amended.
§ 171-87 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-88
157:378
ARTICLE XVII
Variances
§ 171-89. Issuance of zoning variance.
The Board of Zoning Appeals may hear and decide, in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, requests for zoning variances.
§ 171-90. Application for zoning variance.
§ 171-91. Notice to affected property owners.
It shall be the general rule of the Board that reasonable efforts shall be
made to contact and notify interested parties who, in the opinion of the
Board, may be affected by any matter brought before the Board. In all cases
all owners of record of adjoining property, including those separated by a
public way from the premises in question, shall be notified. The notification
required to meet this provision shall be accomplished by certified mail
addressed to the respective owner at the address given in the latest tax
assessment.
§ 171-92. Standards for variances.
The Board shall not grant a variance unless it finds that:
A. The application for a zoning variance may be made by any property
owner, tenant, government official, department, board or bureau. The
application shall be made to the Zoning Administrator in accordance
with rules adopted by the Board. The application and accompanying
maps, plans or other information shall be transmitted promptly to the
Board. Not more than 60 days after filing such application, a hearing
shall be held on the application. Notice of the hearing shall be in
accordance with the hearing procedures in § 15.1-431, Code of Virginia
1950, as amended. A fee (see Appendix D) shall be charged to partially
defray the cost of review and processing for each application for a
variance, except that the fee shall be waived for any governmental
agency. (See Appendix A for procedure).70 [Amended 11-11-1996]
B. The Zoning Administrator shall transmit a copy of the variance
application and accompanying maps, plans and other information to the
Planning Commission, which may submit a recommendation to the
Board.
A. The property owner acquired the property in good faith and that, by
reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, size or shape or
exceptional topographical conditions or other extraordinary conditions
of the property or of the use or development of property immediately
adjacent to it, the strict application of the terms of this chapter would
effectively prohibit or unreasonably restrict the use of the property;
70.Editor's Note: Appendices A, B, C and D are on file in the office of the Town Manager.
§ 171-89 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-92
157:379
§ 171-93. Nonconforming uses and variances.
No permitted or nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures or
buildings in the same district or in other districts shall be considered
grounds for the issuance of a variance.
§ 171-94. Use variances prohibited.
Under no circumstances shall the Board of Zoning Appeals grant a variance
to allow a use not permitted under the terms of this chapter in the district
involved or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of
this chapter in said district.
§ 171-95. Conditions and restrictions by Board.
The Board may impose such conditions and restrictions upon the premises
benefited by a variance as may be necessary to comply with the provisions
set out in § 171-92 to reduce or minimize the injurious effect of such
variance upon surrounding property and to better carry out the general
intent of this chapter. The Board may establish expiration dates as a
condition or as a part of the variance. The Board may require a guarantee
or bond to insure that the conditions imposed are being and will continue to
be complied with.
B. The strict application of the ordinance would produce undue hardship;
C. The hardship is not generally shared by other properties in the same
zoning district and the same vicinity;
D. The Board is satisfied, upon the evidence heard by it, that the granting
of such variance will alleviate a demonstrable hardship approaching
confiscation, as distinguished from a special privilege or convenience
sought by the applicant;
E. The authorization of such variance will not be of substantial detriment
to adjacent property and that the character of the district will not be
changed by the granting of the variance;
F. The condition or situation of the property concerned or the intended
use of the property is not of so general or recurring a nature as to make
reasonably practicable the formulation of a general regulation to be
adopted as an amendment to this chapter;
G. The variance shall be in harmony with the intended spirit and purpose
of this chapter;
H. Financial concerns shall not be the sole consideration as a basis for
granting a variance; and
I. Granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any
special privilege that is denied by this chapter to other lands, structures
or buildings in the same district.
§ 171-92 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-96
157:380
§ 171-96. Variance appeals.
Any person including any agency of the town government aggrieved by a
decision of the Board on a variance may appeal any decision of the Board
to the Circuit Court of the county as provided for in § 15.1-497, Code of
Virginia 1950 (as amended).
§ 171-96 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-96
157:381

ARTICLE XVIII
Board of Zoning Appeals
§ 171-97. Creation, membership and appointment.
The Board of Zoning Appeals is hereby established which may be referred
to in this chapter as the "Board of Zoning Appeals." The Board shall have
jurisdiction within the corporate limits of the Town of Hillsville, and it shall
consist of seven residents of the town, appointed by the Circuit Court of the
county. Members may be reappointed to succeed themselves. Members of
the Board shall hold no other public office in the town except that one may
be a member of the Planning Commission.
§ 171-98. Terms of office; vacancies; removals.
The members of the Board shall serve for a five-year term, except that
original appointments shall be made for such terms that the term of one
member shall expire each year. The Secretary of the Board shall notify the
Court at least 30 days in advance of the expiration of any term of office and
shall also notify the Court promptly if any vacancy occurs. Appointments to
fill vacancies shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term. A member
whose term expires shall continue to serve until his successor is appointed
and qualifies. Any Board member may be removed for malfeasance,
misfeasance or nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by the Court
which appointed him, after a hearing held after at least 15 days' notice.
§ 171-99. Staff of Board; compensation of Board members.
Within the limits of funds appropriated by the Town Council, the Board may
employ or contract for secretaries, clerks, legal counsel, consultants and
other technical and clerical services. Members of the Board may receive
such compensation as may be authorized by the Town Council.
§ 171-100. Powers of Board.
Pursuant to § 15.1-495, Code of Virginia 1950, as amended, the Board of
Zoning Appeals shall have the power to:
A. Hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the Zoning Administrator or any other
administrative officer in carrying out the administration or enforcement
of this chapter.
B. Hear and act upon variances in accordance with the provisions of
Article XVII of this chapter.
C. Hear and decide applications for interpretation of the Official Zoning
Map71 where there is uncertainty as to the location of a district
boundary and where the rules for interpretation of district boundaries
71.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file and available for inspection in the office of the
Town Manager.
§ 171-97 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-100
157:383
§ 171-101. Election of officers.
The Board shall elect from its members its own Chairman, Vice Chairman
and Secretary who shall serve for one year and may, upon election, serve
succeeding terms.
§ 171-102. Stay of proceedings.
An appeal shall stay all proceedings related to the action appealed from
unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Board, after such notice of
appeal shall have been filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate
such stay would cause imminent threat to life or property. In such instance
the proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order,
which may be granted by the Board or by a court of record on application
and on notice to the Zoning Administrator and for good cause shown.
§ 171-103. Rules and proceedings.
The Board shall also adopt rules for the conduct of its meetings. Such rules
shall at the minimum require that:
set forth in § 171-31 of this chapter do not resolve such uncertainty,
provided that the Board shall not have the power to change
substantially the locations of district boundaries established by this
chapter.
D. Hear and decide applications for such special exceptions as may be
authorized elsewhere in this chapter.
A. The presence of a majority of all members of the Board shall constitute
a quorum.
B. No action shall be taken by the Board on any application or appeal until
it has conducted a public hearing after giving public notice, including
newspaper advertisements and written notices to affected parties, as
required by the provisions of § 15.1-431, Code of Virginia 1950, as
amended.
C. Appeals to the Board shall be taken within 30 days after the decision
appealed from by filing with the Zoning Administrator and with the
Board a notice of appeal specifying the grounds of the appeal. The
Zoning Administrator shall then transmit to the Board all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action was taken.
D. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for hearing the application or
appeal, give public notice thereof as well as notify interested parties
and decide the same within 60 days.
E. The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify an
order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from. The
concurring vote of four members shall be necessary to reverse any
order, requirement, decision or determination of an administrative
§ 171-100 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-103
157:384
officer or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which
it is required to pass under this chapter or to effect any variance from
this chapter.
F. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings and other official
actions which shall be filed in the office of the Board and shall be public
records. The Chairman of the Board or, in his absence, the Vice
Chairman may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses.
G. The Board may call upon any other office or agency of the Town of
Hillsville for information in the performance of its duties, and it shall be
the duty of such other agencies to render the information to the Board
as may be reasonably required.
H. Any office, agency or department of the Town of Hillsville or other
aggrieved party may appeal any decision of the Board to the Circuit
Court of Carroll County as provided for in § 15.1-497, Code of Virginia
1950 (as amended).
I. In decisions on variance, the Board shall indicate the specific section of
this chapter under which the variance is being considered and shall
state its findings beyond such generalities as "in the interest of public
health, safety and general welfare." The Board shall state clearly the
specific conditions imposed in granting the variance. For variance cases
pertaining to hardship, the Board shall specifically identify the hardship
warranting such action by the Board.
J. At the public hearing of the case before the Board, the appellant shall
appear in his own behalf or be represented by counsel or agent. The
appellant's side of the case shall be heard first and those in objection
shall follow. To maintain orderly procedure, each side shall proceed
without interruption from the other.
K. The Hillsville Planning Commission shall be permitted to submit an
advisory opinion on any matter before the Board, and such opinion shall
be made part of the record of the public hearing.
L. The Board shall submit an annual report of its activities to the Town
Council, with a copy to the Planning Commission.
§ 171-103 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-103
157:385

ARTICLE XIX
Conditional Zoning
§ 171-104. Purpose.
§ 171-105. Procedure for conditional zoning.
A. Pursuant to applicable provisions of §§ 15.1-491.1 through 15.1-491.6,
Code of Virginia 1950, as amended, the purpose of conditional zoning is
to recognize that frequently, where competing and incompatible uses
conflict, traditional zoning methods and procedures are inadequate,
and that in such cases more flexible and adaptable zoning methods are
needed to permit differing land uses and at the same time to recognize
the effects of change.
B. It is, therefore, the intent of this Article to provide a more flexible and
adaptable zoning method to cope with such situations, whereby a
change in the zoning classification of property may be allowed subject
to certain conditions proffered by the petitioner for the protection of the
community that are not generally applicable to land similarly zoned.
C. It is the intent of the Town Council that the provisions of this Article
shall not be used for the purpose of discrimination in housing.
A. Conditions may be proffered. In conjunction with a petition to change
the zoning classification of property and as a part of a proposed
amendment to the Zoning Map72 as described in Article XX of this
chapter, the owner of such property may voluntarily proffer, in writing,
reasonable conditions in addition to the regulations specified for the
zoning district by this chapter, provided that such conditions meet the
criteria in § 171-106 of this Article.
B. Submission of conditions. The owner may submit such conditions at the
time of submission of the petition to change the zoning classification of
the property or at any other time before the Planning Commission
makes its recommendation on the petition to the Town Council.
C. Modifications to conditions.
(1) In the event that additions, deletions or modifications to conditions
are desired by the owner of the property that is the subject of the
rezoning request, they shall be made, in writing, to the Planning
Commission before the Commission makes its recommendation to
the Town Council.
(2) The Town Council may consider additional conditions, deletions or
modifications to conditions after the Planning Commission makes
its recommendation, provided that such are voluntarily proffered,
72.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file and available for inspection in the office of the
Town Manager.
§ 171-104 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-105
157:387
§ 171-106. Permitted conditions as part of a rezoning or
amendment to rezoning map.
The Town Council may approve reasonable conditions to rezoning, provided
that the following criteria are met:
§ 171-107. Record of conditional zoning.
§ 171-108. Enforcement and guaranties.
In order to ensure the intent and purpose of conditional zoning approved in
accordance with this Article, the Zoning Administrator or his agents shall
be vested with all necessary authority on behalf of the Town Council to
administer and enforce conditions attached to a rezoning or amendment or
a Zoning Map, including:
in writing, prior to the public hearing at which the Town Council is
to consider the petition.
A. The rezoning itself must give rise for the conditions.
B. Such conditions shall have a reasonable relation to the rezoning.
C. Such conditions shall not include a cash contribution to the town.
D. Such conditions shall not include mandatory dedication of real or
personal property for open space, parks, schools, fire departments or
other public facilities except those otherwise authorized by law.
E. Such condition shall not include payment for construction of off-site
improvements except those sewerage or drainage facilities otherwise
authorized by law.
F. No condition shall be proffered that is not related to the physical
development or physical operation of the property.
G. Such condition shall be in conformity with the town's Comprehensive
Plan.
H. The provisions of this chapter shall not be used for the purpose of
discrimination in housing.
A. The Zoning Map shall show by an appropriate symbol the existence of
conditions attached to the zoning of the map.
B. The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a conditional zoning index
which shall be available in the Zoning Administrator's office for public
inspection during regular office hours. The index shall provide ready
access to the ordinance creating such conditions in accordance with the
article and shall clearly list all conditions applicable to each.
A. Ordering, in writing, compliance with such conditions.
§ 171-105 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-108
157:388
§ 171-109. Review of Zoning Administrator's decision.
§ 171-110. Amendments and variations of conditions.
Amendments and variations of conditions attached to a Zoning Map
amendment shall be made only after public notice and hearing in the same
manner as an original Zoning Map amendment and in accordance with the
provisions of this Article and applicable provisions of Title 15.1, Code of
Virginia 1950, as amended.
§ 171-111. Time limit on repeat petitions.
After the Town Council has taken official action either granting, denying or
permitting withdrawal of a petition for any change in zoning or any change
of zoning conditions, no other petitions for substantially the same change(s)
shall again be considered in less than 12 months from the date of such
official action.
B. Bringing of appropriate legal action or proceedings to ensure
compliance.
C. Requiring a guaranty or contract, or both, for construction of physical
improvements required by conditions.
D. Denial of zoning permits and certificates of zoning compliance for
failure to meet conditions.
A. Any person who is aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning
Administrator pursuant to the provisions of § 171-108 of this Article
may petition the Town Council for review of such decision by filing a
petition with the Zoning Administrator and with the Town Council
within 30 days of the decision. Such petition shall specify the grounds
upon which the petitioner is aggrieved.
B. In deciding any such case, the Town Council shall have the same
authority as vested in the Zoning Administrator, but shall not modify or
delete any condition attached to a Zoning Map amendment except by
formal amendment pursuant to the applicable provisions of this Article.
§ 171-108 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-111
157:389

ARTICLE XX
Procedure for Amendment
§ 171-112. Authority to amend.
Whenever public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good zoning
practice require, and subject to the requirements set forth in §§ 15.1-491
and 15.1-493, Code of Virginia 1950, as amended, the regulations,
restrictions and district boundaries established by this chapter may be
amended, supplemented, changed or repealed by ordinance adopted by the
Town Council.
§ 171-113. Initiation of amendments.
Amendments to this chapter may be initiated by any of the following
methods:
§ 171-114. Application.
A. Resolution of the Town Council. The Town Council may, by its own
resolution, initiate an ordinance to amend any of the provisions of this
chapter, including the Official Zoning Map.73 Such resolution shall state
the public purpose for the amendment.
B. Motion of the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission may, by
adoption of a motion, initiate an amendment to any of the provisions of
this chapter, including the Official Zoning Map.74 Such motion shall be
forwarded to the Town Council, which shall cause an ordinance to be
prepared for its consideration.
C. Petition of a property owner. A petition to change the zoning
classification of property by amendment to the Official Zoning Map75
may be filed by the owner of such property or, with the written consent
of the owner, the contract purchaser of the property or an agent of the
owner.
A. A petition to change the zoning classification of property shall be in the
form of an application for rezoning addressed to the Town Council and
filed with the Zoning Administrator. The application shall be
accompanied by the required fee and a certified plat and legal
description. The application shall include indication of the current and
proposed zoning classification of the property and a statement of the
applicant's reasons for requesting rezoning.
73.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file and available for inspection in the office of the
Town Manager.
74.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file and available for inspection in the office of the
Town Manager.
75.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file and available for inspection in the office of the
Town Manager.
§ 171-112 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-114
157:391
§ 171-115. Review and recommendation by Planning Commission.
No amendment to this chapter shall be acted upon by the Town Council
unless the amendment has been referred by the Council to the Planning
Commission for its review and recommendation in accordance with this
section.
§ 171-116. Action by Commission.
All Planning Commission actions on proposed amendments shall be in
accordance with the following:
B. The Zoning Administrator shall review the application for compliance
with the submission requirements of this section. When the Zoning
Administrator is satisfied that such requirements are met, he or she
shall forward the application to the Town Council, with a copy to the
Planning Commission. The Town Council shall cause an ordinance to be
prepared for its consideration of the rezoning application.
A. Recommendation. The Commission may recommend that the Town
Council adopt or reject the amendment or may recommend changes in
the amendment. Failure of the Commission to consider the amendment
and report to the Council within 90 days after the first regular meeting
of the Commission after the amendment was referred to it by the
Council shall be considered a recommendation of approval.
B. Public notice and hearing. [Amended 10-10-2011]
(1) Before taking action on any amendment, the Planning Commission
shall give public notice and hold a public hearing as required by
§ 15.2-2204, Code of Virginia 1950, as amended. A joint public
hearing may be held with the Town Council.
(2) The Zoning Administrator shall see that an appropriate sign is
posted on property proposed to be rezoned at least 10 days prior to
the public hearing. Such sign shall indicate that a proposed
rezoning of the property is pending. No such posting of a sign shall
be required, however, with respect to any initial amendment of the
A-1 Agricultural/Residential zoning classification of territory
annexed to the Town, as provided in § 171-32 of this chapter, to any
other zoning classification that becomes effective within the 12
months following the incorporation of such territory into the Town.
A. In making its recommendation on any proposed amendment, the
Commission shall consider the factors listed in § 171-3 of this chapter.
B. The Zoning Administrator shall submit a written recommendation to the
Planning Commission prior to its action.
C. All actions by the Commission shall be in the form of a motion, giving
the reasons for the action and the vote of each member. All actions shall
be recorded in the Commission's records. Each recommendation to the
§ 171-114 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-116
157:392
§ 171-117. Action by Town Council.
Final action on all proposed amendments shall be taken in accordance with
the following provisions.
§ 171-118. Effect of denial of application.
Whenever an application for change in the zoning classification of any
property is denied, such application shall not be eligible for reconsideration
for one year from the date of denial, except in the following cases:
Council shall include a statement of the relationship of the proposed
rezoning to the Comprehensive Plan of the town.
D. In any case where the Commission is unable to adopt a motion to
recommend approval or disapproval, it shall forward a written report to
the Council stating such fact and summarizing its discussions on the
matter.
A. Public notice and hearing. Before taking action on any ordinance to
amend the provisions of this chapter, the Town Council shall give public
notice as required by § 15.1-431, Code of Virginia 1950, as amended,
and shall hold a public hearing. A joint public hearing may be held with
the Planning Commission.
B. Final action. After receiving a report from the Planning Commission
and after giving public notice and holding a public hearing, the Town
Council may adopt or reject the proposed amendment or may make
appropriate changes to the amendment. No land may be zoned to a
more intensive use classification nor shall a greater area of land be
rezoned than was described in the public notice without referral to the
Planning Commission and an additional public hearing after public
notice as required by § 15.1-431, Code of Virginia 1950, as amended.
C. Continuance or withdrawal. Final action on any proposed amendment
may be continued by the Town Council for good cause, provided that all
resolutions, motions or petitions for amendments shall be acted upon by
the Council within one year of the date of the resolution, motion or
petition. This provision shall not apply if the petitioner requests or
consents in writing to action beyond such period or if a petition is
withdrawn by providing written notice to the Council.
A. Upon initiation by the Town Council or the Planning Commission.
B. When a new application, although involving all or a portion of the same
property, is for a different zoning classification than the original
application.
C. When the original application was denied for the reason that the
proposed rezoning would not conform to the Comprehensive Plan of the
town, and such plan has subsequently been amended in a manner that
the proposed rezoning would conform.
§ 171-116 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-118
157:393

ARTICLE XXI
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
[Added 2-11-2013]
§ 171-119. Summary of general procedural requirements.
The following is for informational purposes to enable a conceptual
understanding of the major procedural differences between applying for
a new tower or a wireless telecommunications facility that increases or
extends above the height of the structure attached to and a co-location that
does not.
A. All applications. All applications shall be required to comply with all
applicable provisions of this article, including, but not limited to,
§ 171-125, and prove the following:
(1) The need for the facility to provide functionally reliable service to
the exclusion of all other alternatives, such as, but not limited to,
adjusting existing adjacent facilities;
(2) The need for the facility at the location proposed;
(3) The facility is designed to be safe and structurally sound for the use
and loads intended;
(4) The facility will be the least visually intrusive as reasonably
possible in order to provide functionally reliable service primarily
and essentially within the Town; and
(5) Establish with the Town an escrow deposit, as required, to assure
that the taxpayers do not incur the cost associated with processing
and reviewing the application.
B. New tower or increasing the height of a structure. An application for a
new tower or for a co-location that increases or extends above the
height of the existing structure attached to shall be deemed a new
tower and require the following:
(1) A nonrefundable application fee of $5,000;
(2) Prove that there is no alternative to a new tower or to extending
above the top of the facility attached to in order to provide
functionally reliable service primarily and essentially within the
Town;
(3) Prove the need for the facility to be located at the height proposed
in order to provide functionally reliable service primarily and
essentially within the Town;
(4) Provide evidence as required that the facility is designed to be
secure and structurally safe for the use and loads intended;
(5) A public hearing.
§ 171-119 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-119
157:395
§ 171-120. Purpose; intent.
The Telecommunications Act of 1996 affirmed the Town of Hillsville's
authority concerning the placement, construction and modification of
wireless telecommunications facilities. The Town of Hillsville, hereinafter
referred to as "Town," finds that wireless telecommunications facilities may
pose significant concerns to the health, safety, public welfare, character
and environment of the Town and its inhabitants. The Town also recognizes
that facilitating the development of wireless service technology can be an
economic development asset to the Town and of significant benefit to the
Town and its residents. In order to insure that the placement, construction
or modification of wireless telecommunications facilities is consistent with
the Town's land use policies, the Town is adopting a single, comprehensive
wireless telecommunications facilities application and permit process. The
intent of this article is to minimize the negative impact of wireless
telecommunications facilities, establish a fair and efficient process for
review and approval of applications, assure an integrated, comprehensive
review of environmental impacts of such facilities, and protect the health,
safety and welfare of the Town of Hillsville.
§ 171-121. Title.
This article shall be known and cited as the "Wireless Telecommunications
Facilities Siting Ordinance for the Town of Hillsville."
§ 171-122. Severability.
C. Co-location not increasing the height or extending above the top of the
existing structure. An application to co-locate on an existing structure
that does not extend above the existing top of the structure or increase
its height shall be required to:
(1) Submit a nonrefundable application fee of $2,000;
(2) Prove the need for the facility to provide functionally reliable
service primarily and essentially within the Town;
(3) Camouflage the antennas and associated equipment so as to be as
visually innocuous and unobtrusive as possible. There shall be no
requirement for a public hearing for such a facility, and the permit
shall be granted administratively.
A. If any word, phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection, or other
portion of this article or any application thereof to any person or
circumstance is declared void, unconstitutional, or invalid for any
reason, then such word, phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection, or
other portion, or the proscribed application thereof, shall be severable,
and the remaining provisions of this article, and all applications thereof,
not having been declared void, unconstitutional, or invalid, shall remain
in full force and effect.
§ 171-119 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-122
157:396
§ 171-123. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, and where not inconsistent with the context
of a particular section, the defined terms, phrases, words, abbreviations,
and their derivations shall have the meanings given in this section. When
not inconsistent with the context, words in the present tense include the
future tense, words used in the plural number include words in the singular
number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The
word "shall" is always mandatory, and not merely directory.
APPLICANT — Any wireless service provider submitting an application for
a special exception permit for wireless telecommunications facilities.
APPLICATION — All necessary and appropriate documentation that an
applicant submits in order to receive a special exception permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities.
ANTENNA — A system of electrical conductors that transmit or receive
electromagnetic waves or radio frequency or other wireless signals. Such
shall include, but not be limited to, radio, television, cellular, paging,
personal telecommunications services (PCS), microwave
telecommunications and services not licensed by the FCC, but not expressly
exempt from the Town's siting, building and permitting authority.
CO-LOCATION — The use of a tower or structure to support an antenna for
the provision of wireless services without increasing the height of the tower
or structure.
COMMERCIAL IMPRACTICABILITY or COMMERCIALLY IMPRACTICABLE
— The inability to perform an act on terms that are reasonable in commerce,
the cause or occurrence of which could not have been reasonably
anticipated or foreseen and that jeopardizes the financial efficacy of the
project. The inability to achieve a satisfactory financial return on investment
or profit, standing alone, shall not deem a situation to be commercial
impracticable and shall not render an act or the terms of an agreement
commercially impracticable.
COMPLETED APPLICATION — An application that contains all information
presented herein (subsequently requested) and/or data necessary to enable
an informed decision to be made with respect to an application.
COUNCIL — The Town Council of the Town of Hillsville, Virginia.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration, or its duly designated and
authorized successor agency.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission, or its duly designated
and authorized successor agency.
B. Any special exception permit issued under this article shall be
comprehensive and not severable. If part of a permit is deemed or ruled
to be invalid or unenforceable in any material respect, by a competent
authority, or is overturned by a competent authority, the permit shall be
void in total, upon determination by the Town.
§ 171-122 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-123
157:397
HEIGHT — When referring to a tower or structure, the distance measured
from the preexisting grade level to the highest point on the tower or
structure, even if said highest point is an antenna or lightning protection
device.
MODIFICATION or MODIFY — The addition, removal or change of any of
the physical and visually discernable components or aspects of a wireless
facility, such as antennas, cabling, radios, equipment shelters, landscaping,
fencing, utility feeds, changing the color or materials of any visually
discernable components, vehicular access, parking and/or an upgrade or
changeout of equipment for better or more modern equipment. Adding a
new wireless carrier or service provider to a telecommunications tower or
telecommunications site is a modification. A modification shall not include
the replacement of any components of a wireless facility where the
replacement is identical to the component being replaced or for any matters
that involve the normal repair and maintenance of a wireless facility without
adding, removing or changing anything.
NIER — Non-ionizing Electromagnetic Radiation.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, estate, trust, partnership, joint
stock company, association of two or more persons having a joint common
interest, or any other entity.
PERSONAL WIRELESS FACILITY — See definition for "wireless
telecommunications facilities."
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES or PWS or PERSONAL
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE or PCS — Shall have the same meaning
as defined and used in the 1996 Telecommunications Act.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION PERMIT — The official document or permit by which
an applicant is allowed to construct and use wireless telecommunications
facilities as granted or issued by the Town.
STEALTH or STEALTH TECHNOLOGY — Minimize adverse aesthetic and
visual impacts on the land, property, buildings, and other facilities adjacent
to, surrounding, and in generally the same area as the requested location
of such wireless telecommunications facilities, which shall mean using the
least visually and physically intrusive facility that is not technologically or
commercially impracticable under the facts and circumstances.
STATE — The Commonwealth of Virginia.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS — The transmission and/or reception of audio,
video, data, and other information by wire, radio frequency, light, and other
electronic or electromagnetic systems.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS ACCESSORY FACILITY OR STRUCTURE — An
accessory facility or structure serving or being used in conjunction with
wireless telecommunications facilities, and located on the same property or
lot as the wireless telecommunications facilities, including, but not limited
to, utility or transmission equipment storage sheds or cabinets.
§ 171-123 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-123
157:398
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SITE — See definition for "wireless
telecommunications facilities."
TELECOMMUNICATIONS STRUCTURE — A structure used in the provision
of services described in the definition of "wireless telecommunications
facilities."
TEMPORARY — In relation to all aspects and components of this article,
something intended to, or that does, exist for fewer than 90 days.
TOWN — The Town of Hillsville.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES (means and includes a
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER and TOWER and
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SITE and PERSONAL WIRELESS FACILITY) —
A structure, facility or location designed or intended to be used as, or
used to support, antennas or other transmitting or receiving devices. This
includes, without limit, towers of all types and kinds and structures that
employ camouflage technology, including, but not limited to, structures
such as a multistory building, church steeple, silo, water tower, sign or
other structures that can be used to mitigate the visual impact of an
antenna or the functional equivalent of such, including all related facilities
such as cabling, equipment shelters and other structures associated with
the site. It is a structure and facility intended for transmitting and/or
receiving radio, television, cellular, paging, 911, personal
telecommunications services, commercial satellite services, microwave
services and services not licensed by the FCC, but not expressly exempt
from the Town's siting, building and permitting authority, excluding those
used exclusively for the Town's fire, police or exclusively for private,
noncommercial radio and television reception and private citizens' bands,
amateur radio and other similar noncommercial telecommunications where
the height of the facility is below the height limits set forth in this article.
§ 171-124. Overall policy and desired goals for special exception
permits.
In order to ensure that the placement, construction, and modification of
wireless telecommunications facilities protects the Town's health, safety,
public welfare, environmental features, the nature and character of the
community and neighborhood and other aspects of the quality of life
specifically listed elsewhere in this article, the Town hereby adopts an
overall policy with respect to a special exception permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities for the express purpose of achieving the
following goals:
A. Implementing an application process for person(s):
(1) A permit for a co-location of wireless telecommunications facilities;
or
(2) A permit for wireless telecommunications facilities.
§ 171-123 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-124
157:399
§ 171-125. Designated agencies; co-location; permit application;
special exception permit application.
B. Establishing a policy for examining an application for and issuing a
special exception permit for wireless telecommunications facilities that
is both fair and consistent.
C. Requiring, wherever feasible, the sharing and/or co-location of wireless
telecommunications facilities among service providers.
D. Promoting and requiring the placement, height and quantity of wireless
telecommunications facilities in such a manner, including, but not
limited to, the use of stealth technology, to minimize adverse aesthetic
and visual impacts on the land, property, buildings, and other facilities
adjacent to, surrounding, and in generally the same area as the
requested location of such wireless telecommunications facilities,
which shall mean using the least visually and physically intrusive
facility that is not technologically or commercially impracticable under
the facts and circumstances.
A. All applicants for a special exception permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities or any modification of such facility shall
comply with the requirements set forth in this section. The Planning
Commission and Town Council are the officially designated agencies or
bodies of the Town to whom applications for a special exception permit
for wireless telecommunications facilities must be made, and that are
authorized to review, analyze, evaluate and make decisions with respect
to granting or not granting, recertifying or not recertifying, or revoking
special exception permits for wireless telecommunications facilities.
The Town may, at its discretion, delegate or designate other official
agencies of the Town or others to accept, review, analyze, evaluate and
make recommendations to the Town Council with respect to the
granting or not granting, recertifying or not recertifying or revoking
special exception permits for wireless telecommunications facilities.
B. An application for a special exception permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities shall be signed on behalf of the applicant
by the person preparing the same and with knowledge of the contents
and representations made therein and attesting to the truth and
completeness of the information. The landowner, if different than the
applicant, shall also sign the application and shall agree to remove any
existing violations and make all existing telecommunications facilities
compliant with this article and all applicable local, state and
telecommunications codes prior to the issuance of any certificate of
occupancy or compliance or the functional equivalent for a new or
modified wireless facility. At the discretion of the Town, any false or
misleading statement in the application may subject the applicant to
denial of the application without further consideration or opportunity
for correction. Applications not meeting the requirements stated herein
or which are otherwise incomplete may be rejected by the Town.
§ 171-124 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-125
157:400
C. The applicant shall include a statement, in writing, that:
(1) The applicant's proposed wireless telecommunications facilities
shall be maintained in a safe manner and in compliance with all
conditions of the special exception permit, without exception,
unless specifically granted relief by the Town, in writing, as well as
all applicable and permissible local codes, ordinances, and
regulations, including any and all applicable Town, state and
federal laws, rules, and regulations.
(2) The construction of the wireless telecommunications facilities is
legally permissible, including, but not limited to, the fact that the
applicant is authorized to do business in the state.
(3) No wireless telecommunications facilities shall be installed or
constructed until the application is reviewed and approved by the
Town and the special exception permit has been issued.
(4) All applications for the construction or installation of new wireless
telecommunications facilities shall contain the information
hereinafter set forth. The application shall be signed by an
authorized individual on behalf of the applicant. Where a
certification is called for, such certification shall bear the signature
and seal of a professional engineer licensed in the state. The
application shall include the following information:
(a) Documentation that demonstrates the need for the wireless
telecommunications facility to provide service primarily and
essentially within the Town. Such documentation shall include
propagation studies of the proposed site and all adjoining
planned, proposed, in-service or existing sites;
(b) The name, address and phone number of the person preparing
the report;
(c) The name, address, and phone number of the property owner,
operator, and applicant, and to include the legal form of the
applicant;
(d) The postal address of the property;
(e) The zoning district or designation in which the property is
situated;
(f) Size of the property, stated both in square feet and lot line
dimensions, and a diagram showing the location of all lot lines;
(g) The location of the nearest residential structure;
(h) The location, size and height of all structures on the property
which are the subject of the application;
§ 171-125 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-125
157:401
(i) The location, size and height of all proposed and existing
antennas and all appurtenant structures;
(j) The type, locations and dimensions of all proposed and existing
landscaping, and fencing;
(k) The number, type and design of the tower(s) and antenna(s)
proposed and the basis for the calculations of the tower's
capacity to accommodate multiple users;
(l) The make, model and manufacturer of the tower and
antenna(s);
(m) A description of the proposed tower and antenna(s) and all
related fixtures, structures, appurtenances and apparatus,
including height above preexisting grade, materials, color and
lighting;
(n) The frequency, modulation and class of service of radio or
other transmitting equipment;
(o) The actual intended transmission and the maximum effective
radiated power of the antenna(s);
(p) Direction of maximum lobes and associated radiation of the
antenna(s);
(q) Certification that the NIER levels at the proposed site are
within the threshold levels adopted by the FCC;
(r) Certification that the proposed antenna(s) will not cause
interference with other telecommunications devices;
(s) A copy of the FCC license applicable for the intended use of the
wireless telecommunications facilities;
(t) Certification that a topographic and geomorphologic study and
analysis has been conducted, and that, taking into account the
subsurface and substrata, and the proposed drainage plan, the
site is adequate to assure the stability of the proposed wireless
telecommunications facilities on the proposed site.
D. In the case of a new tower, the applicant shall be required to submit a
written report demonstrating its meaningful efforts to secure shared
use of existing tower(s) or the use of alternative buildings or other
structures within the Town. Copies of written requests and responses
for shared use shall be provided to the Town in the application, along
with any letters of rejection stating the reason for rejection.
E. The applicant shall certify that the telecommunications facility,
foundation and attachments are designed and will be constructed to
meet all local, Town, state and federal structural requirements for
loads, including wind and ice loads.
§ 171-125 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-125
157:402
F. The applicant shall certify that the wireless telecommunications
facilities will be effectively grounded and bonded so as to protect
persons and property and installed with appropriate surge protectors.
G. An applicant may be required to submit an environmental assessment
analysis and a visual addendum. Based on the results of the analysis,
including the visual addendum, the Town may require submission of a
more detailed visual analysis. The scope of the required environmental
and visual assessment will be reviewed at the pre-application meeting.
H. The applicant shall furnish a visual impact assessment, which shall
include:
(1) A "Zone of Visibility Map," which shall be provided in order to
determine locations from which the tower may be seen.
(2) Pictorial representations of "before and after" views from key
viewpoints both inside and outside of the Town as may be
appropriate, including, but not limited to, state highways and other
major roads; state and local parks; other public lands; historic
districts; preserves and historic sites normally open to the public;
and from any other location where the site is visible to a large
number of visitors, travelers or residents. Guidance will be
provided concerning the appropriate key sites at a pre-application
meeting.
(3) An assessment of the visual impact of the tower base, guy wires
and accessory buildings from abutting and adjacent properties and
streets as relates to the need or appropriateness of screening.
I. The applicant shall demonstrate and provide, in writing and/or by
drawing, how it shall effectively screen from view the base and all
related facilities and structures of the proposed wireless
telecommunications facilities.
J. Any and all representations made by the applicant to the Town on the
record during the application process, whether written or verbal, shall
be deemed a part of the application and may be relied upon in good
faith by the Town.
K. All utilities at a wireless telecommunications facilities site shall be
installed underground and in compliance with all laws, ordinances,
rules and regulations of the Town, including, specifically, but not limited
to, the National Electrical Safety Code and the National Electrical
Code, where appropriate.
L. All wireless telecommunications facilities shall contain a demonstration
that the facility is sited so as to be the least visually intrusive reasonably
possible and thereby has the least adverse visual effect on the
environment and its character, on existing vegetation, and on the
residences in the area of the wireless telecommunications facility.
§ 171-125 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-125
157:403
M. Both the wireless telecommunications facility and any and all accessory
or associated facilities shall maximize the use of building materials,
colors and textures designed to blend with the structure to which it may
be affixed and/or to harmonize with the natural surroundings. This shall
include the utilization of stealth or concealment technology as may be
required by the Town.
N. At a telecommunications site, an access road, turnaround space and
parking shall be provided to assure adequate emergency and service
access. Maximum use of existing roads, whether public or private, shall
be made to the extent practicable. Road construction shall at all times
minimize ground disturbance and the cutting of vegetation. Road
grades shall closely follow natural contours to assure minimal visual
disturbance and reduce soil erosion.
O. A person who holds a special exception permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities shall construct, operate, maintain, repair,
provide for removal of, modify or restore the permitted wireless
telecommunications facilities in strict compliance with all current
applicable technical, safety and safety-related codes adopted by the
Town, state, or United States, including but not limited to the most
recent editions of the National Electrical Safety Code and the National
Electrical Code, as well as accepted and responsible workmanlike
industry practices and recommended practices of the National
Association of Tower Erectors. The codes referred to are codes that
include, but are not limited to, construction, building, electrical, fire,
safety, health, and land use codes. In the event of a conflict between or
among any of the preceding, the more stringent shall apply.
P. A holder of a special exception permit granted under this article shall
obtain, at its own expense, all permits and licenses required by
applicable law, rule, regulation or code, and must maintain the same, in
full force and effect, for as long as required by the Town or other
governmental entity or agency having jurisdiction over the applicant.
Q. An applicant shall submit to the Town the number of completed
applications determined to be needed at the pre-application meeting.
Written notification of the application shall be provided to the
legislative body of all adjacent municipalities and to the Town Planning
Department.
R. The applicant shall examine the feasibility of designing a proposed
tower to accommodate future demand for at least five additional
commercial applications, for example, future co-locations. The tower
shall be structurally designed to accommodate at least five additional
antenna arrays equal to those of the applicant, and located as close to
the applicant's antenna as possible without causing interference. This
requirement may be waived, provided that the applicant, in writing,
demonstrates that the provisions of future shared usage of the tower is
not technologically feasible, is commercially impracticable or creates
an unnecessary and unreasonable burden, based upon:
§ 171-125 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-125
157:404
(1) The foreseeable number of FCC licenses available for the area;
(2) The kind of wireless telecommunications facilities site and
structure proposed;
(3) The number of existing and potential licenses without wireless
telecommunications facilities spaces/sites;
(4) Available space on existing and approved towers.
S. The owner of the proposed new tower, and his/her successors in
interest, shall negotiate in good faith for the shared use of the proposed
tower by other wireless service providers in the future, and shall:
(1) Respond within 60 days to a request for information from a
potential shared-use applicant.
(2) Negotiate in good faith concerning future requests for shared use
of the new tower by other telecommunications providers.
(3) Allow shared use of the new tower if another telecommunications
provider agrees, in writing, to pay reasonable charges. The charges
may include, but are not limited to, a pro rata share of the cost of
site selection, planning, project administration, land costs, site
design, construction and maintenance financing, return on equity,
less depreciation, and all of the costs of adapting the tower or
equipment to accommodate a shared user without causing
electromagnetic interference.
(4) Failure to abide by the conditions outlined above may be grounds
for revocation of the special exception permit for the tower.
T. There shall be a pre-application meeting. The purpose of the preapplication
meeting will be to address issues which will help to expedite
the review and permitting process. A pre-application meeting shall also
include a site visit if there has not been a prior site visit for the
requested site. Costs of the Town's consultants to prepare for and
attend the pre-application meeting will be borne by the applicant out of
the required escrow deposit.
U. The holder of a special exception permit shall notify the Town of any
intended modification of a wireless telecommunications facility and
shall apply to the Town to modify, relocate or rebuild a wireless
telecommunications facility.
V. In order to better inform the public, in the case of a new
telecommunications tower, the applicant shall, prior to the public
hearing on the application, hold a "balloon test." The applicant shall
arrange to fly, or raise upon a temporary mast, a brightly colored
balloon, a minimum of a three feet in diameter, at the maximum height
of the proposed new tower. The dates (including a second date, in case
of poor visibility on the initial date), times and location of this balloon
test shall be advertised by the applicant seven and 14 days in advance
§ 171-125 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-125
157:405
§ 171-126. Location.
of the first test date in a newspaper with a general circulation in the
Town. The applicant shall inform the Town, in writing, of the dates and
times of the test at least 14 days in advance. The balloon shall be flown
for at least four consecutive hours sometime between 7:00 a.m. and
4:00 p.m. on the dates chosen. The primary date shall be on a weekend,
but in case of poor weather on the initial date, the secondary date may
be on a weekday.
W. The applicant will provide a written copy of an analysis, completed by a
qualified individual or organization, to determine if the tower or
existing structure intended to support wireless facilities requires
lighting under Federal Aviation Administration Regulation Part 77. This
requirement shall be for any new tower or for an existing structure or
building where the application increases the height of the structure or
building. If this analysis determines that the FAA must be contacted,
then all filings with the FAA, all responses from the FAA and any related
correspondence shall be provided in a timely manner.
A. Applicants for wireless telecommunications facilities shall locate, site
and erect said wireless telecommunications facilities in accordance
with the following priorities, Subsection A(1) being the highest priority
and Subsection A(6) being the lowest priority.
(1) On existing towers or other structures without increasing the
height of the tower or structure.
(2) On Town-owned properties.
(3) On properties in areas zoned for industrial use (I-Industrial).
(4) On properties in areas zoned for business use (GC General
Commercial, CC Core Commercial, NC Neighborhood
Commercial).
(5) On properties in areas zoned for agricultural use (A-1 Agricultural).
(6) On properties in areas zoned for residential use (R-1 Medium
Density Residential, R-2 Multifamily Residential, MHP Mobile
Home Park).
B. If the proposed site is not proposed for the highest priority listed above,
then a detailed explanation must be provided as to why a site of a
higher priority was not selected. The person seeking such an exception
must satisfactorily demonstrate the technological reason or reasons
why such a permit should be granted for the proposed site, and the
technological problems in the context of providing functionally reliable
service and the harm or hardship that would be incurred by the
applicant if the permit were not granted for the proposed site at the
proposed location.
§ 171-125 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-126
157:406
§ 171-127. Shared use of facilities and other structures.
C. An applicant may not bypass sites of higher priority by stating the site
proposed is the only site leased or selected. An application shall
address co-location as an option. If such option is not proposed, the
applicant must explain to the reasonable satisfaction of the Town why
co-location at any alternative location(s) is commercially,
technologically, or otherwise impracticable. Agreements between
providers limiting or prohibiting co-location shall not be a valid basis
for any claim of commercial impracticability or hardship.
D. Notwithstanding the above, the Town may approve any site located
within an area in the above list of priorities, provided that the Town
finds that the proposed site is in the best interest of the health, safety
and welfare of the Town and its inhabitants and will not have a
deleterious effect on the nature and character of the community and
neighborhood.
E. The applicant shall submit a written report demonstrating the
applicant's review of the above locations in order of priority,
demonstrating the technological reason for the site selection. If
appropriate, based on selecting a site of lower priority, a detailed
written explanation as to why sites of a higher priority were not
selected shall be included with the application, including all supporting
technological documentation and studies needed to make such a
determination.
F. Notwithstanding that a potential site may be situated in an area of
highest priority or highest available priority, the Town may disapprove
an application for any of the following reasons.
(1) Conflict with safety and safety-related codes and requirements;
(2) Conflict with the historic nature or character of a neighborhood or
historical district;
(3) The use or construction of wireless telecommunications facilities
which is contrary to an already stated purpose of a specific zoning
or land use designation;
(4) The placement and location of wireless telecommunications
facilities which would create an unacceptable risk, or the
reasonable probability of such, to residents, the public, employees
and agents of the Town, or employees of the service provider or
other service providers;
(5) Conflicts with the provisions of this article.
A. Locating on existing towers or other structures without increasing the
height, as opposed to the construction of a new tower, shall be
preferred by the Town. The applicant shall submit a comprehensive
report inventorying existing towers and other suitable structures within
§ 171-126 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-127
157:407
§ 171-128. Height of telecommunications tower(s).
§ 171-129. Appearance and visibility.
four miles of the location of any proposed new tower, unless the
applicant can show that some other distance is more reasonable and
demonstrates conclusively why an existing tower or other suitable
structure cannot be used.
B. An applicant intending to locate on an existing tower or other suitable
structure shall be required to document the intent of the existing owner
to permit its use by the applicant.
C. Such shared use shall consist only of the minimum antenna array
technologically required to provide service primarily and essentially
within the Town, to the extent practicable, unless good cause is shown.
A. The applicant shall submit documentation justifying the total height of
any tower, facility and/or antenna and the basis therefor. Such
documentation will be analyzed in the context of the justification of the
height needed to provide functionally reliable service primarily and
essentially within the Town, to the extent practicable, unless good
cause is shown.
B. The maximum permitted height of a new tower shall be that needed for
functionally reliable service based on up to six co-located antenna
arrays requiring six feet of vertical space each, and the ambient tree
height in the immediate area around the proposed tower. The
installation must be proven to have minimal visual and environmental
impact on the community.
C. Building-mounted antennas should be located and designed to be an
integral part of the building and shall be secured or camouflaged, as
necessary or as reasonably required by the Town Council, to minimize
the visual impact and minimize any change in or impact on the nature
and character of the community and shall not increase the height of the
building.
D. No tower constructed after the effective date of this article, including
allowing for all attachments, shall exceed that height which shall permit
operation without required artificial lighting of any kind in accordance
with municipal, Town, state, and/or any federal statute, law, local law,
Town ordinance, code, rule or regulation.
A. Wireless telecommunications facilities shall not be artificially lighted or
marked, except as required by law and in such an instance shall shield
or otherwise construct the facility to prevent any ground scatter effect
of lighting.
B. Towers shall be galvanized or painted with a rust-preventive paint of an
appropriate color to harmonize with the surroundings and shall be
maintained in accordance with the requirements of this article.
§ 171-127 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-129
157:408
§ 171-130. Security.
All wireless telecommunications facilities and antennas shall be located,
fenced or otherwise secured in a manner that prevents unauthorized
access. Specifically:
§ 171-131. Signage.
Wireless telecommunications facilities shall contain a sign no larger than
four square feet in order to provide adequate notification to persons in
the immediate area of the presence of an antenna that has transmission
capabilities and shall contain the name(s) of the owner(s) and operator(s)
of the antenna(s) as well as emergency phone number(s). The sign shall be
on the equipment shelter or cabinet of the applicant and be visible from the
access point of the site and must identify the equipment owner of the shelter
or cabinet. The sign shall not be lighted, unless lighting is required by
applicable law, rule or regulation. No other signage, including advertising,
shall be permitted.
§ 171-132. Lot size and setbacks.
All proposed towers and any other proposed wireless telecommunications
facility structures shall be set back from abutting parcels, recorded rightsof-
way and road and street lines by the greater of the following distances:
a distance equal to the height of the proposed tower or wireless
telecommunications facility structure plus 10% of the height of the tower
or structure, or the existing setback requirement of the underlying zoning
district, whichever is greater. Any accessory structure shall also be located
so as to comply with the applicable minimum setback requirements for the
property on which it is situated.
§ 171-133. Retention of expert assistance; reimbursement by
applicant.
C. If lighting is required, the applicant shall provide a detailed plan for
sufficient lighting of as unobtrusive and inoffensive an effect as is
permissible under state and federal regulations and in such an instance
shall, to the extent not prohibited by applicable law or regulation, shield
or otherwise construct the facility to prevent any ground scatter effect
of lighting.
A. All antennas, towers and other supporting structures, including guy
wires, shall be made inaccessible to individuals and constructed or
shielded in such a manner that they cannot be climbed or collided with;
and
B. Transmitters and telecommunications control points shall be installed
in such a manner that they are readily accessible only to persons
authorized to operate or service them.
§ 171-129 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-133
157:409
§ 171-134. Exceptions from special exception permits.
§ 171-135. Public hearing; notification.
A. The Town may hire any consultant and/or expert necessary to assist the
Town in reviewing and evaluating the application, including the
construction and modification of the site, once permitted, and any
requests for recertification.
B. An applicant shall deposit with the Town funds sufficient to reimburse
the Town for all reasonable costs of consultant and expert evaluation
and consultation to the Town in connection with the review of any
application, including the construction and modification of the site,
once permitted. The initial deposit shall be $8,500. The placement of
the $8,500 with the Town shall precede the pre-application meeting.
The Town will maintain a separate escrow account for all such funds.
The Town's consultants/experts shall invoice the Town for its services in
reviewing the application, including the construction and modification
of the site, once permitted. If at any time during the process this escrow
account has a balance less than $2,500, the applicant shall immediately,
upon notification by the Town, replenish said escrow account so that it
has a balance of at least $5,000. Such additional escrow funds shall be
deposited with the Town before any further action or consideration is
taken on the application. In the event that the amount held in escrow by
the Town is more than the amount of the actual invoicing at the
conclusion of the project, the remaining balance shall be promptly
refunded to the applicant.
C. The total amount of the funds needed as set forth in Subsection B of this
section may vary with the scope and complexity of the project, the
completeness of the application and other information as may be
needed to complete the necessary review, analysis and inspection of any
construction or modification.
A. No person shall be permitted to site, place, build, construct, modify or
prepare any site for the placement or use of wireless
telecommunications facilities as of the effective date of this article
without having first obtained a special exception permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities. Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary in this section, no special exception permit shall be required
for those noncommercial exceptions noted in the definition of "wireless
telecommunications facilities."
B. All wireless telecommunications facilities existing on or before the
effective date of this article shall be allowed to continue as they
presently exist; provided however, that any visible modification or
addition of providers on an existing wireless telecommunications
facility must comply with this article. Any modification of the facilities
on an existing tower shall require the tower to come into compliance
with this article.
§ 171-133 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-135
157:410
§ 171-136. Action on application for special exception permits.
A. Prior to the approval of any application for a special exception permit
for a new tower or a co-located wireless facility that extends above the
top of the structure attached to, thereby increasing the height of the
structure, a public hearing shall be held by the Town, notice of which
shall be published in the official newspaper of the Town no less than 10
calendar days prior to the scheduled date of the public hearing. In order
that the Town may notify nearby landowners, the application shall
contain the names and addresses of all landowners whose property is
located within 1,500 feet of any property line of the lot or parcel on
which the new wireless telecommunications facilities are proposed to
be located.
B. There shall be no public hearing required for an application to co-locate
on an existing tower or other similar structure that does not increase
the height by extending above the top of the structure. Subject to the
requirements contained in § 171-25, an application to co-locate on an
existing tower or similar structure that does not increase the height by
extending above the top of the structure shall be handled
administratively.
C. The Town shall schedule the public hearing referred to in Subsection A
of this section once it finds the application is complete. The Town, at
any stage prior to issuing a special exception permit, may require such
additional information as it deems necessary.
A. The Town will undertake a review of an application pursuant to this
article in a timely fashion and shall act within a reasonable period of
time, given the relative complexity of the application and the
circumstances, with due regard for the public's interest and need to be
involved and the applicant's desire for a timely resolution.
B. The Town may refer any application or part thereof to any advisory or
other committee for a nonbinding recommendation.
C. After the public hearing and after formally considering the application,
the Town may approve, approve with conditions, or deny a special
exception permit. Its decision shall be in writing and shall be supported
by substantial evidence contained in a written record. The burden of
proof for the grant of the permit shall always be upon the applicant.
D. If the Town approves the special exception permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities, then the applicant shall be notified of
such approval, in writing, within 10 calendar days of the Town's action,
and the special exception permit shall be issued within 30 days after
such approval. Except for necessary building permits, and subsequent
certificates of compliance, once a special exception permit has been
granted hereunder, no additional permits or approvals from the Town,
such as site plan or zoning approvals, shall be required by the Town for
§ 171-135 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-136
157:411
§ 171-137. Recertification of special exception permits.
the wireless telecommunications facilities covered by the special
exception permit.
E. If the Town denies the special exception permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities, then the applicant shall be notified of
such denial, in writing, within 10 calendar days of the Town's action.
A. Between 12 months and six months prior to the five-year anniversary
date after the effective date of the special exception permit and all
subsequent five-year anniversaries of the effective date of the original
special exception permit for wireless telecommunications facilities, the
holder of a special exception permit for such wireless
telecommunications facilities shall submit a signed written request to
the Town for recertification. In the written request for recertification,
the holder of such special exception permit shall note the following:
(1) The name of the holder of the special exception permit for the
wireless telecommunications facilities;
(2) If applicable, the number or title of the special exception permit;
(3) The date of the original granting of the special exception permit;
(4) Whether the wireless telecommunications facilities have been
moved, relocated, rebuilt, or otherwise visibly modified since the
issuance of the special exception permit and if so, in what manner;
(5) If the wireless telecommunications facilities have been moved,
relocated, rebuilt, or otherwise visibly modified, then whether the
Town approved such action, and under what terms and conditions,
and whether those terms and conditions were complied with;
(6) That the wireless telecommunications facilities are in compliance
with the special exception permit and compliance with all
applicable codes, laws, rules and regulations;
(7) Recertification that the tower and attachments both are designed
and constructed and continue to meet all local, Town, state and
federal structural requirements for loads, including wind and ice
loads. Such recertification shall be by a professional engineer
licensed in the state, the cost of which shall be borne by the
applicant.
B. If, after such review, the Town determines that the permitted wireless
telecommunications facilities are in compliance with the special
exception permit and all applicable statutes, laws, local laws,
ordinances, codes, rules and regulations, then the Town may issue a
recertification of the special exception permit for the wireless
telecommunications facilities, which may include any new provisions or
conditions that are mutually agreed upon, or that are required by
§ 171-136 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-137
157:412
§ 171-138. Extent and parameters of special exception permits.
The extent and parameters of a special exception permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities shall be as follows:
applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, codes, rules or regulations. If,
after such review, it is determined that the permitted wireless
telecommunications facilities are not in compliance with the special
exception permit and all applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, codes,
rules and regulations, then the Town may refuse to issue a
recertification special exception permit for the wireless
telecommunications facilities, and in such event, such wireless
telecommunications facilities shall not be used after the date that the
applicant receives written notice of the decision by the Town until such
time as the facility is brought into compliance. Any decision requiring
the cessation of use of the facility or imposing a penalty shall be in
writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written
record and shall be promptly provided to the owner of the facility.
C. If the applicant has submitted all of the information requested and
required by this article, and if the review is not completed, as noted in
Subsection B of this section, prior to the five-year anniversary date of
the special exception permit, or subsequent five-year anniversaries,
then the applicant for the permitted wireless telecommunications
facilities shall receive an extension of the special exception permit for
up to six months, in order for the completion of the review.
D. If the holder of a special exception permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities does not submit a request for
recertification of such special exception permit within the timeframe
noted in Subsection A of this section, then such special exception
permit and any authorizations granted thereunder shall cease to exist
on the date of the fifth anniversary of the original granting of the
special exception permit, or subsequent five-year anniversaries, unless
the holder of the special exception permit adequately demonstrates
that extenuating circumstances prevented a timely recertification
request. If the Town agrees that there were legitimately extenuating
circumstances, then the holder of the special exception permit may
submit a late recertification request or application for a new special
exception permit.
A. Such special exception permit shall be nonexclusive.
B. Such special exception permit shall not be assigned, transferred or
conveyed without the express prior written notification to the Town.
C. Such special exception permit may, following a hearing upon due prior
notice to the applicant, be revoked, canceled, or terminated for a
violation of the conditions and provisions of the special exception
permit, or for a material violation of this article after prior written
notice to the holder of the special exception permit.
§ 171-137 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-138
157:413
§ 171-139. Application fee.
§ 171-140. Performance security.
The applicant and the owner of record of any proposed wireless
telecommunications facilities property site shall, at its cost and expense,
be jointly required to execute and file with the Town a bond, or other
form of security acceptable to the Town as to type of security and the
form and manner of execution, in an amount of at least $75,000 and with
such sureties as are deemed sufficient by the Town to assure the faithful
performance of the terms and conditions of this article and conditions of any
special exception permit issued pursuant to this article. The full amount of
the bond or security shall remain in full force and effect throughout the term
of the special exception permit and/or until any necessary site restoration
is completed to restore the site to a condition comparable to that which
existed prior to the issuance of the original special exception permit.
§ 171-141. Inspection authority.
In order to verify that the holder of a special exception permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities, and any and all lessees, renters, and/or
licensees of wireless telecommunications facilities, place and construct
such facilities, including towers and antennas, in accordance with all
applicable technical, safety, fire, building, and zoning codes, laws,
ordinances and regulations and other applicable requirements, the Town
may inspect all facets of said permit holder's, renter's, lessee's or licensee's
placement, construction, modification and maintenance of such facilities,
including, but not limited to, towers, antennas and buildings or other
structures constructed or located on the permitted site.
D. Any wireless telecommunications facility that is permitted shall be
constructed, completed and provide service no later than six months
from the date of the grant of the initial permit. If not constructed,
completed, and providing service within the required six months, the
permit may be revoked and a new application will be required.
A. At the time that a person submits an application for a special exception
permit for a new tower, such person shall pay a nonrefundable
application fee of $5,000 to the Town. If the application is for a special
exception permit for co-locating on an existing tower or other suitable
structure, where no increase in height of the tower or structure is
required, the nonrefundable fee shall be $2,000.
B. No application fee is required in order to recertify a special exception
permit for wireless telecommunications facilities, unless there has been
a visible modification of the wireless telecommunications facility since
the date of the issuance of the existing special exception permit for
which the conditions of the special exception permit have not
previously been modified. In the case of any modification, the fees
provided in Subsection A shall apply.
§ 171-138 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-142
157:414
§ 171-142. Annual NIER certification.
The holder of the special exception permit shall, annually, certify to the
Town that NIER levels at the site are within the threshold levels adopted by
the FCC.
§ 171-143. Liability insurance.
§ 171-144. Indemnification.
A. A holder of a special exception permit for wireless telecommunications
facilities shall secure and at all times maintain public liability insurance
for personal injuries, death and property damage, and umbrella
insurance coverage, for the duration of the special exception permit in
amounts as set forth below:
(1) Commercial general liability covering personal injuries, death and
property damage: $1,000,000 per occurrence/$2,000,000
aggregate;
(2) Automobile coverage: $1,000,000 per occurrence/$2,000,000
aggregate;
(3) Workers' compensation and disability: statutory amounts.
B. The commercial general liability insurance policy shall specifically
include the Town and its officers, boards, employees, committee
members, attorneys, agents and consultants as additional named
insureds.
C. The insurance policies shall be issued by an agent or representative of
an insurance company licensed to do business in the state and with a
Best's rating of at least A.
D. The insurance policies shall contain an endorsement obligating the
insurance company to furnish the Town with at least 30 days' prior
written notice in advance of the cancellation of the insurance.
E. Renewal or replacement policies or certificates shall be delivered to the
Town at least 15 days before the expiration of the insurance that such
policies are to renew or replace.
F. Before construction of a permitted wireless telecommunications
facilities is initiated, but in no case later than 15 days after the grant of
the special exception permit, the holder of the special exception permit
shall deliver to the Town a copy of each of the policies or certificates
representing the insurance in the required amounts.
A. Any application for wireless telecommunications facilities that is
proposed for Town property, pursuant to this article, shall contain a
provision with respect to indemnification. Such provision shall require
the applicant, to the extent permitted by the law, to at all times defend,
indemnify, protect, save, hold harmless, and exempt the Town, and its
§ 171-142 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-144
157:415
§ 171-145. Violations and penalties.
officers, boards, employees, committee members, attorneys, agents,
and consultants, from any and all penalties, damages, costs, or charges
arising out of any and all claims, suits, demands, causes of action,
or award of damages, whether compensatory or punitive, or expenses
arising therefrom, either at law or in equity, which might arise out of,
or are caused by, the placement, construction, erection, modification,
location, products performance, use, operation, maintenance, repair,
installation, replacement, removal, or restoration of said facility,
excepting, however, any portion of such claims, suits, demands, causes
of action or award of damages as may be attributable to the negligent
or intentional acts or omissions of the Town, or its servants or agents.
With respect to the penalties, damages or charges referenced herein,
reasonable attorneys' fees, consultants' fees, and expert witness fees
are included in those costs that are recoverable by the Town.
B. Notwithstanding the requirements noted in Subsection A of this
section, an indemnification provision will not be required in those
instances where the Town itself applies for and secures a special
exception permit for wireless telecommunications facilities.
A. In the event of a violation of this article or any special exception permit
issued pursuant to this article, the Town may impose and collect, and
the holder of the special exception permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities shall pay to the Town, fines or penalties as
set forth below.
B. A violation of this article is hereby declared to be an offense, punishable
by a fine not exceeding $350 per day per occurrence or imprisonment
for a period not to exceed six months, or both, for conviction of a first
offense; for conviction of a second offense, both of which were
committed within a period of five years, punishable by a fine of not less
than $350 nor more than $700 or imprisonment for a period not to
exceed six months, or both; and upon conviction for a third or
subsequent offense, all of which were committed within a period of five
years, punishable by a fine of not less than $700 nor more than $1,000
or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both.
However, for the purpose of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and
judicial officers generally, violations of this article or of such ordinance
or regulation shall be deemed misdemeanors and for such purpose only
all provisions of law relating to misdemeanors shall apply to such
violations. Each week's continued violation shall constitute a separate,
additional violation.
C. Notwithstanding anything in this article, the holder of the special
exception permit for wireless telecommunications facilities may not use
the payment of fines, liquidated damages or other penalties to evade or
avoid compliance with this article or any section of this article. An
attempt to do so shall subject the holder of the special exception permit
to termination and revocation of the special exception permit. The Town
§ 171-144 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-145
157:416
§ 171-146. Default and/or revocation of special exception permit.
§ 171-147. Removal.
may also seek injunctive relief to prevent the continued violation of this
article, without limiting other remedies available to the Town.
A. If wireless telecommunications facilities are repaired, rebuilt, placed,
moved, relocated, modified or maintained in a way that is inconsistent
or not in compliance with the provisions of this article or with the
special exception permit, then the Town shall notify the holder of the
special exception permit, in writing, of such violation. Such notice shall
specify the nature of the violation or noncompliance and that the
violations must be corrected within seven days of the date of the
postmark of the notice or of the date of personal service of the notice,
whichever is earlier. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this
subsection or any other section of this article, if the violation causes,
creates or presents an imminent danger or threat to the health or safety
of lives or property, the Town may, at its sole discretion, order the
violation remedied within 24 hours.
B. If within the period set forth in Subsection A above the wireless
telecommunications facilities are not brought into compliance with the
provisions of this article, or of the special exception permit, or
substantial steps are not taken in order to bring the affected wireless
telecommunications facilities into compliance, then the Town may
revoke such special exception permit for wireless telecommunications
facilities, and shall notify the holder of the special exception permit
within 48 hours of such action.
A. Under the following circumstances, the Town may determine that the
health, safety, and welfare interests of the Town warrant and require
the removal of wireless telecommunications facilities.
(1) Wireless telecommunications facilities with a permit have been
abandoned (i.e., not used as wireless telecommunications facilities)
for a period exceeding 90 consecutive days or a total of 180 days in
any three-hundred-sixty-five-day period, except for periods caused
by force majeure or acts of God, in which case repair or removal
shall commence within 90 days;
(2) Permitted wireless telecommunications facilities fall into such a
state of disrepair that it creates a health or safety hazard;
(3) Wireless telecommunications facilities have been located,
constructed, or modified without first obtaining, or in a manner not
authorized by, the required special exception permit, or any other
necessary authorization.
B. If the Town makes such a determination as noted in Subsection A of this
section, then the Town shall notify the holder of the special exception
§ 171-145 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-147
157:417
§ 171-148. Relief, waivers or exemptions.
Any applicant desiring relief, waiver or exemption from any aspect or
requirement of this article may request such at the pre-application meeting,
provided that the relief or exemption is contained in the original application
for either a special exception permit, or in the case of an existing or
previously granted special exception permit, a request for modification of
its tower and/or facilities. Such relief may be temporary or permanent,
permit for the wireless telecommunications facilities within 48 hours
that said wireless telecommunications facilities are to be removed; the
Town may approve an interim temporary use agreement/permit, such
as to enable the sale of the wireless telecommunications facilities.
C. The holder of the special exception permit, or its successors or assigns,
shall dismantle and remove such wireless telecommunications facilities,
and all associated structures and facilities, from the site and restore the
site to as close to its original condition as is possible, such restoration
being limited only by physical or commercial impracticability, within 90
days of receipt of written notice from the Town. However, if the owner
of the property upon which the wireless telecommunications facilities
are located wishes to retain any access roadway to the wireless
telecommunications facilities, the owner may do so with the approval of
the Town.
D. If wireless telecommunications facilities are not removed or substantial
progress has not been made to remove the wireless
telecommunications facilities within 90 days after the permit holder has
received notice, then the Town may order officials or representatives of
the Town to remove the wireless telecommunications facilities at the
sole expense of the owner or special exception permit holder.
E. If, the Town removes, or causes to be removed, wireless
telecommunications facilities, and the owner of the wireless
telecommunications facilities does not claim and remove it from the site
to a lawful location within 10 days, then the Town may take steps to
declare the wireless telecommunications facilities abandoned, and sell
them and their components.
F. Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, the Town may
approve a temporary use permit/agreement for the wireless
telecommunications facilities, for no more than 90 days, during which
time a suitable plan for removal, conversion, or relocation of the
affected wireless telecommunications facilities shall be developed by
the holder of the special exception permit, subject to the approval of the
Town, and an agreement to such plan shall be executed by the holder of
the special exception permit and the Town. If such a plan is not
developed, approved and executed within the ninety-day time period,
then the Town may take possession of and dispose of the affected
wireless telecommunications facilities in the manner provided in this
section.
§ 171-147 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-148
157:418
partial or complete. However, the burden of proving the need for the
requested relief, waiver or exemption is solely on the applicant to prove.
The applicant shall bear all costs of the Town in considering the request
and the relief, waiver or exemption. No such relief or exemption shall
be approved unless the applicant demonstrates by clear and convincing
evidence that, if granted the relief, waiver or exemption will have no
significant effect on the health, safety and welfare of the Town, its residents
and other service providers.
§ 171-149. Periodic regulatory review.
§ 171-150. Adherence to state and/or federal rules and regulations.
A. The Town may at any time conduct a review and examination of this
entire ordinance.
B. If after such a periodic review and examination of this article, the Town
determines that one or more provisions of this article should be
amended, repealed, revised, clarified, or deleted, then the Town may
take whatever measures are necessary in accordance with applicable
law in order to accomplish the same. It is noted that where warranted,
and in the best interests of the Town, the Town may repeal this entire
ordinance at any time.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsections A and B of this section,
the Town may at any time, and in any manner (to the extent permitted
by federal, state, or local law), amend, add, repeal, and/or delete one or
more provisions of this article.
A. To the extent that the holder of a special exception permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities has not received relief, or is otherwise
exempt, from appropriate state and/or federal agency rules or
regulations, then the holder of such a special exception permit shall
adhere to, and comply with, all applicable rules, regulations, standards,
and provisions of any state or federal agency, including, but not limited
to, the FAA and the FCC. Specifically included in this requirement are
any rules and regulations regarding height, lighting, security, electrical
and RF emission standards.
B. To the extent that applicable rules, regulations, standards, and
provisions of any state or federal agency, including, but not limited to,
the FAA and the FCC, and specifically including any rules and
regulations regarding height, lighting, and security are changed and/or
are modified during the duration of a special exception permit for
wireless telecommunications facilities, then the holder of such a special
exception permit shall conform the permitted wireless
telecommunications facilities to the applicable changed and/or modified
rule, regulation, standard, or provision within a maximum of 24 months
of the effective date of the applicable changed and/or modified rule,
regulation, standard, or provision, or sooner as may be required by the
issuing entity.
§ 171-148 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 171-151
157:419
§ 171-151. Conflict with other laws.
Where this article differs or conflicts with other laws, rules and regulations,
unless the right to do so is preempted or prohibited by the Town, state or
federal government, this article shall apply.
§ 171-152. When effective.
This article shall be effective immediately upon passage, pursuant to
applicable legal and procedural requirements.
§ 171-153. Authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to applicable authority granted by the state
and federal governments.
§ 171-151 HILLSVILLE CODE § 171-153
157:420
Appendix
Chapter A180
FRANCHISES
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Adoption Date Subject Disposition
11-11-1996 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
11-25-1996 Business license tax amendment Ch. 144, Art. VII
12-9-1996 Zoning amendment Ch. 171
2-10-1997 Personnel policy amendment Ch. 26
2-10-1997 Business license tax amendment Ch. 144, Art. VII
3-9-1998 Personnel policy amendment Ch. 26
7-13-1998 Special events amendment Ch. 132
5-10-1999 Building construction amendment Ch. 48
6-28-1999 Personnel policy amendment Ch. 26
10-25-1999 Sewer discharge control Ch. 167, Art. IV
4-24-2000 Solid waste amendment Ch. 128
5-8-2000 Town Attorney amendment Ch. 22, Art. I
5-22-2000 Handicapped parking amendment Ch. 104
6-26-2000 Utilities amendment Ch. 153
9-25-2000 Electric consumers tax Ch. 144, Art. III
11-27-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 171
4-23-2001 Refuse and garbage collection
amendment
Ch. 128, Art. II
2-11-2002 Grievance procedure and officers and
employees amendment
Chs. 15; 22
7-8-2002 Personnel policies amendment Ch. 26
7-22-2002 Food vendors amendment Ch. 132
1-13-2003 Personnel policies amendment Ch. 26
2-10-2003 Personnel policies amendment Ch. 26
§ 171-153 FRANCHISES § DL-1
A180:421
Adoption Date Subject Disposition
3-10-2003 Alcoholic beverages repealer Ch. 34 (Reference
page only)
6-9-2003 Personnel policies amendment Ch. 26
8-11-2003 Tattoo parlors Ch. 142
8-11-2003 Special events amendment Ch. 132
10-27-2003 Personnel policies amendment Ch. 26
11-24-2003 Building construction amendment Superseded
8-14-2006
5-10-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 171
6-14-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 171
6-14-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 171
6-28-2004 Meals tax amendment Ch. 144, Art. VI
8-9-2004 Personnel policy amendment Ch. 26
8-9-2004 Personnel policy amendment Ch. 26
6-13-2006 Fees amendment (from budget) Chs. 104; 132; 140
8-14-2006 Building construction amendment Ch. 48
4-23-2007 Electric and gas utility consumer tax
amendment
Ch. 144, Art. III
1-22-2007 Erosion and sediment control Ch. 73
3-26-2007 Erosion and sediment control
amendment
Ch. 73
6-9-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 171
10-27-2008 Special events amendment Ch. 132
5-11-2009 Special events amendment Ch. 132
7-27-2009 Licensing of vehicles amendment Ch. 163
9-28-2009 Personnel policy amendment Ch. 26
12-14--2009 Personnel policy amendment Ch. 26
12-14-2009 Personnel policy amendment Ch. 26
12-14-2009 Personnel policy amendment Ch. 26
6-27-2011 Transient lodging tax amendment Ch. 144, Art. V
8-22-2011 Garage and yard sales amendment Ch. 121, Art. I
8-22-2011 Transient lodging tax amendment Ch. 144, Art. V
10-10-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 171
2-27-2012 Solid waste: condition of premises
amendment
Ch. 128, Art. I
5-14-2012 Building construction amendment Ch. 48
1-14-2013 Tax rate amendment Ch. 144, Art. I
§ DL-1 HILLSVILLE CODE § DL-1
A180:422
Adoption Date Subject Disposition
1-14-2013 Solid waste: refuse and garbage
collection amendment
Ch. 128, Art. II
2-11-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 171
2-11-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 171
3-25-2013 Nuisances amendment Ch. 97
3-25-2013 Inoperable vehicles amendment Ch. 160
3-25-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 171
3-25-2013 Personnel policy repealer Ch. 26, reference
only
3-25-2013 Grievance procedure repealer Ch. 15, reference
only
6-10-2013 Solid waste: conditions of premises
amendment
Ch. 128, Art. I
7-1-2013 Transient lodging tax amendment;
meals tax amendment
Ch. 144, Art. V; Ch.
144, Art. VI
7-8-2013 Wind energy systems Ch. 170
8-12-2013 Precious metals and gems Ch. 115
6-9-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 171
2-24-2015 Licensing of vehicles amendment Ch. 163
6-27-2016 Building construction amendment;
franchises: public service
corporations; tax rate amendment;
business license tax amendment;
licensing of vehicles amendment;
zoning amendment;
Ch. 48; Ch. 80, Art.
I; Ch. 144, Art. I;
Ch. 144, Art. VII;
Ch. 163; Ch. 171
12-12-2016 Tax rate amendment Ch. 144, Art. I
2-27-2017 Cross-connection control and
backflow prevention amendment
Ch. 167, Art. V
3-13-2017 Special events amendment; utilities
amendment; licensing of vehicles
amendment
Ch. 132; Ch. 153;
Ch. 163
3-13-2017 Officers and Employees: Police Chief
and Patrolmen Amendment
Ch. 22, Art. III
5-22-2017 Peddling and soliciting amendment Ch. 112
7-10-2017 Solid waste: condition of premises
amendment
Ch. 128, Art. I
§ DL-1 FRANCHISES § DL-1
A180:423
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
9-25-2017 Special Events Amendment Ch. 132 14
2-26-2018 Special Events Amendment Ch. 132 14
9-24-2018 Building Construction
Amendment; Erosion and
Sediment Control
Amendment
Ch. 48; Ch. 73 14
10-22-2018 Special Events Amendment Ch. 132 14
11-20-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 171 14
9-9-2019 Solid Waste: Condition of
Premises Amendment
Ch. 128, Art. I 14
§ DL-1 HILLSVILLE CODE § DL-1
A180:424